<doc id="628782" wikidata="Q79990" url="?curid=628782" title="Christchurch">
<text>Christchurch (; ) is the largest city in the South Island and the second-largest city by urban area population in New Zealand. Christchurch has an urban population of , and a metropolitan population of over half a million. It is located in the Canterbury Region, near the centre of the east coast of the South Island, east of the Canterbury Plains. It is located near the southern end of Pegasus Bay, and is bounded to the east by the Pacific Ocean and to the south by the ancient volcanic complex of the Banks Peninsula. The Avon River (Ōtākaro) winds through the centre of the city, with a large urban park along its banks. With the exception of the Port Hills, it is a relatively flat city, on an average around above sea level. Christchurch has a reputation for being an English city, with its architectural identity and nickname the &#x27;Garden City&#x27; due to similarities with garden cities in England, but also has a historic Māori heritage. Christchurch has a temperate oceanic climate with regular moderate rainfall.

The area of modern-day greater Christchurch was first inhabited by the historic Māori iwi Waitaha in the mid-thirteenth century. Waitaha, who occupied the swamplands with patchworks of marshland, were invaded by Kāti Māmoe in the sixteenth century, and then were absorbed by Kāi Tahu a century later. Ōtautahi was inhabited seasonally, and a major trading centre was established at Kaiapoi Pā. British colonial settlement began in the mid-nineteenth century. The First Four Ships were chartered by the Canterbury Association and brought the Canterbury Pilgrims from Britain to Lyttelton Harbour in 1850. It became a city by royal charter on 31 July 1856, making it officially the oldest established city in New Zealand. Christchurch was heavily industrialised in the early 20th century, with the opening of the Main South Line railway and the development of state housing saw rapid growth in the city&#x27;s economy and population.

Christchurch has strong cultural connections with its European elements and architectural identity. Christchurch is also home to a number of performing arts centres and academic institutions (including the University of Canterbury). Christchurch has hosted numerous international sporting events, notably the 1974 British Commonwealth Games at the purpose-built Queen Elizabeth II Park. The city has been recognised as an Antarctic gateway since 1901, and is nowadays one of the five Antarctic gateway cities hosting Antarctic support bases for several nations. Christchurch is served by the Christchurch Airport in Harewood, the country&#x27;s second-busiest airport.

The city suffered a series of earthquakes from September 2010, with the most destructive occurring on 22 February 2011, in which 185 people were killed and thousands of buildings across the city suffered severe damage, with many central city buildings collapsing, leading to ongoing recovery and rebuilding projects. Christchurch later became the site of a terrorist attack targeting two mosques on 15 March 2019.

==Toponymy==
The name &quot;Christchurch&quot; was adopted at the first meeting of the Canterbury Association on 27 March 1848. The reason it was chosen is not known with certainty, but the most likely reason is it was named after Christ Church, Oxford, the alma mater of many members of the association, including John Robert Godley. Christ Church college had similarities with the planned new city, including its own cathedral, the smallest in England. Other possibilities are that it was named for Christchurch, Dorset, or for Canterbury Cathedral. Many of the early colonists did not like the name, preferring instead the name Lyttelton, but the Colonists&#x27; Council resolved to stick with the name of Christchurch in 1851, because it had been used by surveyors and distinguished the settlement from the port.

The Māori name for modern-day Christchurch is , meaning . It was adopted as the Māori name for the city in the 1930s. Ōtautahi precisely refers to a specific site by the Avon River / Ōtākaro in Central Christchurch. The site was a seasonal food-gathering place of Ngāi Tahu chief Te Pōtiki Tautahi. A different account claims the Tautahi in question was the son of the Port Levy chief Huikai. Prior to that, Ngāi Tahu generally referred to the Christchurch area as , an anglicised version.

&quot;ChCh&quot; is commonly used as an abbreviation of &quot;Christchurch&quot;. In New Zealand Sign Language, &quot;Christchurch&quot; is signed with two Cs.

==History==

===Waitaha Māori settlement===
Prior to European occupation of the modern-day greater Christchurch area, the land was originally swampland with patchworks of marshland, grassland, scrub and some patches of tall forest of mostly kahikatea, mataī and tōtara. The inner coastal sand dunes were covered in hardier scrub bush, including akeake, taupata, tūmatakuru, ngaio, carmichaelia, and coprosma. Christchurch was rich in birdlife prior to European colonisation, as they burned down forests and introduced predators, it led to local extinction of native birds.

Evidence of human activity in the area begins in approximately 1250 C.E., with evidence of prolonged occupation beginning no later than 1350 AD. These first occupants lived in coastal caves around modern-day Sumner, and preyed upon local species of moa. The early settlers and their descendants became known as the historic Waitaha Māori iwi. Around the Kāti Māmoe iwi migrated south from the east coast of the North Island and invaded the Christchurch basin, ultimately gaining control of much of Canterbury. Kāi Tahu arrived a century later, and the two ultimately absorbed Waitaha through a mixture of conflict and marriage.

Most of the Māori settlement was along the coast. Other areas of Christchurch were also important foraging grounds and a seasonal settlements. Several Māori settlements were within Christchurch during the early-nineteenth century, such as Pūtarikamotu in modern-day Riccarton, and Papanui. In both cases these were located in areas of surviving tall forest. In South New Brighton there was a major Māori settlement named &quot;Te Kai-a-Te-Karoro&quot;, this was an important food-gathering area to Ngāi Tūāhuriri that had kelp gull presence and mānuka scrub. Te Ihutai (The Avon Heathcote Estuary) was an important food source for local iwi and hapū, the estuary providing food such as, flounder and shellfish. Kaiapoi Pā was the most important trading area, and the centre of a thriving economy. The pā was located at the nexus of the major rivers of Christchurch, the Avon River / Ōtākaro, Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River and the Styx River. It was the likely richest eel fishery in the country at that time. Sugar was produced from plantations of cabbage trees.

===European settlement===
European settlement of the Canterbury region was largely influenced by brothers William and John Deans in 1843. The Deans farm located in Riccarton Bush was a crucial factor in the decision of where to place the settlement of Christchurch, as it proved that the swampy ground could be farmed. The Deans brothers named their farm after their former parish in Ayrshire, Scotland; they also named the river near their farm after the Avon Water in South Lanarkshire, which rises in the hills near to where their grandfather&#x27;s farm was located.

The Canterbury Association&#x27;s Chief Surveyor, Captain Joseph Thomas, surveyed the area in 1849 and 1850. Working with his assistant, Edward Jollie, they named the various ports and settlements in the area, and chose a simple grid pattern for the streets of Christchurch. The First Four Ships were chartered by the Canterbury Association and brought the &quot;Canterbury Pilgrims&quot; to Lyttelton Harbour in 1850. These sailing vessels were the &quot;Randolph&quot;, &quot;Charlotte Jane&quot;, , and &quot;Cressy&quot;. The journey took three to four months, and the &quot;Charlotte Jane&quot; was the first to arrive on 16 December 1850. The Canterbury Pilgrims had aspirations of building a city around a cathedral and college, on the model of Christ Church in Oxford.

Transport between the port and the new settlement at Christchurch was a major problem for the early settlers. By December 1849, Thomas had commissioned the construction of a road from Port Cooper, later Lyttelton, to Christchurch via Evans Pass and Sumner. By the time that John Robert Godley arrived in April 1850 all of the funds for public works had been used up in constructing the road. Godley ordered that all work on the road should stop, leaving the steep foot and pack horse track that had been hastily constructed over the hill between the port and the Heathcote valley as the only land-access to the area of Christchurch. This track became known as the Bridle Path because the path was so steep that pack horses needed to be led by the bridle. Goods that were too heavy or bulky to be transported by pack horse over the Bridle Path were shipped by small sailing vessels some by sea around the coast and up the Avon Heathcote Estuary to Ferrymead. Overturned boats at the Sumner bar were a frequent cause of new arrivals to the colony losing all their luggage. The Sumner Road was completed in 1857, though this did not alleviate the transport problems. In 1858 the provincial superintendent William Sefton Moorhouse announced that a tunnel would be dug between Lyttelton and Christchurch. While the tunnel was under construction, New Zealand&#x27;s first public railway line, the Ferrymead Railway, opened from Ferrymead to Christchurch in 1863.

===Provincial growth===

Between 1853 and 1876 Christchurch was the administrative seat of the Province of Canterbury. While slow at first, growth in the town began to accelerate towards the end of the 1850s, with a period of rapid growth between 1857 and 1864. Christchurch became the first city in New Zealand by royal charter on 31 July 1856, and Henry Harper was consecrated by the archbishop of Canterbury as the local Anglican bishop. He arrived in Christchurch a few months later in December 1856. In 1862 the Christchurch City Council was established. By 1874, Christchurch was New Zealand&#x27;s fourth-largest city with a population of 14,270 residents. Between 1871 and 1876 nearly 20,000 immigrants arrived in Canterbury, and through the 1880s frozen meat joined wool as a primary export. The last decades of the nineteenth-century were a period of significant growth for the city, despite the national economic depression. Many of the city&#x27;s stone Gothic Revival buildings by provincial architect Benjamin Mountfort date from around this period, including Canterbury University College, ChristChurch Cathedral, Canterbury Museum, and the Canterbury Provincial Council Buildings, among others. Mountfort oversaw construction of a prison on Lincon Road in 1874, which operated until 1999.

Christchurch experienced a number of minor natural disasters during this period. Heavy rain caused the Waimakariri River to flood Christchurch in February 1868. Victoria Square (known as Market Place at the time) was left underwater with &quot;the whole left side of the [Avon] river from Montreal-street bridge to Worcester street was all one lake, as deep as up to a horse&#x27;s belly&quot;. Christchurch buildings were damaged by earthquakes in 1869, 1881 and 1888. The 1888 earthquake caused the highest 7.8 metres of the Christchurch Cathedral spire to collapse, many chimneys were broken, and the Durham Street Methodist Church had its stonework damaged. In November 1901, a magnitude 6.9 earthquake, centred near Cheviot, caused the spire on top of ChristChurch Cathedral to collapse again, but this time only the top 1.5 metres fell. On this occasion, it was rebuilt with timber and metal instead of stone.
The Catholic Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament was opened in February 1905. It was designed by Francis Petre with inspiration from the Saint-Vincent-de-Paul in Paris. In 1906, the New Zealand International Exhibition opened in Hagley Park, which had over a million visitors. In 1908, the city experienced its first major fire which started at the Strange&#x27;s Department Store and destroyed buildings in central Christchurch on High St, Cashel St and Lichfield Streets.

Christchurch was heavily industrialised in the early 20th century, particularly the suburbs of Woolston and Addington, with Woolston housing a large amount of New Zealand&#x27;s rubber industry. Many warehouses, factories and large premises of railway workshops were built along the Main South Line. There was notable development of breweries, flour mills, and light-commercial in Christchurch. This significantly increased the population of workers in the city, which soon spread industrialisation to Sydenham. As central Christchurch grew, many cottages were demolished to make way for light-industrial and retail premises near Moorhouse Avenue as they expanded south. Many churches were also built to compensate for its growing Christian population. The population of Christchurch exceeded 100,000 for the first time in 1919.

===Modern history ===

Despite the central city remaining relatively unchanged between 1914 and 1960, Christchurch grew rapidly during the 20th century in part due to the construction of many state houses. The earliest state houses were built in Sydenham in the 1900s, to house workers that were employed in nearby factories, with more houses built in 1909 near the Addington Railway Workshops.

In November 1947, a basement fire at the Ballantynes department store on the corner of Cashel and Colombo Streets unexpectedly burned out of control, resulting in New Zealand&#x27;s worst fire disaster. Despite being initially thought to be under control, the fire suddenly spread to the upper floors and consumed the entire building within minutes. The speed of the fire trapped 41 staff members on the upper floor, all of whom were killed. The department store was actually a combination of seven or eight different buildings, joined to form a &quot;perplexing maze&quot; with no sprinklers or alarm system. A subsequent Royal commission of enquiry resulted in changes to the building code to improve fire safety. Thousands of mourners, including the Prime Minister, attended a mass funeral in the aftermath.

During the 1960s Christchurch experienced urban sprawl, with much of the retail business of the central city moving out to urban shopping malls. These typically included large car parking areas to suit the growing shift towards personal car ownership, and away from public transport. Hornby became a significant industrial suburb in the 1960s, with industrial and residential premises expanding westwards. The Lyttelton road tunnel between Lyttelton and Christchurch was opened in 1964. Television broadcasts began in Christchurch on 1 June 1961 with the launch of channel CHTV3, making Christchurch the second New Zealand city to receive regular television broadcasts. The channel initially broadcast from a 10-kilowatt transmitter atop the Gloucester Street studios until it switched to the newly built 100-kilowatt Sugarloaf transmitter in the Port Hills on 28 August 1965. In 1969, the one-way system running through central Christchurch was established. The first two streets to be made one-way were Lichfield and St Asaph streets. They were followed by Barbadoes, Madras, Salisbury and Kilmore streets. A police station opened in 1973 on Hereford street, it was imploded and demolished in 2015.

Christchurch hosted the 1974 British Commonwealth Games at the purpose-built Queen Elizabeth II Park. The sports complex was open in 1973, one year before the games.

=== 2010–11 earthquakes ===

On Saturday, 4 September 2010, a magnitude 7.1 earthquake struck Christchurch and the central Canterbury region at 4:35 am. With its hypocentre near Darfield, west of the city at a depth of , it caused widespread damage to the city and minor injuries, but no direct fatalities. This was followed by the Boxing Day earthquake a few months later, which occurred directly under the city centre and also caused widespread damage, but this was less severe.

Nearly two months later, on Tuesday 22 February 2011, an earthquake measuring magnitude 6.3 struck the city at 12:51 pm. Its hypocentre was located closer to the city, near Lyttelton, at a depth of . Although lower on the moment magnitude scale than the previous earthquake, the intensity and violence of the ground shaking was measured to be IX (&quot;Violent&quot;), among the strongest ever recorded globally in an urban area, which killed 185 people. On 13 June 2011 Christchurch was again rocked by two more large aftershocks. This resulted in more liquefaction and building damage, but no more lives were lost.

There were further earthquakes on 23 December 2011; the first, of magnitude 5.8 according to the US Geological Survey, north-east of the city at a depth of , at 13:58, followed by several aftershocks and another earthquake of magnitude 6.0 and similar location 80 minutes later.

=== Port Hills fires ===
On 13 February 2017, two bush fires started on the Port Hills. These later merged and the single large wildfire extended down both sides of the Port Hill almost reaching Governors Bay in the south-west. Eleven houses were destroyed by fire and over of land was burned.

In 2024, a second fire on the Port Hills burned . The fire was also started under similarly suspicious circumstances. Lessons from the 2017 fire contributed to a more effective emergency response, and the fire was more-quickly contained.

=== 2019 mosque shootings ===

On 15 March 2019, fifty-one people died from two consecutive mass shootings at the Al Noor Mosque and Linwood Islamic Centre by an Australian white supremacist. Forty others were injured. The attacks were described by then prime minister Jacinda Ardern as &quot;one of New Zealand&#x27;s darkest days&quot;. Just days after the attacks the live-streamed footage became classified as objectionable by the Chief Censor, making the footage illegal to possess and distribute within New Zealand. On 2 June 2020, the attacker pleaded guilty to multiple charges of murder, attempted murder, and terrorism. On 27 August, he was sentenced to life in prison without the chance of parole, the first time such a sentence was handed down in New Zealand.

==Geography==
=== Location ===
Christchurch is halfway along the east coast of the South Island, facing the South Pacific Ocean. With the exception of the Port Hills on Banks Peninsula to its south, the city sits on flat land, on average around above sea level.

=== Geology ===
The present land mass of New Zealand split from the super continent of Gondwana around 85 million years ago. Prior to that time, mudstone and hardened sandstones commonly known as greywacke was deposited and deformed by tectonic movement. Following the split from Gondwana, during the period between 80 and 23 million years ago, the land became eroded and subsided below sea level. Marine and terrestrial sediments were deposited, leaving the greywacke as the oldest and deepest layers (basement rock). Around 11–6 million years ago, volcanic eruptions created the Banks Peninsula volcanic complex. Over the last two million years as the Southern Alps were rising, there were multiple periods of glaciation. Rivers flowing from the mountains carried alluvial gravels over the area that is now the Canterbury Plains, covering the underlying rock to depths of between 200 and 600 metres. Continuing tectonic movement created faults that penetrate from the greywacke rock into the layers above. These faults remain beneath Canterbury and Christchurch.

The glacial/interglacial cycles of the Quaternary Period led to multiple rises and falls in sea level. These sea level changes occurred over a period when there was also slow subsidence in the eastern coastal plains of Canterbury and Christchurch. The result has been the deposition of sequences of mostly fluvial gravel (occurring during periods of low sea level and glaciation), and fine deposits of silt, sand and clay, with some peat, shells and wood (occurring during interglacial periods when the sea level was similar to the present).

=== Aquifer and spring-fed streams ===
The layers of gravel beneath the eastern Canterbury plains and Christchurch area form an artesian aquifer with the interbedded fine sediments as an impermeable layer, or aquiclude. Water pressure from the artesian aquifer has led to the formation of numerous spring-fed streams. In Christchurch, the Avon River / Ōtākaro and Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River rivers have spring-fed sources in the western suburbs of Christchurch, and the Halswell River begins north-west of the Port Hills on the periphery of Christchurch and flows to Lake Ellesmere / Te Waihora.

As a consequence of the flat terrain and spring-fed streams, large parts of the area now occupied by Christchurch City were originally a coastal wetland, with extensive swamp forests. Much of the forest was destroyed by fire, mostly likely by the earliest inhabitants, from around 1000 CE. When European settlers arrived in the 19th century, the area was a mixture of swamp and tussock grasslands, with only remnant patches of forest. An early European visitor was William Barnard Rhodes, captain of the barque &quot;Australian,&quot; who climbed the Port Hills from Lyttelton Harbour in September 1836 and observed a large grassy plain with two small areas of forest. He reported that &quot;All the land that I saw was swamp and mostly covered with water&quot;. Most of the eastern, southern and northern parts of the city were wet areas when European settlement began.

Over the period since European settlement commenced, land drainage works have enabled development of land across the city. There are now only small remnants of wetland remaining, such as Riccarton Bush, Travis Wetland, Ōtukaikino wetland, and the Cashmere Valley.

===Central City===
Christchurch Central City is defined as the area centred on Cathedral Square and within the Four Avenues (Bealey Avenue, Fitzgerald Avenue, Moorhouse Avenue and Deans Avenue). It includes Hagley Park, and the Christchurch Botanic Gardens. The design of the central city with its grid pattern of streets, city squares and parkland was laid out by 1850.

The central city was among the most heavily damaged areas of Christchurch in the 2010 and 2011 earthquakes. Following the second earthquake, the Central City Red Zone was set up as an exclusion zone for public safety reasons, and many parts remained closed to the public until June 2013. A large number of heritage buildings were demolished following the earthquake, along with most of the city&#x27;s high rise buildings. The Christchurch Central Recovery Plan was developed to lead the rebuild of the city centre, and featured 17 &quot;anchor projects&quot;. There has been massive growth in the residential sector in the central city, particularly in the East Frame development.

===Suburbs===
There are currently no legal definition of the boundaries of suburbs in Christchurch. The suburb boundaries are largely defined by third-party agencies, such as Statistics New Zealand and New Zealand Post, and may differ between agencies or sources.

The earliest suburbs of Christchurch were laid out with streets in a grid pattern, centred on Cathedral Square. Growth initially took place along the tramlines, leading to radial development. Major expansion occurred in the 1950s and 60s, with the development of large areas of state housing. Settlements that had originally been remote, such as Sumner, New Brighton, Upper Riccarton and Papanui eventually became amalgamated into the expanding city.

===Satellite towns===
The Christchurch functional urban area, as defined by Statistics New Zealand, covers . Towns and settlements in the functional urban area include:

* Leeston
* Lyttelton
* Governors Bay
* Diamond Harbour
* Tai Tapu
* Little River
* Lincoln
* Prebbleton
* Rolleston
* Templeton
* West Melton
* Rangiora
* Woodend
* Waikuku
* Pegasus
* Kaiapoi
* Kainga
* The Pines Beach
* Motukarara
===Climate===
Christchurch has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) with a mild summer, cool winter, and regular moderate rainfall. It has mean daily maximum air temperatures of in January and in July. Summer in the city is mostly warm, but is often moderated by a sea breeze from the north-east. A notable feature of the weather is the &quot;nor&#x27;wester&quot;, a hot föhn wind that occasionally reaches storm force, causing widespread minor damage to property. Like many cities, Christchurch experiences an urban heat island effect; temperatures are slightly higher within the inner-city regions compared to the surrounding countryside. The highest temperature recorded in Christchurch was on 7 February 1973, however the highest for the Christchurch metropolitan area was recorded in Rangiora on the same day.

In winter, subfreezing temperatures are common, with nights falling below an average of 50 times a year at Christchurch Airport and 23 times a year in the city centre. There are on average 80 days of ground frost per year. Snowfall occurs on average three times per year, although in some years none is recorded. The lowest temperature recorded in Christchurch was in the suburb of Wigram in July 1945.

On cold winter nights, the surrounding hills, clear skies, and frosty calm conditions often combine to form a stable inversion layer above the city that traps vehicle exhausts and smoke from domestic fires to cause smog. While not as bad as smog in Los Angeles or Mexico City, Christchurch smog has often exceeded World Health Organisation recommendations for air pollution. To limit air pollution, the regional council banned the use of open fires in the city in 2006. 


==Demographics==

Christchurch City covers a land area of and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.

This is the second-most populous area administered by a single council in New Zealand, and the largest city in the South Island. The population comprises people in the Christchurch urban area, people in the Lyttelton urban area, people in the Diamond Harbour urban area, and people in rural settlements and areas.

Christchurch City had a population of 391,383 in the 2023 New Zealand census, an increase of 22,377 people (6.1%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 49,914 people (14.6%) since the 2013 census. There were 192,684 males, 196,557 females and 2,139 people of other genders in 150,909 dwellings. 4.5% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 37.5 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 64,722 people (16.5%) aged under 15 years, 84,633 (21.6%) aged 15 to 29, 178,113 (45.5%) aged 30 to 64, and 63,912 (16.3%) aged 65 or older.

Of those at least 15 years old, 70,764 (21.7%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, 160,440 (49.1%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 73,659 (22.5%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $40,400, compared with $41,500 nationally. 35,010 people (10.7%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 163,554 (50.1%) people were employed full-time, 47,463 (14.5%) were part-time, and 8,913 (2.7%) were unemployed.

===Culture and identity===
People could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 75.9% European (Pākehā); 11.2% Māori; 4.3% Pasifika; 17.1% Asian; 1.9% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 2.2% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as &quot;New Zealander&quot;. English was spoken by 95.8%, Māori language by 2.4%, Samoan by 1.3% and other languages by 16.8%. No language could be spoken by 2.1% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.6%. The percentage of people born overseas was 27.8, compared with 28.8% nationally.

Religious affiliations were 31.6% Christian, 2.1% Hindu, 1.3% Islam, 0.4% Māori religious beliefs, 1.0% Buddhist, 0.5% New Age, 0.1% Jewish, and 2.0% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 54.9%, and 6.3% of people did not answer the census question.

At the 2018 census, Europeans formed the majority in all sixteen wards, ranging from 57.7% in the Riccarton ward to 93.1% in the Banks Peninsula ward. The highest concentrations of Māori and Pasifika people were in the Linwood ward (18.3% and 9.0% respectively), followed by the Burwood ward (15.5% and 6.6%), while the highest concentrations of Asian people were in the Riccarton ward (34.9%) and Waimairi ward (26.7%).

===Urban area===
Christchurch urban area covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.

The urban area had a population of 380,079 in the 2023 New Zealand census, an increase of 22,011 people (6.1%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 49,434 people (15.0%) since the 2013 census. There were 187,086 males, 190,911 females and 2,082 people of other genders in 146,055 dwellings. 4.5% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 37.1 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 63,138 people (16.6%) aged under 15 years, 83,217 (21.9%) aged 15 to 29, 172,314 (45.3%) aged 30 to 64, and 61,413 (16.2%) aged 65 or older.

People could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 75.4% European (Pākehā); 11.3% Māori; 4.4% Pasifika; 17.5% Asian; 1.9% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 2.2% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as &quot;New Zealander&quot;. English was spoken by 95.7%, Māori language by 2.4%, Samoan by 1.3% and other languages by 17.0%. No language could be spoken by 2.1% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.6%. The percentage of people born overseas was 27.9, compared with 28.8% nationally.

Religious affiliations were 31.8% Christian, 2.2% Hindu, 1.3% Islam, 0.4% Māori religious beliefs, 1.0% Buddhist, 0.5% New Age, 0.1% Jewish, and 2.0% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 54.6%, and 6.3% of people did not answer the census question.

Of those at least 15 years old, 68,472 (21.6%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, 155,583 (49.1%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 71,943 (22.7%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $40,400, compared with $41,500 nationally. 33,714 people (10.6%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 158,859 (50.1%) people were employed full-time, 45,678 (14.4%) were part-time, and 8,727 (2.8%) were unemployed.

== Economy ==
=== Economic profile in 2023 ===
In 2023, the gross domestic product (GDP) of Christchurch City was $31.5 billion, representing 8.4% of New Zealand&#x27;s total GDP. The sector with the largest contribution to the Christchurch City GDP was professional, scientific and technical services, at 12%. This is higher than the 9.6% contribution that these services make to the national economy. The next highest contribution to the city GDP was from healthcare and social assistance at 8.8%, versus 6.5% in the national economy. Manufacturing contributed 8.1%, compared with 8.2% in the national economy.

Christchurch City provides a diverse range of services for the Canterbury Region, but there are significant differences in the ranking of the sectors with the greatest contribution to GDP, when comparing the city GDP with the Canterbury Region GDP. Manufacturing and construction are the top two ranked sectors for the Canterbury region, but these two sectors are ranked third and fourth for the contribution to the city GDP. Conversely, professional, scientific and technical services are top ranked for the city, but third in the Canterbury Region GDP. Healthcare and social assistance is ranked second in the city GDP, but only seventh in the Canterbury Region GDP. Agriculture remains a significant contributor to the Canterbury Region GDP (sixth placed at $3.3 billion).

The four largest industries in the city, based on the percentage of filled jobs were healthcare and social assistance, professional scientific and technical services, construction, and retail trade. Christchurch City had a higher proportion of people in employed in healthcare and social assistance (12.9%) than the national average (10.3%), but the proportions employed in professional, scientific and technical services, construction and retail trade were close to the national averages.

A number of nationally and internationally recognised brands and companies were founded and have their headquarters in Christchurch including Macpac, Kathmandu, PGG Wrightson, Tait Communications, Cookie Time, and Smiths City.

===Industry===
Christchurch is the second-largest manufacturing centre in New Zealand behind Auckland, the sector being the second-largest contributor to the local economy, with firms such as Anderson&#x27;s making steel work for bridges, tunnels, and hydroelectric dams in the early days of infrastructure work. Now manufacturing is mainly of light products and the key market is Australia, with firms such as those pioneered by the Stewart family among the larger employers. Before clothing manufacture largely moved to Asia, Christchurch was the centre of the New Zealand clothing industry, with firms such as LWR Industries. The firms that remain mostly design and market, and manufacture in Asia. The city also had five footwear manufacturers, but these have been replaced by imports.

In the last few decades, technology-based industries have sprung up in Christchurch. Angus Tait founded Tait Electronics, a mobile-radio manufacturer, and other firms spun off from this, such as Dennis Chapman&#x27;s Swichtec. In software, Cantabrian Gil Simpson founded a company that made LINC and Jade programming languages, and a management buyout spawned local firm &quot;Wynyard Group&quot;.

There have also been spin-offs from the electrical department of the University of Canterbury engineering school. These included Pulse Data, which became Human Ware (making reading devices and computers for blind people and those with limited vision) and CES Communications (encryption). The Pulse Data founders had moved from the Canterbury University engineering school to work for Wormald Inc. when they set up Pulse Data through a Management buyout of their division. Spin-off company Invert Robotics developed the world&#x27;s first climbing robot capable of climbing on stainless steel, aimed at the dairy tank inspection market.

In recent times, the University of Canterbury engineering school and computer science department play an important role in supplying staff and research for the technology industries, and the Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology provides a flow of trained technicians and engineers. Locally and nationally, the IT sector is known not for its size (the third largest in New Zealand) but for producing innovative and entrepreneurial solutions, products and concepts.

===Services for agriculture===

The agricultural industry was originally the economic core of Christchurch. Its surrounding farming countryside was originally the basis of its industry, part of the original &quot;package&quot; sold to New Zealand immigrants. PGG Wrightson, New Zealand&#x27;s leading agribusiness, is based in Christchurch. Its local roots go back to Pyne Gould Guinness, an old stock and station agency serving the South Island.

Other agribusinesses in Christchurch have included malting, seed development and dressing, wool and meat processing, and small biotechnology operations using by-products from meat works. Dairying has grown strongly in the surrounding areas, with high world prices for milk products and the use of irrigation to lift grass growth on dry land. With its higher labour use, this has helped stop declines in rural population. Many cropping and sheep farms have been converted to dairying. Conversions have been by agribusiness companies as well as by farmers, many of whom have moved south from North Island dairying strongholds such as Taranaki and the Waikato.

Cropping has always been important in the Canterbury Region. Wheat and barley and various strains of clover and other grasses for seed exporting have been the main crops. These have all created processing businesses in Christchurch. Agriculture in the region has diversified, with a wine industry developing at Waipara, and the beginnings of new horticulture industries such as olive production and processing. Deer farming has led to new processing using antlers for Asian medicine and aphrodisiacs. The high-quality local wine in particular has increased the appeal of Canterbury and Christchurch to tourists.

An important component of the regions agricultural calendar is the Canterbury A&amp;P Show. The first show took place in Christchurch on 22 October 1862 and is now the largest agricultural and pastoral show in New Zealand featuring a combination of agriculture presentations, trade stalls, competitions and entertainment over three days. The Friday of the A&amp;P Show had since at least 1918 been the People&#x27;s Day or Show Day, and sometime between 1955 and 1958, Christchurch City Council moved the anniversary day to coincide with Show Day, as this allowed banks and businesses to close and people to attend the A&amp;P Show.

===Tourism===
Tourism is also a significant factor in the city economy. As a city with a major international airport and the largest city in the South Island, Christchurch is a gateway for international tourists visiting the South Island attractions of Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park, Queenstown, the West Coast and Kaikōura. However, the city is also a destination in itself because of its gardens, its history and heritage, galleries and museums, the scenery of the Port Hills, and the stories of the impact and recovery from the 2011 earthquakes. The tourism sector contributed 3.7% of the GDP of Christchurch in 2023, a significant increase over the 2.1% contribution in 2000. Annual growth in the tourism GDP since 2000 has been an average of 5.9%, slightly below the national average growth rate of 6.9%. The largest category of tourism expenditure in 2023 was sales at $780m (31.6% of total tourism spending). The next highest category was passenger transport, at $392.5M (15.9% of total).
===Gateway to the Antarctic===
The city began its long history as an Antarctic gateway in 1901, when the &quot;Discovery&quot; Expedition left from Lyttelton. Robert Falcon Scott&#x27;s second departure from Christchurch in 1910 would be his last; he died as part of the &quot;Terra Nova&quot; Expedition. The city mourned his death, and a memorial statue of him was unveiled in 1917. The International Antarctic Centre provides both base facilities and a museum and visitor centre focused upon current Antarctic activities. The United States Navy and United States Air National Guard, augmented by the New Zealand and Australian air forces, use Christchurch Airport as the take-off point for the main supply route to McMurdo and Scott Bases in Antarctica. The Clothing Distribution Center in Christchurch had more than 140,000 pieces of extreme cold weather gear for issue to nearly 2,000 United States Antarctic Program participants in the 2007–08 season.

==Government==
===Local government===

Christchurch&#x27;s local government is a democracy with various elements, including:
* Christchurch City Council, comprising the Mayor of Christchurch, and 16 councillors elected in 16 wards: Spreydon, Cashmere, Halswell, Riccarton, Hornby, Fendalton, Waimairi, Papanui, Innes, Central, Linwood, Heathcote, Harewood, Burwood, Coastal, and Banks Peninsula.
* Community boards, currently six, typically covering 3 wards with 2 members elected, and one councillor appointed from each (9 members): Waihoro Spreydon-Cashmere-Heathcote, Waipapa Papanui-Innes-Central, Waipuna Halswell-Hornby-Riccarton, Waimaero Fendalton-Waimairi-Harewood, Waitai Coastal-Burwood-Linwood; the exception to this rule being the one covering Te Pātaka o Rākaihautū Banks Peninsula where all members are elected from 4 subdivisions within the Banks Peninsula Ward (Akaroa, Mount Herbert, Lyttelton, Wairewa) alongside the Ward Councillor.
* District councils in surrounding areas: Selwyn, and Waimakariri. The Banks Peninsula district council was amalgamated into Christchurch City in March 2006 after a vote by the Banks Peninsula residents to disestablish in November 2005.
* Canterbury Regional Council, known as &#x27;Environment Canterbury&#x27;, including four Christchurch constituencies with two members from each constituency.
* Prior to the disestablishment of the district health board model during the 2022 local elections, elections were also held for the Canterbury District Health Board, with five members for Christchurch.

Some of the local governments in Canterbury and the NZ Transport Agency have created the Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy to facilitate future urban planning.

===Central government===
Christchurch is covered by seven general electorates (, , , , , and ) and one Māori electorate (Te Tai Tonga), each returning one member to the New Zealand House of Representatives. As of the 2023 New Zealand general election there are four general electorate members of the National party and three members of the Labour party. The Māori electorate is represented by Te Pāti Māori.


==Culture and entertainment==
The architecture of Christchurch has been said to be distinctly English; however, it contains various European elements, with strong Gothic Revival architecture. As early settlers of New Zealand, Māori culture is also prevalent in the city. It features many public open spaces and parks, river beds and cafés and restaurants situated in the city centre and surrounding suburbs.

===Cinema===
Historically, most cinemas were grouped around Cathedral Square.

One of the first generation of suburban cinemas still operating as a cinema, the Hollywood in Sumner, operated from 1938 until 2022; before closing to be refurbished and becoming part of the Silky Otter cinema chain which also runs a cinema in Wigram. The largest multiplexes were the Hoyts 8 in the old railway station on Moorhouse Avenue (now replaced by EntX) and Reading Cinemas (also eight screens) in the Palms Shopping Centre in Shirley. Hoyts in Riccarton opened in 2005 with one of its screens for a time holding the record for the largest in New Zealand.

The Rialto Cinemas on Moorhouse avenue specialised in international films and art house productions. The Rialto also hosted the majority of the city&#x27;s various film festivals and was home to the local film society. The Rialto was closed following the February 2011 earthquake.

The Alice Cinema first operated as a specialised video store, now has two screens and a comprehensive library foreign films, documentaries, cult and arthouse films to rent.

The Canterbury Film Society is active in the city, operating every Monday evening from the Christchurch Art Gallery.

The Peter Jackson film &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot; (1994), starring Melanie Lynskey and Kate Winslet, was set in Christchurch.

===Parks and nature===

Christchurch has been described as &quot;The Garden City&quot; because of the large number of public parks and well-developed residential gardens with many trees. A British lawyer John Eldon Gorst, stated that Christchurch reminded him of the garden cities in England, and he called it as such. Hagley Park and the Christchurch Botanic Gardens, founded in 1863, are in the central city, which is an active habitat for kererū. The Hagley Oval is a popular cricket field. Other sports such as association football, and rugby are popular in Hagley Park, and open-air concerts by local bands and orchestras. North Hagley Park is known for its cherry blossoms, planted along Harper Avenue on Arbor Day in 1936. During the flowering season the trees are popular with visitors.

To the east lies Rāwhiti Domain, in New Brighton, and to the north lies Spencer Park. And there are many inner city urban parks such as, Latimer Square, Cranmer Square, and Victoria Square. To the north of the city is the Willowbank Wildlife Reserve. Travis Wetland, an ecological restoration programme to create a wetland, many native plants and birdlife thrive there, notably royal spoonbills and spotless crake and recent plantings of fork-leaved sundew. It is located to the east of the city centre near the suburb of Burwood and North New Brighton. There has been recent work to restore Papanui Bush, it began in 2018, with recent plantings of native wildlife such as rimu and tōtara to restore this area like it was pre-European urbanisation.

Orana Wildlife Park is New Zealand&#x27;s only open-range zoo, sitting on 80 hectares of land, located on the outskirts of Christchurch.

===Theatre===

Christchurch has a long history with performing arts, dating back to December 1861, when the first theatre opened on the current site of The Press building on Gloucester Street. Across the road from that building is the Isaac Theatre Royal, originally opened in 1863, and has since been rebuilt four times, most recently the building was moderately damaged following the 2011 earthquake. The Isaac Theatre Royal reopened to the public on 17 November 2014.

Christchurch has one full-time professional theatre, the Court Theatre, founded in 1971. Originally based in the Christchurch Arts Centre, the Court Theatre has been located in the suburb of Addington in temporary accommodation following the 2011 earthquakes. Construction of a new premises located in the Performing Arts Precinct is due to be complete in 2025.

The Free Theatre Christchurch was established in 1979 and based in the Arts Centre from 1982, and Showbiz Christchurch, an incorporated society established in 1938 and primarily producing musical theatre. There is also an active recreational theatre scene with community-based theatre companies, such as the Christchurch Repertory Society, Elmwood Players, Riccarton Players, and Canterbury Children&#x27;s Theatre, producing many quality shows.

===Music===
The city is known for its many live acts, including a professional symphony orchestra. After the closure of Canterbury Opera in 2006, due to financial reasons, in 2009 another professional opera company, Southern Opera, was founded. After the 2010 and 2011 earthquakes, it suspended its activities, before merging with New Zealand Opera in 2013.
Christchurch is a home for the experimental music scene of New Zealand.

There are usually buskers around the town square, and Christchurch also hosts the World Buskers Festival in January each year. Singer-songwriter Hayley Westenra launched her international career by busking in Christchurch.

Some of New Zealand&#x27;s acts, such as Shapeshifter, Ladi6, Tiki Taane and Truth are from Christchurch. Promoters, Venues and clubs such as Bassfreaks, The Bedford and Dux Live regularly have international, and New Zealand acts within the Drum and Bass scene performing live in Christchurch, along with dance parties, raves and gigs all featuring NZ and local Drum and Bass DJs, with often two or three happening on a single night or weekend (e.g. 2010 when UK Dubstep DJ Doctor P with Crushington was playing at The Bedford, while simultaneously Concord Dawn featuring Trei and Bulletproof was playing at Ministry).

In recent developments, hip hop has effectively landed in Christchurch. In 2000, First Aotearoa Hip Hop Summit was held there. And in 2003, Christchurch&#x27;s Scribe released his debut album in New Zealand and has received five times platinum in that country, in addition to achieving two number one singles.

Since 2015 the city has hosted Electric Avenue, a two-day music festival in Hagley Park which is the largest held in Australasia. Taking place annually in February, the festival hosts international and domestic acts, such as Lorde, The Chemical Brothers, and The Prodigy being amongst recent headliners.

===Venues===

Situated in Addington, the Wolfbrook Arena is the city&#x27;s major multipurpose indoor arena. The venue has capacity for nearly 9000 people when configured for concerts. In sports, it is one of the home venues of the Mainland Tactix netball side and was the venue for the 1999 World Netball championships.

The Christchurch Town Hall auditorium opened in September 1972, it was the first major auditorium design by architects Warren and Mahoney and acousticians Marshall Day. It is still recognised as a model example of concert-hall design with an excellent modern pipe organ. The hall was reopened on 23 February 2019, after being closed for eight years for repair after the significant damage caused by the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake.

Christchurch also has a casino, and there are also a wide range of live music venues – some short-lived, others with decades of history. Classical music concerts were held at the Christchurch Music Centre until it was demolished as a result of earthquake damage. The Piano was built to offer a variety of performance spaces for music and the arts.

In late 2014 it was announced that a 475 million dollar project was underway to build a convention centre located on the block defined by Armagh Street, Oxford Terrace, Worcester Street and Colombo Street. Gloucester Street becomes part of the Centre itself, but allows for retail use and public access. The convention centre, now called Te Pae, hosts several events at the same time; starting with space for up to 2,000 people, this complements facilities in Auckland and Queenstown. Te Pae opened on 17 December 2021.

In 2012, in the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan, it was announced there will be a replacement for Lancaster Park. Construction started on a new stadium in 2022 and is due to be complete in April 2026.

=== Festivals ===
Christchurch had a biennial Festival of Transitional Architecture (FESTA) from 2012 to 2018 founded by architectural historian Jessica Halliday. This has turned into an annual festival of architecture events called Open Christchurch since 2019 run by Te Pūtahi Centre for Architecture and City Making. Word Christchurch is a long running literary festival, the director in 2023 is Steph Walker.

==Sport==
Sport in Christchurch has developed from the time of the initial settlement of Canterbury by British migrants, and remains an important part of community life. Cricket and rugby union have been popular team sports since the early years of settlement, with the first cricket club established in the city in 1851, and the first rugby club in 1863. Interest in organised sports has diversified and now includes a wide range of codes. In 2022, the top five sporting codes in Canterbury based on club membership were netball, touch rugby, rugby union, golf and cricket.

There are around 1,200 sports clubs and associations, and in 2022 there were 140,000 affiliated members. Most of the sporting codes remain amateur, and rely upon volunteers as administrators and officials. However, there are some professional teams. Notable teams representing Christchurch or the Canterbury region include the Mainland Tactix (netball), Crusaders (rugby) and the Canterbury Kings (cricket).

The city has hosted many international competitions including championship events. A particularly notable international event held in Christchurch was the 1974 Commonwealth Games.

There are many outdoor sportsgrounds and a variety of indoor venues. Christchurch City Council maintains 110 sportsgrounds across Christchurch City and Banks Peninsula. The sports venues Lancaster Park and Queen Elizabeth II Park were damaged beyond repair in the 2011 Christchurch earthquake, and were demolished. New facilities built to replace those damaged in the earthquake include the Ngā Puna Wai Sports Hub, the Parakiore Recreation and Sport Centre — an aquatic and indoor sports venue scheduled to open in 2025, and a multi–purpose covered stadium &quot;Te Kaha&quot; seating 30,000 spectators that is expected to be complete by April 2026.

==Education==

===Secondary schools===
Christchurch is home to the fourth-largest school in New Zealand, co-educational state school Burnside High School, with pupils. Cashmere High School, Papanui High School and Riccarton High School are other large schools. There are four single-sex state schools: Shirley Boys&#x27; High School, Christchurch Boys&#x27; High School, Avonside Girls&#x27; High School and Christchurch Girls&#x27; High School.

Christchurch is also home to several single-sex private church schools, some of them of the traditional English public school type. These include St Thomas of Canterbury College, St Margaret&#x27;s College, Christ&#x27;s College, St Bede&#x27;s College, Marian College, Catholic Cathedral College, St Andrew&#x27;s College, Villa Maria College and Rangi Ruru Girls&#x27; School. Less conventional schools in the city include Ao Tawhiti, Hagley Community College, and the Christchurch Rudolf Steiner School.

===Tertiary institutions===
A number of tertiary education institutions have campuses in Christchurch, or in the surrounding areas.
* Ara Institute of Canterbury
* Lincoln University
* University of Canterbury
* University of Otago, Christchurch

==Transport==

Private cars are the dominant form of transport in Christchurch, with 62% of commuter journeys utilising a private car, . Historically, decisions on land use and infrastructure investment in Christchurch have tended to favour car travel, resulting in high adoption of cars. , Christchurch has almost of roads. The city is served by State Highways 1, 73, 74, 74A, 75 and 76. Christchurch has three motorways consisting of the Christchurch Northern Motorway (includes the Western Belfast Bypass), Christchurch Southern Motorway and the Christchurch-Lyttelton Motorway.

Christchurch has an extensive bus network, with bus routes serving most areas of the city and satellite towns. The local bus service, marketed as &quot;Metro&quot;, is provided by Environment Canterbury. The topology of the network broadly follow a spoke–hub distribution paradigm, with major routes intersecting the city and crossing at the central Christchurch Bus Interchange. Less-frequent &#x27;connector&#x27; and &#x27;link&#x27; services provide journeys between suburbs not on the major routes. Additionally, a service called the &quot;Orbiter&quot; connects the suburban mall hubs by running in a ring around the outside of the central city. Before the 2011 earthquakes, in addition to normal bus services, Christchurch also had a zero-fare hybrid bus service, the &quot;Shuttle&quot;, in the inner city. The service was suspended following the earthquakes. public transport mode share in the Greater Christchurch area was 2.8%, with daily journeys still well-below pre-earthquake levels.

Historically, Christchurch has been known as New Zealand&#x27;s cycling city, even earning the nickname &quot;Cyclopolis&quot; around the turn of the 20th century. Mark Twain described Christchurch in 1895 as a place &quot;where half the people ride bicycles and the other half are kept busy dodging them&quot;. The central city has very flat terrain and the Christchurch City Council has established a network of cycling infrastructure in the form of both dedicated and shared paths, such as the major Northern Line Cycleway. Post-quake public consultation on rebuilding the city expressed a strong desire for a more sustainable transport system, particularly greater use of cycling; this was reflected in the council&#x27;s 2012–42 strategic transport plan. The number of cycle paths across the city has continued to increase since the earthquakes, with the roll-out of the Major Cycle Route initiative intending to create of cycle paths in the city. This has contributed to a 30% increase in bicycle journeys between 2016 and 2023, with over 3.6 million cyclists detected at counting stations in a 12-month period. Data from the 2023 census revealed Christchurch as a national leader in the adoption of cycling as commuter transport. Nearly 25% of all bicycle commuters in New Zealand live in Christchurch, with the highest levels of adoption in suburbs with robust cycle infrastructure.

Trams were running as public transport in Christchurch as early as 1880, with the system mostly electrified beginning in 1905. Routes mostly centred around Cathedral Square connecting out as far as Papanui, New Brighton and Sumner, but all had ceased operating by 1954. In 1995, the Christchurch tramway system was re-established as a tourist attraction. The tram follows a short loop around central city streets, with stops at Cathedral Square, the Arts Centre, Canterbury Museum, Victoria Square and Cathedral Junction, which is also the location of the depot. The tram tracks are owned by the Christchurch City Council, with the trams supplied, maintained and operated by the Tramways Historical Society. In 2022 the tram tracks were extended south down High Street at a cost of , though due to an engineering issue they derailed a tram and had to be relaid.

There is a cable car system called the Christchurch Gondola which operates as a tourist attraction, providing transport from the Heathcote Valley to the top of Mount Cavendish in the city&#x27;s south-east.

Rail services, both long-distance and commuter, used to focus on the former railway station on Moorhouse avenue. Commuter trains were progressively cancelled in the 1960s and 1970s. The last such service, between Christchurch and Rangiora, ceased in 1976. After the reduction in services, a new Christchurch railway station was established at Addington Junction. The Main North Line railway travels northwards via Kaikōura to Picton and is served by the Coastal Pacific scheduled passenger train while the Main South Line heads to Invercargill via Dunedin and was used by the Southerner until its cancellation in 2002.

The most famous train to depart Christchurch is the TranzAlpine, which travels along the Main South Line to Rolleston and then turns onto the Midland Line, passes through the Southern Alps via the Otira Tunnel, and terminates in Greymouth on the West Coast. This trip is often regarded as one of the ten great train journeys in the world for the remarkable scenery through which it passes. The TranzAlpine service is primarily a tourist service and carries no significant commuter traffic.

Christchurch Airport is located in Harewood, to the north-west of the city centre. The airport is the second-busiest airport in New Zealand, with regular passenger services from Christchurch to sixteen New Zealand and seven international destinations. The airport serves as the major base for the New Zealand, South Korean, Italian and United States Antarctic programs.

==Utilities==

=== Water supply ===
Christchurch has one of the highest-quality water supplies in the world, with its water rated among the purest and cleanest in the world. Untreated, naturally filtered water is sourced, via more than 50 pumping stations surrounding the city, from aquifers emanating from the foothills of the Southern Alps. However, since 2018 about 70% of Christchurch&#x27;s water supply has been temporarily chlorinated due to well-head upgrades, and the chlorination is planned to be stopped after the upgrades have been completed and certified.

=== Wastewater ===

Christchurch was the first city in New Zealand to develop an underground sewerage network. In the early 1870s, Christchurch had a population of around 12,000 people. However, there was a high death rate from diseases such as typhoid, with 152 people dying in an epidemic from 1875 to 1876. The city was considered as the unhealthiest in New Zealand at that time. Most of the human waste was being discharged untreated into the Avon and Heathcote rivers, despite those rivers also being used for bathing. Following the passing of the Christchurch District Drainage Act 1875, the Christchurch Drainage Board was established, holding its first meeting on 4 January 1876. The first chairman of the board was the city mayor, Fred Hobbs, who had been a strong advocate for a drainage system.

In 1878, an English drainage engineer William Clark proposed detailed designs for an underground sewerage network for the city, with a pumping station to pump the sewage to sandhills in Bromley for irrigation over land adjacent to the estuary. The city&#x27;s first sewage pumping station was established in Tuam Street in 1882, with a boiler and steam-driven pumps. Homeowners were required to pay for a connection to the new sewerage system and establish flushing toilets, and by 1884 there were 293 connections. The 1903 Cyclopedia of New Zealand stated that following the implementation of the drainage system &quot;the city now ranks amongst the most healthy in the Colony&quot;.

===Electricity===
The Christchurch City Council established the city&#x27;s first public electricity supply in 1903, and the city was connected to Coleridge Power Station in 1914. Until 1989, electricity distribution and retailing in Christchurch was the responsibility of four entities: the Christchurch City Council Municipal Electricity Department (MED), Riccarton Electricity, the Port Hills Energy Authority, and the Central Canterbury Electric Power Board. In 1989, all four companies entered a joint venture, named Southpower. The 1998 electricity sector reforms required all electricity companies to separate their distribution and retailing businesses. Southpower retained its distribution business and sold its retail business to Meridian Energy. In December 1998, the distribution business was renamed Orion New Zealand. Today, Orion owns and operates the local distribution network servicing the city, with electricity fed into it from two Transpower substations at Islington and Bromley.

The electricity distribution network in Christchurch suffered significant damage in the 2011 earthquakes, especially in the north-east, where the 66,000-volt subtransmission cables supplying the area were damaged beyond repair. This necessitated major repairs to the existing infrastructure, as well as building new infrastructure to supply new housing developments.

At the 2013 census, 94.0% of Christchurch homes were heated wholly or partly by electricity, the highest in the country.

=== Telecommunications ===
Telephone service was introduced in Christchurch on 1 October 1881 with the commissioning of New Zealand&#x27;s first telephone exchange. The city converted to fully automatic service on 14 September 1929. Subscriber toll dialling was introduced in Christchurch from 19 November 1976, with the city given the area code 03; in the early 1990s, the 03 area code was expanded to cover the entire South Island and Christchurch telephone numbers were lengthened from six to seven digits by prefixing 3 to existing numbers. Mobile phone service was introduced to Christchurch on 5 September 1988 by Telecom (now Spark).

As part of the Ultra Fast Broadband initiative, fibre to the premises was rolled out in Christchurch during the 2010s, with the network completed in August 2018. Enable Networks operates the fibre network in Christchurch and Lyttelton, while Chorus Limited operates the fibre network in Diamond Harbour and in towns on the Banks Peninsula. Chorus also operates the copper network across all of Christchurch City.

== Media ==
The major daily newspaper in Christchurch is &quot;The Press&quot;, which has a daily circulation of 31,207 and is owned by Stuff. &quot;The Press&quot; was first published on 25 May 1861, originally as a weekly paper before becoming a daily paper in March 1863. Weekly newspapers include &quot;The Star,&quot; owned by Allied Press, which began in 1868 as a daily evening newspaper before becoming a bi-weekly (and later weekly) free newspaper in 1991.

The Christchurch radio market is the second-largest in New Zealand, with 511,700 listeners aged 10 and over. The three largest stations in Christchurch by market share are Newstalk ZB, More FM, and The Breeze. As with other New Zealand radio markets, most radio stations in Christchurch are centralcast out of Auckland.

Television was introduced in Christchurch on 1 June 1961 with channel CHTV3. The channel networked with its NZBC counterparts in Auckland, Wellington and Dunedin in 1969 and today is part of Television New Zealand (TVNZ). As with radio, television channels in Christchurch are centralcast out of Auckland.

== Notable people ==
==Sister cities==

Christchurch&#x27;s sister cities are:

* Adelaide, South Australia, Australia (1972)
* Christchurch, Dorset, England, United Kingdom (1972)
* Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan (1973)
* Seattle, Washington, United States (1981)
* Songpa-gu, Seoul, South Korea (1995)
* Wuhan, Hubei, China (2006)
Christchurch also has friendly relations with Gansu in China.

==See also==
* Christchurch City Holdings
* List of radio stations in Christchurch
* List of tallest buildings in Christchurch
* List of people from Christchurch

==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 

===Citations===
==External links==

* Christchurch City Council – official council website
* Ōtautahi Christchurch – official website of the Christchurch City Council economic development agency, includes a tourism guide and visitor information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="0" end="12" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="45" end="57" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q375643" start="66" end="85" title="List of cities in New Zealand" label="second-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="114" end="125" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="244" end="261" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033781" start="330" end="347" title="Canterbury Plains" label="Canterbury Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782677" start="388" end="399" title="Pegasus Bay" label="Pegasus Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q806836" start="505" end="520" title="Banks Peninsula" label="Banks Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q791289" start="526" end="546" title="Avon River / Ōtākaro" label="Avon River (Ōtākaro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134612" start="590" end="608" title="Hagley Park, Christchurch" label="a large urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q941581" start="652" end="662" title="Port Hills" label="Port Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q110313491" start="775" end="782" title="English New Zealanders" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="937" end="942" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="972" end="997" title="temperate oceanic climate" label="temperate oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="1117" end="1120" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540772" start="1121" end="1128" title="Waitaha (South Island iwi)" label="Waitaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="1186" end="1191" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1216" end="1221" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163411" start="1243" end="1253" title="Kāti Māmoe" label="Kāti Māmoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="1306" end="1314" title="Kāi Tahu" label="Kāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q126162282" start="1413" end="1423" title="Kaiapoi Pā" label="Kaiapoi Pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1425" end="1432" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453028" start="1494" end="1510" title="First Four Ships" label="First Four Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q386520" start="1533" end="1555" title="Canterbury Association" label="Canterbury Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879040" start="1608" end="1625" title="Lyttelton Harbour" label="Lyttelton Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="1655" end="1668" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350718" start="1842" end="1857" title="Main South Line" label="Main South Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603702" start="1889" end="1902" title="State housing in New Zealand" label="state housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="2170" end="2194" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q919088" start="2273" end="2304" title="1974 British Commonwealth Games" label="1974 British Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122562" start="2326" end="2349" title="Queen Elizabeth II Park" label="Queen Elizabeth II Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q111235034" start="2448" end="2472" title="Antarctic gateway cities" label="Antarctic gateway cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061330" start="2556" end="2576" title="Christchurch Airport" label="Christchurch Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656944" start="2580" end="2588" title="Harewood, New Zealand" label="Harewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q750144" start="2664" end="2695" title="2010 Canterbury earthquake" label="earthquakes from September 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="2702" end="2752" title="2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="the most destructive occurring on 22 February 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="2989" end="3007" title="Christchurch mosque shootings" label="a terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q386520" start="3136" end="3158" title="Canterbury Association" label="Canterbury Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="3280" end="3301" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255110" start="3364" end="3382" title="John Robert Godley" label="John Robert Godley"/>
<link wikidata="Q925424" start="3550" end="3570" title="Christchurch, Dorset" label="Christchurch, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="3579" end="3599" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="3871" end="3876" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q791289" start="4037" end="4057" title="Avon River / Ōtākaro" label="Avon River / Ōtākaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="4131" end="4140" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="4443" end="4468" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="4661" end="4666" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981615" start="4760" end="4769" title="Dacrycarpus dacrydioides" label="kahikatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127677" start="4771" end="4776" title="Prumnopitys taxifolia" label="mataī"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="4781" end="4787" title="Podocarpus totara" label="tōtara"/>
<link wikidata="Q58393" start="4864" end="4870" title="Dodonaea viscosa" label="akeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168970" start="4872" end="4879" title="Coprosma repens" label="taupata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281421" start="4881" end="4891" title="Discaria toumatou" label="tūmatakuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q153042" start="4893" end="4898" title="Myoporum laetum" label="ngaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043776" start="4900" end="4912" title="carmichaelia" label="carmichaelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578865" start="4918" end="4926" title="coprosma" label="coprosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070280" start="5301" end="5307" title="Sumner, New Zealand" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="5342" end="5345" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540772" start="5417" end="5424" title="Waitaha (South Island iwi)" label="Waitaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="5431" end="5434" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163411" start="5447" end="5457" title="Kāti Māmoe" label="Kāti Māmoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="5603" end="5611" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Kāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322943" start="5988" end="5997" title="Riccarton, New Zealand" label="Riccarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132483" start="6003" end="6010" title="Papanui" label="Papanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866395" start="6083" end="6101" title="South New Brighton" label="South New Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127687" start="6244" end="6253" title="kelp gull" label="kelp gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520028" start="6267" end="6273" title="mānuka" label="mānuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q791272" start="6296" end="6318" title="Avon Heathcote Estuary" label="Avon Heathcote Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="6367" end="6371" title="hapū" label="hapū"/>
<link wikidata="Q126162282" start="6433" end="6443" title="Kaiapoi Pā" label="Kaiapoi Pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q927271" start="6614" end="6639" title="Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River" label="Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070213" start="6648" end="6658" title="Styx River (Canterbury)" label="Styx River"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="6686" end="6689" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379130" start="6766" end="6779" title="Cordyline australis" label="cabbage trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q84583384" start="6888" end="6895" title="William Deans" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066281" start="6900" end="6910" title="John Deans (pioneer)" label="John Deans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322943" start="6946" end="6960" title="Riccarton Bush" label="Riccarton Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="7166" end="7174" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829261" start="7238" end="7248" title="Avon Water" label="Avon Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q209142" start="7252" end="7269" title="South Lanarkshire" label="South Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q386520" start="7358" end="7380" title="Canterbury Association" label="Canterbury Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229759" start="7412" end="7425" title="Joseph Thomas (surveyor)" label="Joseph Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343815" start="7491" end="7504" title="Edward Jollie" label="Edward Jollie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453028" start="7633" end="7649" title="First Four Ships" label="First Four Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879040" start="7746" end="7763" title="Lyttelton Harbour" label="Lyttelton Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291779" start="7810" end="7818" title="Randolph (ship)" label="Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086023" start="7832" end="7846" title="Charlotte Jane" label="Charlotte Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184531" start="7866" end="7872" title="Cressy (ship)" label="Cressy"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="8106" end="8119" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="8123" end="8129" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q911909" start="8335" end="8344" title="Lyttelton, New Zealand" label="Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070280" start="8381" end="8387" title="Sumner, New Zealand" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255110" start="8406" end="8424" title="John Robert Godley" label="John Robert Godley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227595" start="8605" end="8615" title="Packhorse" label="pack horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966949" start="8796" end="8807" title="Bridle Path (New Zealand)" label="Bridle Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q148558" start="8879" end="8885" title="bridle" label="bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q791272" start="9053" end="9075" title="Avon Heathcote Estuary" label="Avon Heathcote Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445542" start="9079" end="9088" title="Ferrymead" label="Ferrymead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9114" end="9124" title="Sumner, New Zealand#Sumner bar" label="Sumner bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357079" start="9319" end="9333" title="superintendent (New Zealand)" label="superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018256" start="9334" end="9358" title="William Sefton Moorhouse" label="William Sefton Moorhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445548" start="9523" end="9540" title="Ferrymead Railway" label="Ferrymead Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033684" start="9685" end="9707" title="Canterbury Province" label="Province of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="9905" end="9918" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722621" start="9940" end="9952" title="Henry Harper (bishop)" label="Henry Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="9976" end="10000" title="archbishop of Canterbury" label="archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109064" start="10107" end="10132" title="Christchurch City Council" label="Christchurch City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="10556" end="10570" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q202497" start="10605" end="10623" title="Benjamin Mountfort" label="Benjamin Mountfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q863801" start="10664" end="10693" title="Christchurch Arts Centre" label="Canterbury University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077977" start="10695" end="10717" title="ChristChurch Cathedral" label="ChristChurch Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033769" start="10719" end="10736" title="Canterbury Museum, Christchurch" label="Canterbury Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033681" start="10746" end="10785" title="Canterbury Provincial Council Buildings" label="Canterbury Provincial Council Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535123" start="10999" end="11016" title="Waimakariri River" label="Waimakariri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14702857" start="11057" end="11072" title="Victoria Square, Christchurch" label="Victoria Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555253" start="11345" end="11349" title="1869 Christchurch earthquake" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11351" end="11355" title="1881 Castle Hill earthquake" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486364" start="11360" end="11364" title="1888 North Canterbury earthquake" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077977" start="11423" end="11445" title="ChristChurch Cathedral" label="Christchurch Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170477" start="11470" end="11477" title="chimney" label="chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316564" start="11500" end="11530" title="Durham Street Methodist Church" label="Durham Street Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557855" start="11576" end="11602" title="1901 Cheviot earthquake" label="a magnitude 6.9 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070959" start="11617" end="11624" title="Cheviot, New Zealand" label="Cheviot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050898" start="11825" end="11859" title="Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament, Christchurch" label="Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q347490" start="11908" end="11921" title="Francis Petre" label="Francis Petre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710383" start="11948" end="11969" title="Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, Paris" label="Saint-Vincent-de-Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060760" start="11993" end="12029" title="International Exhibition (1906)" label="New Zealand International Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033945" start="12381" end="12389" title="Woolston, New Zealand" label="Woolston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681170" start="12394" end="12403" title="Addington, New Zealand" label="Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681188" start="12530" end="12547" title="Addington Railway Workshops" label="railway workshops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350718" start="12569" end="12584" title="Main South Line" label="Main South Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="12630" end="12640" title="flour mill" label="flour mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659766" start="12788" end="12796" title="Sydenham, New Zealand" label="Sydenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603702" start="13308" end="13320" title="state housing in New Zealand" label="state houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681188" start="13482" end="13509" title="Addington Railway Workshops" label="Addington Railway Workshops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851443" start="13553" end="13564" title="Ballantynes" label="Ballantynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123290" start="13599" end="13605" title="City Mall, Christchurch" label="Cashel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148045" start="13610" end="13624" title="Colombo Street" label="Colombo Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851435" start="13694" end="13713" title="Ballantynes fire" label="worst fire disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="14135" end="14162" title="Royal commission" label="Royal commission of enquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="14366" end="14378" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="14500" end="14517" title="Parking lot" label="car parking areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904115" start="14608" end="14614" title="Hornby, New Zealand" label="Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710403" start="14734" end="14755" title="Lyttelton road tunnel" label="Lyttelton road tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q113561601" start="15066" end="15083" title="Gloucester Street" label="Gloucester Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634998" start="15142" end="15163" title="Sugarloaf (New Zealand)" label="Sugarloaf transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639519" start="15433" end="15449" title="Christchurch Central Police Station" label="A police station"/>
<link wikidata="Q919088" start="15550" end="15581" title="1974 British Commonwealth Games" label="1974 British Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122562" start="15603" end="15626" title="Queen Elizabeth II Park" label="Queen Elizabeth II Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q750144" start="15753" end="15779" title="2010 Canterbury earthquake" label="a magnitude 7.1 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410" start="15855" end="15865" title="hypocentre" label="hypocentre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165830" start="15871" end="15879" title="Darfield, New Zealand" label="Darfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q129642835" start="16025" end="16046" title="December 2010 Christchurch earthquake" label="Boxing Day earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="16229" end="16242" title="February 2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="an earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="16397" end="16419" title="moment magnitude scale" label="moment magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q170350" start="16518" end="16542" title="Mercalli intensity scale" label="IX (&amp;quot;Violent&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801192" start="16679" end="16705" title="June 2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="two more large aftershocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28779519" start="17119" end="17141" title="2017 Port Hills fires" label="two bush fires started"/>
<link wikidata="Q941581" start="17149" end="17159" title="Port Hills" label="Port Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589764" start="17268" end="17281" title="Governors Bay" label="Governors Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q124528185" start="17386" end="17408" title="2024 Port Hills fire" label="fire on the Port Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="17683" end="17713" title="Christchurch mosque shootings" label="two consecutive mass shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066735" start="17721" end="17735" title="Al Noor Mosque, Christchurch" label="Al Noor Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066751" start="17740" end="17762" title="Linwood Islamic Centre" label="Linwood Islamic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="17780" end="17797" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606816" start="17876" end="17890" title="Jacinda Ardern" label="Jacinda Ardern"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="18271" end="18285" title="Life imprisonment" label="life in prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="18463" end="18475" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q941581" start="18535" end="18545" title="Port Hills" label="Port Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q806836" start="18549" end="18564" title="Banks Peninsula" label="Banks Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="18730" end="18738" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q917545" start="18839" end="18848" title="greywacke" label="greywacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="18879" end="18887" title="Tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143968" start="19146" end="19159" title="Basement (geology)" label="basement rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040291" start="19224" end="19256" title="Banks Peninsula Volcano" label="Banks Peninsula volcanic complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="19297" end="19310" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="19355" end="19365" title="Glacial period" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="19409" end="19417" title="Alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033781" start="19456" end="19473" title="Canterbury Plains" label="Canterbury Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="19748" end="19765" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="20015" end="20022" title="Fluvial sediment processes" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="20380" end="20396" title="Aquifer" label="artesian aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q998184" start="20406" end="20417" title="Interbedding" label="interbedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643589" start="20721" end="20735" title="Halswell River" label="Halswell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800918" start="20818" end="20845" title="Lake Ellesmere / Te Waihora" label="Lake Ellesmere / Te Waihora"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="21134" end="21136" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005082" start="21313" end="21335" title="William Barnard Rhodes" label="William Barnard Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322943" start="21907" end="21921" title="Riccarton, New Zealand" label="Riccarton Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836402" start="21923" end="21937" title="Travis Wetland" label="Travis Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050885" start="22064" end="22080" title="Cathedral Square, Christchurch" label="Cathedral Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q110130678" start="22096" end="22108" title="Four Avenues" label="Four Avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134612" start="22192" end="22203" title="Hagley Park, Christchurch" label="Hagley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186086" start="22213" end="22241" title="Christchurch Botanic Gardens" label="Christchurch Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241112" start="22502" end="22523" title="Central City Red Zone" label="Central City Red Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623306" start="22663" end="22681" title="List of historic places in Christchurch" label="heritage buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642207" start="22747" end="22778" title="List of tallest buildings in Christchurch" label="city&amp;#x27;s high rise buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q97158835" start="22784" end="22818" title="Christchurch Central Recovery Plan" label="Christchurch Central Recovery Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819197" start="23215" end="23237" title="Statistics New Zealand" label="Statistics New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144511" start="23242" end="23258" title="NZ Post" label="New Zealand Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050885" start="23399" end="23415" title="Cathedral Square, Christchurch" label="Cathedral Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603702" start="23583" end="23596" title="State housing in New Zealand" label="state housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070280" start="23651" end="23657" title="Sumner, New Zealand" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q728878" start="23659" end="23671" title="New Brighton, New Zealand" label="New Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898881" start="23673" end="23688" title="Upper Riccarton" label="Upper Riccarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132483" start="23693" end="23700" title="Papanui" label="Papanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175539" start="23796" end="23817" title="functional urban area" label="functional urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q985373" start="23929" end="23936" title="Leeston" label="Leeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q911909" start="23939" end="23948" title="Lyttelton, New Zealand" label="Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589764" start="23951" end="23964" title="Governors Bay" label="Governors Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270805" start="23967" end="23982" title="Diamond Harbour, New Zealand" label="Diamond Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065644" start="23985" end="23993" title="Tai Tapu" label="Tai Tapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843146" start="23996" end="24008" title="Little River, New Zealand" label="Little River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186226" start="24011" end="24018" title="Lincoln, New Zealand" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q176330" start="24021" end="24031" title="Prebbleton" label="Prebbleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099966" start="24034" end="24043" title="Rolleston, New Zealand" label="Rolleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698819" start="24046" end="24055" title="Templeton, New Zealand" label="Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479817" start="24058" end="24069" title="West Melton, New Zealand" label="West Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034575" start="24072" end="24080" title="Rangiora" label="Rangiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032610" start="24083" end="24090" title="Woodend, New Zealand" label="Woodend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960049" start="24093" end="24100" title="Waikuku" label="Waikuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898765" start="24103" end="24110" title="Pegasus, New Zealand" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013339" start="24113" end="24120" title="Kaiapoi" label="Kaiapoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54865570" start="24123" end="24129" title="Kainga, New Zealand" label="Kainga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757176" start="24132" end="24147" title="The Pines Beach" label="The Pines Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q25661476" start="24150" end="24160" title="Motukarara" label="Motukarara"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="24194" end="24203" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="24204" end="24219" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="24221" end="24227" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81242" start="24443" end="24453" title="sea breeze" label="sea breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033756" start="24521" end="24536" title="Nor&amp;#x27;west arch" label="nor&amp;#x27;wester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="24550" end="24559" title="Foehn wind" label="föhn wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="24690" end="24707" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034575" start="24968" end="24976" title="Rangiora" label="Rangiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="25218" end="25226" title="Snowfall" label="Snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999696" start="25377" end="25383" title="Wigram" label="Wigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="25462" end="25467" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="25516" end="25531" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="inversion layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="25713" end="25738" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="25837" end="25847" title="fire" label="open fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="26132" end="26144" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900093" start="26198" end="26208" title="Urban areas of New Zealand" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q911909" start="26224" end="26233" title="Lyttelton, New Zealand" label="Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270805" start="26260" end="26275" title="Diamond Harbour, New Zealand" label="Diamond Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q116745078" start="26385" end="26408" title="2023 New Zealand census" label="2023 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="26456" end="26467" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="26520" end="26531" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="26595" end="26608" title="non-binary gender" label="other genders"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="26660" end="26667" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTIQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015349" start="27523" end="27531" title="European New Zealanders" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="27533" end="27539" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="27548" end="27553" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="27560" end="27568" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="27576" end="27581" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="27906" end="27931" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="28067" end="28076" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="28083" end="28088" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="28095" end="28100" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950631" start="28107" end="28130" title="Māori religious beliefs" label="Māori religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="28137" end="28145" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="28152" end="28159" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917569" start="28166" end="28172" title="Judaism in New Zealand" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886714" start="28234" end="28245" title="Irreligion in New Zealand" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q116745078" start="28921" end="28944" title="2023 New Zealand census" label="2023 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="28992" end="29003" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="29056" end="29067" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="29131" end="29144" title="non-binary gender" label="other genders"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="29196" end="29203" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTIQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015349" start="29500" end="29508" title="European New Zealanders" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="29510" end="29516" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="29525" end="29530" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="29537" end="29545" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="29553" end="29558" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="29883" end="29908" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="30044" end="30053" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="30060" end="30065" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="30072" end="30077" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950631" start="30084" end="30107" title="Māori religious beliefs" label="Māori religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="30114" end="30122" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="30129" end="30136" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917569" start="30143" end="30149" title="Judaism in New Zealand" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886714" start="30211" end="30222" title="Irreligion in New Zealand" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32808" end="32836" title=":Category:Companies based in Christchurch" label="headquarters in Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724943" start="32847" end="32853" title="Macpac" label="Macpac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736294" start="32855" end="32864" title="KMD Brands" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119164" start="32866" end="32879" title="PGG Wrightson" label="PGG Wrightson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676459" start="32881" end="32900" title="Tait Communications" label="Tait Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167090" start="32902" end="32913" title="Cookie Time" label="Cookie Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865291" start="32919" end="32930" title="Smiths City" label="Smiths City"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="33026" end="33034" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="33185" end="33198" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764261" start="33809" end="33819" title="Angus Tait" label="Angus Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676459" start="33828" end="33844" title="Tait Communications" label="Tait Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123891" start="33975" end="33986" title="Gil Simpson" label="Gil Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458741" start="34015" end="34019" title="LINC 4GL" label="LINC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107617" start="34024" end="34028" title="JADE (programming language)" label="Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501578" start="34058" end="34075" title="management buyout" label="management buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501578" start="34558" end="34575" title="Management buyout" label="Management buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="34781" end="34805" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109087" start="34951" end="34999" title="Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology" label="Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694064" start="35273" end="35294" title="agriculture in New Zealand" label="agricultural industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119164" start="35496" end="35509" title="PGG Wrightson" label="PGG Wrightson"/>
<link wikidata="Q140207" start="36317" end="36325" title="Taranaki" label="Taranaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q139918" start="36334" end="36341" title="Waikato" label="Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="36655" end="36662" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033619" start="37024" end="37047" title="Canterbury A&amp;amp;P Show" label="Canterbury A&amp;amp;P Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918368" start="37133" end="37163" title="Agricultural show" label="agricultural and pastoral show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109064" start="37426" end="37451" title="Christchurch City Council" label="Christchurch City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q383373" start="37605" end="37612" title="Tourism in New Zealand" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950336" start="37844" end="37877" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="37879" end="37889" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="37895" end="37905" title="West Coast Region" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q25834" start="37910" end="37918" title="Kaikōura" label="Kaikōura"/>
<link wikidata="Q111235034" start="38660" end="38677" title="Antarctic gateway cities" label="Antarctic gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031706" start="38696" end="38728" title="Discovery Expedition" label="&amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot; Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="38750" end="38769" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q973919" start="38862" end="38895" title="Terra Nova Expedition" label="&amp;quot;Terra Nova&amp;quot; Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437304" start="38929" end="38946" title="Statue of Robert Falcon Scott, Christchurch" label="a memorial statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048193" start="38980" end="39010" title="International Antarctic Centre" label="International Antarctic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="39120" end="39138" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="39143" end="39175" title="United States Air National Guard" label="United States Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q498627" start="39309" end="39316" title="McMurdo Station" label="McMurdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136714" start="39321" end="39331" title="Scott Base" label="Scott Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q955267" start="39481" end="39512" title="United States Antarctic Program" label="United States Antarctic Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109064" start="39677" end="39702" title="Christchurch City Council" label="Christchurch City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797690" start="39719" end="39740" title="Mayor of Christchurch" label="Mayor of Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39948" end="39963" title="Christchurch City Council#Community Boards" label="Community board"/>
<link wikidata="Q941036" start="40505" end="40522" title="Districts of New Zealand" label="District councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210763" start="40545" end="40551" title="Selwyn District" label="Selwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542322" start="40557" end="40568" title="Waimakariri District" label="Waimakariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033686" start="40742" end="40769" title="Canterbury Regional Council" label="Canterbury Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283326" start="40939" end="40960" title="district health board" label="district health board"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169574" start="40978" end="40998" title="2022 New Zealand local elections" label="2022 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180599" start="41033" end="41065" title="Canterbury District Health Board" label="Canterbury District Health Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="41137" end="41147" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015807" start="41156" end="41175" title="NZ Transport Agency" label="NZ Transport Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="41262" end="41276" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382900" start="41337" end="41356" title="New Zealand electorates" label="general electorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690987" start="41400" end="41412" title="Te Tai Tonga" label="Te Tai Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034424" start="41448" end="41484" title="New Zealand House of Representatives" label="New Zealand House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q100718706" start="41496" end="41529" title="2023 New Zealand general election" label="2023 New Zealand general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="41579" end="41587" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="41619" end="41625" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="41672" end="41685" title="Te Pāti Māori" label="Te Pāti Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="41852" end="41879" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647357" start="41915" end="41928" title="Māori culture" label="Māori culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922976" start="42462" end="42467" title="Hoyts" label="Hoyts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42481" end="42516" title="Christchurch railway station (New Zealand)#Second station" label="railway station on Moorhouse Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898773" start="42544" end="42559" title="Reading Entertainment" label="Reading Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755971" start="42584" end="42609" title="the Palms Shopping Centre" label="the Palms Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109058" start="43290" end="43314" title="Christchurch Art Gallery" label="Christchurch Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="43321" end="43334" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q322206" start="43346" end="43364" title="Heavenly Creatures" label="Heavenly Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q235905" start="43388" end="43403" title="Melanie Lynskey" label="Melanie Lynskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="43408" end="43420" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765264" start="43652" end="43668" title="John Eldon Gorst" label="John Eldon Gorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134612" start="43767" end="43778" title="Hagley Park, Christchurch" label="Hagley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186086" start="43787" end="43815" title="Christchurch Botanic Gardens" label="Christchurch Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145127" start="43890" end="43896" title="kererū" label="kererū"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638760" start="43902" end="43913" title="Hagley Oval" label="Hagley Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q682943" start="43927" end="43940" title="cricket field" label="cricket field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="43989" end="43994" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q871991" start="44111" end="44125" title="cherry blossom" label="cherry blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q578836" start="44159" end="44168" title="Arbor Day" label="Arbor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096393" start="44381" end="44395" title="Latimer Square" label="Latimer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096215" start="44397" end="44411" title="Cranmer Square" label="Cranmer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q14702857" start="44417" end="44432" title="Victoria Square, Christchurch" label="Victoria Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022394" start="44466" end="44493" title="Willowbank Wildlife Reserve" label="Willowbank Wildlife Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836402" start="44495" end="44509" title="Travis Wetland" label="Travis Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q722981" start="44622" end="44637" title="royal spoonbill" label="royal spoonbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q930738" start="44643" end="44657" title="spotless crake" label="spotless crake"/>
<link wikidata="Q138163" start="44682" end="44700" title="fork-leaved sundew" label="fork-leaved sundew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001056" start="44766" end="44773" title="Burwood, New Zealand" label="Burwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q382469" start="44917" end="44921" title="rimu" label="rimu"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="44926" end="44932" title="tōtara" label="tōtara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264222" start="44994" end="45013" title="Orana Wildlife Park" label="Orana Wildlife Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942849" start="45367" end="45386" title="Isaac Theatre Royal" label="Isaac Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178290" start="45661" end="45674" title="Court Theatre (New Zealand)" label="Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45910" end="45934" title="Christchurch Central Recovery Plan#Performing Arts Precinct" label="Performing Arts Precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500116" start="45971" end="45996" title="Free Theatre Christchurch" label="Free Theatre Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="46493" end="46511" title="Orchestra" label="symphony orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752980" start="46745" end="46762" title="New Zealand Opera" label="New Zealand Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593605" start="46927" end="46949" title="World Buskers Festival" label="World Buskers Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q231985" start="46990" end="47005" title="Hayley Westenra" label="Hayley Westenra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454199" start="47110" end="47122" title="Shapeshifter (band)" label="Shapeshifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469415" start="47124" end="47129" title="Ladi6" label="Ladi6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991315" start="47131" end="47141" title="Tiki Taane" label="Tiki Taane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848269" start="47146" end="47151" title="Truth (Dubstep Artist)" label="Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061" start="47543" end="47551" title="Doctor P" label="Doctor P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124054" start="47618" end="47630" title="Concord Dawn" label="Concord Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47641" end="47645" title="Trei" label="Trei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439147" start="47849" end="47855" title="Scribe (rapper)" label="Scribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q124625117" start="48031" end="48046" title="Electric Avenue (New Zealand festival)" label="Electric Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476175" start="48225" end="48230" title="Lorde" label="Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q208507" start="48232" end="48253" title="The Chemical Brothers" label="The Chemical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="48259" end="48270" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009234" start="48346" end="48361" title="Wolfbrook Arena" label="Wolfbrook Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033700" start="48537" end="48552" title="Mainland Tactix" label="Mainland Tactix"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="48553" end="48560" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109102" start="48631" end="48653" title="Christchurch Town Hall" label="Christchurch Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970617" start="48746" end="48764" title="Warren and Mahoney" label="Warren and Mahoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="48886" end="48896" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="49039" end="49067" title="2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="2011 Christchurch earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109059" start="49092" end="49100" title="Christchurch Casino" label="a casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941469" start="49249" end="49274" title="Music Centre of Christchurch" label="Christchurch Music Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q97158835" start="49956" end="49990" title="Christchurch Central Recovery Plan" label="Christchurch Central Recovery Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q97575035" start="50081" end="50094" title="Te Kaha (stadium)" label="a new stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q106697164" start="50290" end="50306" title="Jessica Halliday" label="Jessica Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813947" start="50465" end="50482" title="WORD Christchurch" label="Word Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="50648" end="50658" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="50729" end="50736" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="50741" end="50752" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="51081" end="51088" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777054" start="51090" end="51101" title="touch rugby" label="touch rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033700" start="51462" end="51477" title="Mainland Tactix" label="Mainland Tactix"/>
<link wikidata="Q959847" start="51489" end="51498" title="Crusaders (rugby union)" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033711" start="51515" end="51531" title="Canterbury cricket team" label="Canterbury Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q919088" start="51699" end="51722" title="1974 Commonwealth Games" label="1974 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109064" start="51794" end="51819" title="Christchurch City Council" label="Christchurch City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q806836" start="51877" end="51892" title="Banks Peninsula" label="Banks Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q295182" start="51912" end="51926" title="Lancaster Park" label="Lancaster Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122562" start="51931" end="51954" title="Queen Elizabeth II Park" label="Queen Elizabeth II Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="51989" end="52017" title="2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="2011 Christchurch earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q113840137" start="52116" end="52139" title="Ngā Puna Wai Sports Hub" label="Ngā Puna Wai Sports Hub"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52145" end="52182" title="Parakiore Recreation and Sport Centre" label="Parakiore Recreation and Sport Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049757" start="52253" end="52282" title="Multi-purpose stadium" label="multi–purpose covered stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q97575035" start="52283" end="52302" title="Te Kaha (stadium)" label="&amp;quot;Te Kaha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000134" start="52510" end="52530" title="Burnside High School" label="Burnside High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048765" start="52545" end="52565" title="Cashmere High School" label="Cashmere High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409942" start="52567" end="52586" title="Papanui High School" label="Papanui High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322945" start="52591" end="52612" title="Riccarton High School" label="Riccarton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498701" start="52679" end="52709" title="Shirley Boys&amp;#x27; High School" label="Shirley Boys&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109060" start="52711" end="52746" title="Christchurch Boys&amp;#x27; High School" label="Christchurch Boys&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829359" start="52748" end="52780" title="Avonside Girls&amp;#x27; High School" label="Avonside Girls&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109078" start="52785" end="52821" title="Christchurch Girls&amp;#x27; High School" label="Christchurch Girls&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418495" start="52928" end="52949" title="Independent school (United Kingdom)" label="English public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595580" start="52970" end="53001" title="St Thomas of Canterbury College" label="St Thomas of Canterbury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594115" start="53003" end="53029" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s College, Christchurch" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108634" start="53031" end="53052" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Christchurch" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592625" start="53054" end="53076" title="St Bede&amp;#x27;s College, Christchurch" label="St Bede&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761863" start="53078" end="53092" title="Marian College, Christchurch" label="Marian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053090" start="53094" end="53120" title="Catholic Cathedral College, Christchurch" label="Catholic Cathedral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586845" start="53122" end="53146" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s College (New Zealand)" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930418" start="53148" end="53167" title="Villa Maria College, Christchurch" label="Villa Maria College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292824" start="53172" end="53201" title="Rangi Ruru Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="Rangi Ruru Girls&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897054" start="53249" end="53259" title="Ao Tawhiti" label="Ao Tawhiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638756" start="53261" end="53285" title="Hagley Community College" label="Hagley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q24998538" start="53466" end="53493" title="Ara Institute of Canterbury" label="Ara Institute of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048626" start="53496" end="53514" title="Lincoln University, New Zealand" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="53517" end="53541" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896032" start="53544" end="53577" title="University of Otago, Christchurch" label="University of Otago, Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547145" start="53941" end="53942" title="State Highway 1 (New Zealand)" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015716" start="53944" end="53946" title="State Highway 73 (New Zealand)" label="73"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766655" start="53948" end="53950" title="State Highway 74 (New Zealand)" label="74"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926692" start="53957" end="53959" title="State Highway 75 (New Zealand)" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189372" start="53964" end="53966" title="State Highway 76 (New Zealand)" label="76"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109086" start="54019" end="54049" title="Christchurch Northern Motorway" label="Christchurch Northern Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927284" start="54064" end="54086" title="Western Belfast Bypass" label="Western Belfast Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109097" start="54089" end="54119" title="Christchurch Southern Motorway" label="Christchurch Southern Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q669801" start="54128" end="54159" title="Christchurch-Lyttelton Motorway" label="Christchurch-Lyttelton Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033686" start="54342" end="54364" title="Environment Canterbury" label="Environment Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292180" start="54411" end="54442" title="spoke–hub distribution paradigm" label="spoke–hub distribution paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q90871624" start="54512" end="54540" title="Christchurch Bus Interchange" label="Christchurch Bus Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105834" start="54903" end="54912" title="zero-fare" label="zero-fare"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="54913" end="54919" title="hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="55326" end="55336" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198662" start="55576" end="55598" title="cycling infrastructure" label="cycling infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109089" start="55665" end="55687" title="Christchurch Northern Line Cycleway" label="Northern Line Cycleway"/>
<link wikidata="Q590954" start="56837" end="56864" title="Christchurch tramway system" label="Christchurch tramway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409250" start="57428" end="57437" title="Aerial lift" label="cable car"/>
<link wikidata="Q28181038" start="57456" end="57476" title="Christchurch Gondola" label="Christchurch Gondola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497924" start="57546" end="57562" title="Heathcote Valley" label="Heathcote Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920083" start="57577" end="57592" title="Mount Cavendish" label="Mount Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034575" start="57855" end="57863" title="Rangiora" label="Rangiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109090" start="57920" end="57948" title="Christchurch railway station (New Zealand)" label="Christchurch railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705311" start="57992" end="58007" title="Main North Line, New Zealand" label="Main North Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25834" start="58039" end="58047" title="Kaikōura" label="Kaikōura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362879" start="58051" end="58057" title="Picton, New Zealand" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104409" start="58079" end="58094" title="Coastal Pacific" label="Coastal Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350718" start="58131" end="58146" title="Main South Line" label="Main South Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q31805" start="58156" end="58168" title="Invercargill" label="Invercargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="58173" end="58180" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570740" start="58201" end="58211" title="Southerner (New Zealand train)" label="Southerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q918759" start="58297" end="58308" title="TranzAlpine" label="TranzAlpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099966" start="58353" end="58362" title="Rolleston, New Zealand" label="Rolleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931969" start="58387" end="58399" title="Midland Line, New Zealand" label="Midland Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="58420" end="58433" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037030" start="58442" end="58454" title="Otira Tunnel" label="Otira Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q934790" start="58474" end="58483" title="Greymouth" label="Greymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="58491" end="58501" title="West Coast, New Zealand" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061330" start="58736" end="58756" title="Christchurch Airport" label="Christchurch Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608524" start="58838" end="58860" title="List of the busiest airports in New Zealand" label="second-busiest airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q955267" start="59072" end="59095" title="United States Antarctic Program" label="United States Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="59187" end="59201" title="water supply" label="water supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="59390" end="59397" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="59435" end="59448" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075344" start="59537" end="59548" title="chlorinated water" label="chlorinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="59922" end="59929" title="Typhoid fever" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060315" start="60417" end="60427" title="Fred Hobbs" label="Fred Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006833" start="60522" end="60535" title="William Clark (inventor)" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q54865400" start="60670" end="60677" title="Bromley, New Zealand" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728550" start="61008" end="61033" title="The Cyclopedia of New Zealand" label="Cyclopedia of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144632" start="61317" end="61340" title="Coleridge Power Station" label="Coleridge Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819305" start="61910" end="61925" title="Meridian Energy" label="Meridian Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102789" start="61983" end="62000" title="Orion New Zealand Limited" label="Orion New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835339" start="62122" end="62132" title="Transpower New Zealand Limited" label="Transpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q54865605" start="62148" end="62157" title="Islington, New Zealand" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631960" start="62895" end="62919" title="Subscriber trunk dialling" label="Subscriber toll dialling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549526" start="63295" end="63300" title="Spark New Zealand" label="Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189358" start="63319" end="63339" title="Ultra-Fast Broadband (New Zealand)" label="Ultra Fast Broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="63352" end="63373" title="Fiber to the x" label="fibre to the premises"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349009" start="63466" end="63481" title="Enable Networks" label="Enable Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105276" start="63546" end="63560" title="Chorus Limited" label="Chorus Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413590" start="63781" end="63790" title="The Press" label="The Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430190" start="63854" end="63859" title="Stuff (company)" label="Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064748" start="64025" end="64033" title="The Star (Christchurch)" label="The Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732590" start="64050" end="64062" title="Allied Press" label="Allied Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q142043" start="64160" end="64174" title="free newspaper" label="free newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019845" start="64357" end="64368" title="Newstalk ZB" label="Newstalk ZB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910930" start="64370" end="64377" title="More FM" label="More FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719948" start="64383" end="64393" title="The Breeze (New Zealand radio station)" label="The Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062163" start="64476" end="64487" title="Centralcasting" label="centralcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891204" start="64614" end="64618" title="New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation" label="NZBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="64697" end="64726" title="TVNZ" label="Television New Zealand (TVNZ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="64873" end="64886" title="sister cities" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094063" start="64895" end="64903" title="City of Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="64905" end="64920" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q925424" start="64941" end="64953" title="Christchurch, Dorset" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q467487" start="64996" end="65005" title="Kurashiki" label="Kurashiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q132936" start="65007" end="65014" title="Okayama Prefecture" label="Okayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="65031" end="65038" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415" start="65075" end="65084" title="Songpa District" label="Songpa-gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="65086" end="65091" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="65114" end="65119" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="65187" end="65192" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109066" start="65219" end="65245" title="Christchurch City Holdings" label="Christchurch City Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635815" start="65248" end="65286" title="List of radio stations in Christchurch" label="List of radio stations in Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642207" start="65289" end="65330" title="List of tallest buildings in Christchurch" label="List of tallest buildings in Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962403" start="65333" end="65365" title="List of people from Christchurch" label="List of people from Christchurch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628783" wikidata="Q783509" url="?curid=628783" title="IOT">
<text>IOT or IoT may refer to:

* British Indian Ocean Territory, ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 code
* Internet of things, connecting everyday objects to the internet
* Illuminates of Thanateros, an international magical organization
* Inductive output tube, a variety of vacuum tube
* Institute of Transportation, an agency in Taiwan
* Input-Output Transfer, instructions for the PDP-8
* Completed operations indicator, in Belgian railway signalling
* Interocular transfer, a visual perception phenomenon
==See also==
* Indian Ocean Territory (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q783509" start="0" end="3" title="IOT" label="IOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q783509" start="7" end="10" title="IOT" label="IoT"/>
<link wikidata="Q43448" start="28" end="58" title="British Indian Ocean Territory" label="British Indian Ocean Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="86" end="104" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q356723" start="152" end="177" title="Illuminates of Thanateros" label="Illuminates of Thanateros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661860" start="219" end="240" title="Inductive output tube" label="Inductive output tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883029" start="269" end="296" title="Institute of Transportation" label="Institute of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="364" end="369" title="PDP-8#IOT (Input-Output Transfer) instructions" label="PDP-8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="407" end="433" title="Belgian railway signalling#Completed operations indicator (IOT)" label="Belgian railway signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q122782870" start="436" end="456" title="Interocular transfer" label="Interocular transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58492699" start="504" end="543" title="Indian Ocean Territory (disambiguation)" label="Indian Ocean Territory (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628784" wikidata="Q5478533" url="?curid=628784" title="HMS Saintes (D84)">
<text>HMS &quot;Saintes&quot; was a 1942 fleet destroyer of the Royal Navy (RN). She and 15 sister ships being ordered under the 1942 defence estimates. The ship was named after the Battle of the Saintes, a Royal Navy victory over a French fleet intending to invade Jamaica in 1782. So far she has been the only ship of the Royal Navy to bear the name. &quot;Saintes&quot; was built by Hawthorn Leslie and Company on the Tyne. The vessel was launched on 19 July 1944 and commissioned on 27 September 1946.

==Royal Navy service==
When &quot;Saintes&quot; first commissioned in 1946 she joined the 5th Destroyer Flotilla and was used to trial the new 4.5-inch Mk 6 twin turret which became the standard destroyer main armament until well into the 1970s.

&quot;Saintes&quot; paid off on completion of the trials and was refitted with the conventional main armament of the class. In 1949, &quot;Saintes&quot; recommissioned into the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla and deployed to the Mediterranean where she took over as Captain (D)3, the senior officer in command of the flotilla.

In March 1954, whilst still in the Mediterranean, &quot;Saintes&quot; came to the assistance of the British troopship , which had suffered an engine room explosion and fire whilst carrying troops and their families home from Japan. &quot;Saintes&quot; reached &quot;Windrush&quot; after the passengers and crew had been rescued by other ships, put fire and towing parties aboard and attempted to tow &quot;Windrush&quot; to Gibraltar but the ship foundered whilst under tow. Apart from the four engine room staff killed in the original explosion all crew and passengers were rescued unharmed.

&quot;Saintes&quot; remained Captain of the 3rd Destroyer Squadron until she went for a major refit in 1956 at Rosyth when her crew transferred to her sister ship . On completion of her refit in 1958, &quot;Saintes&quot; again took over as Captain of the Squadron, this time as part of a General Service commission spending a part of the time with the Home Fleet and part of the time with the Mediterranean Fleet. In 1960, &quot;Saintes&quot; recommissioned with the 1st Destroyer Squadron, again having spells with the Home and Mediterranean Fleets.

==Decommissioning and disposal==
&quot;Saintes&quot; was paid off in May 1962 at Devonport. The ship was then towed to Rosyth by a towing crew of volunteers from her last commission. At Rosyth &quot;Saintes&quot; became the training ship for Artificer Apprentices from the shore establishment . Her armament was mothballed but her engines were maintained in full working order by the trainees. &quot;Saintes&quot; was broken up at Cairn Ryan in 1972.

==References==
==Publications==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5478533" start="0" end="17" title="HMS Saintes (D84)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Saintes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="58" end="68" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="86" end="97" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850800" start="176" end="197" title="Battle of the Saintes" label="Battle of the Saintes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="201" end="211" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="260" end="267" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548575" start="380" end="407" title="Hawthorn Leslie and Company" label="Hawthorn Leslie and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="415" end="419" title="River Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602840" start="591" end="613" title="5th Destroyer Flotilla" label="5th Destroyer Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602803" start="925" end="947" title="3rd Destroyer Flotilla" label="3rd Destroyer Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="968" end="981" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1102" end="1115" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="1491" end="1500" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q376329" start="1772" end="1778" title="Rosyth" label="Rosyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="2013" end="2023" title="Home Fleet" label="Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="2054" end="2073" title="Mediterranean Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Mediterranean Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969978" start="2128" end="2150" title="1st Destroyer Squadron (United Kingdom)" label="1st Destroyer Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="2181" end="2185" title="Home Fleet" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="2190" end="2203" title="British Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q376329" start="2332" end="2338" title="Rosyth" label="Rosyth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628786" wikidata="Q73043" url="?curid=628786" title="Iarnród Éireann">
<text>Iarnród Éireann, () or Irish Rail, is the operator of the national railway network of Ireland. Established on 2 February 1987, it is a subsidiary of Córas Iompair Éireann (CIÉ). It operates all internal InterCity, Commuter, DART and freight railway services in the Republic of Ireland, and, jointly with Northern Ireland Railways, the Enterprise service between Dublin and Belfast. In 2019, IÉ carried a record peak of 50 million passengers, up from 48 million in 2018.

Until 2013, Ireland was the only European Union state that had not implemented EU Directive 91/440 and related legislation, having derogated from its obligation to split train operations and infrastructure businesses, and allow open access by private companies to the rail network. A consultation on the restructuring of Iarnród Éireann took place in 2012. The derogation ended on 14 March 2013 when the company was split in 2 sectors: Railway Undertaking and Infrastructure Manager.

== Organisation ==
At the time of its establishment, the company referred to itself as Irish Rail and adopted the four rails &quot;IR&quot; logo. In 1994, the company brought the Irish form of its name to the fore, introducing a logo and corporate branding based on the letters &quot;IÉ&quot; (Iarnród Éireann) branding and logo. Both languages remained part of the official company name (&quot;Iarnród Éireann – Irish Rail&quot;). In January 2013, a new logo was introduced with a new bilingual branding; it made its first appearance in early January on online timetables, before officially launching on the 21st. In late 2013 the logo was updated again with a new font.

Operationally, services are divided across four regional areas:
* &quot;Northern&quot; and &quot;Eastern&quot; services are managed from Connolly (including Sligo in the North-West)
* &quot;Southern&quot; and &quot;Western&quot; services are managed from Heuston

== Services ==

=== Passenger services ===
IÉ&#x27;s passenger services are branded under three main names; &quot;InterCity&quot;, &quot;Commuter&quot; and &quot;DART&quot;.

==== InterCity ====
&quot;InterCity&quot; services are long-distance routes radiating mainly from Dublin. The Belfast – Dublin service, jointly operated with Northern Ireland Railways, is branded separately as &quot;Enterprise&quot;. Dublin&#x27;s two main InterCity stations are Connolly and Heuston. Intercity services run to/from Cork, Limerick, Tralee, Ennis, Galway, Waterford, Rosslare Europort, Sligo, Westport, Wexford and Ballina. Dublin&#x27;s third major station, Pearse, is the terminus for much of the suburban network in the Greater Dublin area. An additional two InterCity services runs from Limerick to Limerick Junction and from Limerick Junction to Waterford. This service formerly operated through to Rosslare Europort but services between Waterford and Rosslare Europort ceased after the last train on 18 September 2010. Bus Éireann now operates route 370 through the affected towns as replacement transport.

A new service began on 29 March 2010 from Limerick to Galway, as part of the Western Rail Corridor, reopening the long-closed line.

A January 2012 national newspaper article suggested that Iarnród Éireann was expected to seek permission in the near future from the National Transport Authority to close the Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line and the Limerick–Waterford line.

==== Commuter ====
The majority of &quot;Commuter&quot; services are based in Dublin, which has four commuter routes: Northern (to Drogheda MacBride), Western (Connolly Station or Docklands to Kilcock/M3 Parkway), South-Western (to Sallins and Naas Railway Station) and South-Eastern (to Kilcoole). See Dublin Suburban Rail for more details. 
The Cork Suburban Rail currently has three Commuter services: to Mallow and Cobh, and a third service to Midleton which became operational on a part of the disused Youghal branch line on 30 July 2009. 
Limerick Suburban Rail currently consists of two lines to Ennis and Nenagh, with shuttle services to Limerick Junction. A Commuter service operates between Galway to Oranmore and Athenry.

Commuter trains also operate on shuttle duty for branches from the main InterCity services from Mallow to Tralee (off the Dublin – Cork route) and from Manulla Junction to Ballina (off the Dublin – Westport route), as well as acting as InterCity trains for Dublin – Rosslare and some Dublin – Sligo services, and as the aforementioned Limerick – Limerick Junction – Waterford service.

==== DART ====

The north–south route along Dublin&#x27;s eastern coastal side is also host to DART, Ireland&#x27;s only electrified heavy-rail service. The DART consists of many types of trains, the oldest and most famous one being the 8100 Class which still operates, now extensively refurbished.
====Services Table====
The following is a simplified table of Monday - Friday off-peak services, various irregular calling patterns have been omitted for clarity.

=== Freight services ===
Iarnród Éireann also has responsibility for running freight services on the Irish network through its Freight Division – which recorded a tonnage decrease of 19.2% in 2019, and as of 2020, there are 3 freight flows running throughout the country. This operates both Railfreight trains and a network of road haulage through various distribution nodes throughout the country. Iarnród Éireann Freight is subdivided into three sections:
*Bulk Freight – specialises in operating full trainloads of freight, usually bulk movements of single products such as cement, mineral ore or timber.
*Intermodal – container trains, currently operated between Waterford Port and Ballina and Dublin Port and Ballina.
*Navigator – the freight forwarding division, particularly associated with the transport of automotive stock parts.

== Operational details ==
The Enterprise route (Dublin to Belfast) is well regarded. However, it is only double track and serves both local and intermediate Commuter as well as InterCity traffic. Hence any delay has knock-on effects. Also, there is limited platform availability at Connolly Station in Dublin. There was also a persistent problem with engine overloading, as Enterprise locomotives also supplied coach power. However, since September 2012, additional power is provided by separate Mark 3 generator vans.

The Cork-Dublin route was formerly the &quot;premier line&quot; of the &quot;Great Southern and Western Railway&quot;, one of the biggest pre-CIÉ operators. Rolling stock on this route consists of Mark 4 trains, which were built in Spain, complete with DVTs for faster turn-around. 22000 Class DMUs built in South Korea came into service from early 2007 replacing older coaching stock on most other InterCity routes. These 183 carriages are described by the company as the &quot;Greenest diesel trains in Europe&quot;.

The former Minister for Transport, Noel Dempsey TD had announced that an additional 51 railcars had been ordered for the company for a planned introduction on services between Dublin, Louth, and Meath. They were placed into service in 2011/2012 but this plan was badly affected by the recession with 21 surpluses to requirements at the end of 2012.

The maximum operational speed of InterCity trains on the IÉ rail network is 160 km/h (100 mph), although the design speed of the Mark 4 carriages is 201 km/h (125 mph).

Since 2019, Irish Rail has been trying to recruit more female drivers.

== 1916 station renaming ==

Although the majority of Iarnród Éireann&#x27;s stations are simply named after the towns they serve, a number of stations in major towns and cities were renamed after leaders of the 1916 Easter Rising, on its 50th anniversary in 1966:
*Dublin Connolly (formerly Amiens Street)
*Dublin Heuston (formerly Kingsbridge)
*Dublin Pearse (formerly Westland Row)
*Dún Laoghaire Mallin
*Bray Daly
*Cork Kent (formerly Glanmire Road)
*Kilkenny MacDonagh
*Limerick Colbert
*Tralee Casement
*Dundalk Clarke
*Drogheda MacBride
*Sligo Mac Diarmada
*Galway Ceannt
*Waterford Plunkett
*Wexford O&#x27;Hanrahan

== Network Catering ==
IÉ&#x27;s Network Catering unit used to provide a trolley service of food and drink, a snack car and (on some routes) a restaurant service. It also operated a restaurant at Dún Laoghaire. According to Iarnród Éireann&#x27;s annual report, the unit lost €297,000 in 2004. In 2006, Iarnród Éireann outsourced the catering on the Dublin-Belfast service to Corporate Catering Ltd, and all InterCity services were taken over by Rail Gourmet in March 2007. Rail Gourmet withdrew from the contract in 2020, and no longer provides catering for any Irish Rail services.
 In 2023, a contactless-only catering service began on the Dublin-Cork route.

== Rolling stock ==

The company has a fleet size consisting of 547 carriages (excluding the Enterprise service):
*InterCity services have a fleet of 265 carriages.
*Commuter services have a fleet of 148 carriages.
*DART services have a fleet of 134 carriages.
*Dublin-Belfast Enterprise has a fleet of 28 carriages.

=== InterCity and Enterprise fleet ===
*IE 201 Class Locomotive
*IE 22000 Class DMU
*Mark 4
*De Dietrich Rolling stock
=== Locomotive fleet ===

==== Current ====
*CIE 071 Class/NIR Class 110 locomotive
*IE 201 Class locomotive

==== Former ====
*CIE 001 Class locomotive
*CIE 201 Class locomotive 
*CIE 121 Class locomotive
*CIE 141 Class locomotive
*CIE 181 Class locomotive

=== Commuter fleet ===
==== Current ====
*IE 2600 Class DMU
*IE 2800 Class DMU
*IE 29000 Class DMU
*IE 22000 Class DMU

==== Former ====
*IE 2700 Class DMU
*IE 2750 Class DMU
=== DART fleet ===
==== Current ====
*CIÉ 8100 Class EMU
*IE 8500 Class EMU
*IE 8510 Class EMU
*IE 8520 Class EMU

==== Former ====
*IE 8200 Class EMU
===Future fleet===
IÉ&#x27;s increasing fleet usage has led to requirements being made for the procurement of additional vehicles. DART services are running with all trains formed of 4–8 cars, while 54 sets of 63 fleet of ICRs are committed to services with 56 required on Friday. To this end, IÉ plans to purchase a significant number of new ICR vehicles – an initial purchase of 41 will be made for delivery in 2021, comprising three new trains, with the remainder planned as intermediate vehicles to lengthen existing units. The deal for the new vehicles is intended to include options for up to 40 further vehicles. There are also plans for a total replacement of the existing DART fleet, which will be combined with extensions to the DART network. The framework for the DART fleet is planned for up to 600 vehicles formed into four-car and eight-car sets, split into both pure EMU and BEMU trains. For immediate fleet capacity increases, IÉ planned refurbishment of its 2700 Class DMUs, which was subsequently cancelled. Instead, IÉ is discussing the possibility of sourcing surplus DMUs from the British network, with s and s available.

== See also ==
* Coaching stock of Ireland
* Diesel locomotives of Ireland
* History of rail transport in Ireland
* List of companies of Ireland
* List of railway stations in Ireland
* Multiple units of Ireland
* Transport in Ireland

== References ==

== External links ==
* Irish Rail Official Site – Timetables, bookings, operations, and corporate site
* Irish Railway Record Society
* Eiretrains – Irish Railways Past &amp; Present</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="0" end="15" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="23" end="33" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Irish Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q837023" start="67" end="93" title="Rail transport in Ireland" label="railway network of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q633519" start="149" end="170" title="CIÉ" label="Córas Iompair Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044834" start="203" end="212" title="InterCity (Iarnród Éireann)" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155093" start="214" end="222" title="Commuter (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="224" end="228" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="DART"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="233" end="240" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="304" end="329" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="335" end="345" title="Enterprise (train service)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="362" end="368" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="373" end="380" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="504" end="518" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q183423" start="550" end="569" title="First Railway Directive" label="EU Directive 91/440"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200314" start="602" end="611" title="derogation" label="derogated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979054" start="699" end="710" title="Open access (infrastructure)" label="open access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134689" start="1194" end="1212" title="corporate branding" label="corporate branding"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="1442" end="1451" title="bilingual" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543742" start="1766" end="1774" title="Dublin Connolly railway station" label="Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="1786" end="1791" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377845" start="1884" end="1891" title="Dublin Heuston railway station" label="Heuston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044834" start="2007" end="2016" title="InterCity (Iarnród Éireann)" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155093" start="2030" end="2038" title="Commuter (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="2055" end="2059" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="DART"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="2226" end="2251" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="2284" end="2294" title="Enterprise Train" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="2401" end="2405" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="2407" end="2415" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q213358" start="2417" end="2423" title="Tralee" label="Tralee"/>
<link wikidata="Q209128" start="2425" end="2430" title="Ennis" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="2432" end="2438" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="2440" end="2449" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281650" start="2451" end="2468" title="Rosslare Europort" label="Rosslare Europort"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="2470" end="2475" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="2477" end="2485" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="2487" end="2494" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="2499" end="2506" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658249" start="2543" end="2549" title="Dublin Pearse railway station" label="Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q952569" start="2583" end="2599" title="Dublin Suburban Rail" label="suburban network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059829" start="2687" end="2704" title="Limerick Junction" label="Limerick Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="3040" end="3048" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="3052" end="3058" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100681" start="3264" end="3292" title="National Transport Authority (Ireland)" label="National Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743461" start="3306" end="3339" title="Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line" label="Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743465" start="3348" end="3371" title="Limerick–Rosslare railway line" label="Limerick–Waterford line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969549" start="3505" end="3522" title="Drogheda MacBride" label="Drogheda MacBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968799" start="3554" end="3563" title="Docklands railway station" label="Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269522" start="3567" end="3574" title="Kilcock" label="Kilcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970000" start="3575" end="3585" title="M3 Parkway railway station" label="M3 Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970772" start="3606" end="3638" title="Sallins and Naas" label="Sallins and Naas Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437185" start="3662" end="3670" title="Kilcoole" label="Kilcoole"/>
<link wikidata="Q952569" start="3677" end="3697" title="Dublin Suburban Rail" label="Dublin Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693608" start="3721" end="3739" title="Cork Suburban Rail" label="Cork Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q922247" start="3782" end="3788" title="Mallow, County Cork" label="Mallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="3793" end="3797" title="Cobh" label="Cobh"/>
<link wikidata="Q595619" start="3822" end="3830" title="Midleton" label="Midleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="3881" end="3888" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549274" start="3919" end="3941" title="Limerick Suburban Rail" label="Limerick Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q209128" start="3977" end="3982" title="Ennis" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q918372" start="3987" end="3993" title="Nenagh" label="Nenagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059829" start="4020" end="4037" title="Limerick Junction" label="Limerick Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026389" start="4085" end="4093" title="Oranmore" label="Oranmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q755389" start="4098" end="4105" title="Athenry" label="Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595462" start="4260" end="4276" title="Manulla Junction" label="Manulla Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011973" start="4731" end="4741" title="CIÉ 8100 Class" label="8100 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600020" start="6394" end="6428" title="Great Southern and Western Railway" label="Great Southern and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766426" start="6514" end="6520" title="Mark 4 (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Mark 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="6599" end="6615" title="IE 22000 Class" label="22000 Class DMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766426" start="7316" end="7322" title="Mark 4 (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Mark 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="7646" end="7659" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543742" start="7695" end="7710" title="Dublin Connolly railway station" label="Dublin Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377845" start="7737" end="7751" title="Dublin Heuston railway station" label="Dublin Heuston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658249" start="7776" end="7789" title="Dublin Pearse railway station" label="Dublin Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969552" start="7815" end="7835" title="Dún Laoghaire railway station" label="Dún Laoghaire Mallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924155" start="7837" end="7846" title="Bray railway station" label="Bray Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969483" start="7848" end="7857" title="Cork Kent railway station" label="Cork Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058784" start="7884" end="7902" title="Kilkenny railway station" label="Kilkenny MacDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969965" start="7904" end="7920" title="Limerick railway station" label="Limerick Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q546313" start="7922" end="7937" title="Tralee railway station" label="Tralee Casement"/>
<link wikidata="Q664711" start="7939" end="7953" title="Dundalk railway station" label="Dundalk Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969549" start="7955" end="7972" title="Drogheda railway station" label="Drogheda MacBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059721" start="7974" end="7992" title="Sligo Mac Diarmada Station" label="Sligo Mac Diarmada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086351" start="7994" end="8007" title="Galway railway station" label="Galway Ceannt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971355" start="8009" end="8027" title="Waterford railway station" label="Waterford Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971361" start="8029" end="8052" title="Wexford railway station" label="Wexford O&amp;#x27;Hanrahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q745989" start="8250" end="8263" title="Dún Laoghaire" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447660" start="8500" end="8512" title="SSP Group" label="Rail Gourmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044834" start="8832" end="8841" title="InterCity (Iarnród Éireann)" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155093" start="8883" end="8891" title="Commuter (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="8933" end="8937" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="DART"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="8994" end="9004" title="Enterprise (train service)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970588" start="9075" end="9087" title="IE 201 Class" label="IE 201 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="9100" end="9114" title="IE 22000 Class" label="IE 22000 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="9115" end="9118" title="Diesel multiple unit" label="DMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766426" start="9120" end="9126" title="Mark 4 (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Mark 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q695014" start="9128" end="9139" title="De Dietrich Ferroviaire" label="De Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="9140" end="9153" title="Rolling stock" label="Rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035623" start="9199" end="9226" title="CIE 071 Class/NIR Class 110" label="CIE 071 Class/NIR Class 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970588" start="9239" end="9251" title="IE 201 Class" label="IE 201 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011642" start="9282" end="9295" title="CIE 001 Class" label="CIE 001 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011646" start="9308" end="9321" title="CIE 201 Class" label="CIE 201 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455273" start="9335" end="9348" title="CIE 121 Class" label="CIE 121 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011645" start="9361" end="9374" title="CIE 141 Class" label="CIE 141 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035624" start="9387" end="9400" title="CIE 181 Class" label="CIE 181 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970591" start="9455" end="9468" title="IE 2600 Class" label="IE 2600 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970595" start="9474" end="9487" title="IE 2800 Class" label="IE 2800 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970597" start="9493" end="9507" title="IE 29000 Class" label="IE 29000 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="9513" end="9527" title="IE 22000 Class" label="IE 22000 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970593" start="9551" end="9564" title="IE 2700 Class" label="IE 2700 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970593" start="9570" end="9583" title="IE 2750 Class" label="IE 2750 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011973" start="9626" end="9640" title="CIÉ 8100 Class" label="CIÉ 8100 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="9641" end="9644" title="Electric multiple unit" label="EMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150786" start="9646" end="9659" title="IE 8500 Class" label="IE 8500 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150786" start="9665" end="9678" title="IE 8510 Class" label="IE 8510 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150786" start="9684" end="9697" title="IE 8520 Class" label="IE 8520 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970599" start="9721" end="9734" title="IE 8200 Class" label="IE 8200 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="9961" end="9965" title="IE 22000 Class" label="ICRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q902403" start="10629" end="10633" title="Battery electric multiple unit" label="BEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="10841" end="10856" title="Rail transport in Great Britain" label="British network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137637" start="10900" end="10925" title="Coaching stock of Ireland" label="Coaching stock of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455285" start="10928" end="10957" title="Diesel locomotives of Ireland" label="Diesel locomotives of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014758" start="10960" end="10996" title="History of rail transport in Ireland" label="History of rail transport in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q939949" start="10999" end="11027" title="List of companies of Ireland" label="List of companies of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636034" start="11030" end="11065" title="List of railway stations in Ireland" label="List of railway stations in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934970" start="11068" end="11093" title="Multiple units of Ireland" label="Multiple units of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287964" start="11096" end="11116" title="Transport in Ireland" label="Transport in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628791" wikidata="Q2408926" url="?curid=628791" title="Thames Gateway Bridge">
<text>The Thames Gateway Bridge was a proposed crossing over the River Thames in east London, England. It was first mooted in the 1970s but never came to fruition. The concept was re-proposed in 2004, with preliminary planning proceeding until November 2008, when Boris Johnson, the Mayor of London, cancelled the entire £500 million scheme.

In 2009, a new scaled-down project on the same site, the Gallions Reach Crossing, was proposed, joined in 2015 by the Belvedere Crossing, until both proposals were cancelled in 2016. Despite several proposals being put forward, there would be no new road crossing between Tower Bridge and the Dartford Crossing until the Silvertown Tunnel began construction in 2021.

==Description==
It was planned that the bridge should be built by 2013 and would have connected Beckton in the London Borough of Newham with Thamesmead in the Royal Borough of Greenwich linking the A406/A13 junction in Beckton with the A2016 Eastern Way and Western Way in Thamesmead and serve the new Thames Gateway development.

The bridge was to have a span of about , with a vertical clearance for ships but be low enough not to impede the flight approach to the nearby London City Airport. The bridge was to have had four lanes for general traffic and two lanes for public transport use. It would also have had a cycle lane, a pedestrian walkway and the facility for a Docklands Light Railway crossing.

For pedestrians the nearest other crossings are the Greenwich foot tunnel, the Woolwich foot tunnel and Woolwich Ferry, or the Docklands Light Railway, from King George V station under the river to Woolwich Arsenal station, which opened in early 2009.

For vehicles, the nearest other Thames crossings are the Blackwall Tunnel (A102), the Dartford Crossing (A282) and the Woolwich Ferry.

==History==
===Background===
The design and the location were similar to the East London River Crossing, which was proposed and approved by two public inquiries from the 1970s to the 1990s but subsequently dropped by the Department for Transport.

===Consultation===
In July 2004, a new bridge on the site was proposed, with planning applications submitted by Transport for London (TfL) to the London Borough of Newham and London Borough of Greenwich, with the support of Ken Livingstone, the Mayor of London.
and were approved in December 2004. There was support from the other local councils including Barking &amp; Dagenham, Havering and Lewisham, some local Members of Parliament, and business organisations such as London First and the London Development Agency.

A public inquiry on the scheme sat at Charlton Athletic F.C. from June 2005 to May 2006.

The inspector recorded, prior to the inquiry, 2,949 objections and 47 expressions of support. It drew organised opposition from a number of environmental groups, including Friends of the Earth; they joined a local opposition group to argue against the bridge at the inquiry. 
During the inquiry, a further 1,819 written representations were received opposed to the proposed development and nine in support; 22 objections were withdrawn during the Inquiries. Their objections were mainly as follows:
* that the proposed developments did not conform to the Development Plan for the area or to national planning guidance and that and there were more acceptable ways in which the benefits aimed at by the proposed development could be achieved,
* that in reality development was the first phase a larger strategic road scheme and would not deliver the regeneration benefit claimed,
* that the tolling arrangements were unacceptable and that the traffic modelling was inadequate
* that the scheme would result in unacceptable levels of traffic, air pollution, noise pollution and would impact on wildlife and nature conservation and
* that the public consultation process had been inadequate.

=== Negative Decision ===
A decision was announced in July 2007, with the planning inspector noting that the requirements of both local and national planning needs would not be served by the granting of planning permission for the bridge. He recommended that there should be no bridge, side street changes, or compulsory purchase orders.

=== Reopening Inquiry ===
However Hazel Blears, the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government, requested that the inquiry be re-opened to examine the evidence further as to whether the bridge would lead to regeneration and to investigate the potential impact on pollution.

Ken Livingstone said that &quot;any delay to the Thames Gateway bridge is a blow to east London, and south-east London in particular&quot; and that &quot;the reopening of the public inquiry will delay bringing the benefits of the Thames Gateway bridge to an area that sorely needs them. This new crossing is crucial to supporting plans for an extra 160,000 houses in the Thames Gateway region and up to 42,000 additional jobs in the area as whole.&quot;

It was reported in May 2008 that the new London Mayor, Boris Johnson, planned to put the bridge project on hold.

On 6 November 2008, Johnson announced a &quot;massive investment in transport infrastructure&quot; but confirmed the cancellation of the £500m bridge. The reasons cited for cancellation included local opposition, insufficient funding, projected detrimental effects on traffic flow and concerns over the bridge&#x27;s location and environmental impact.
It was also independently confirmed that the public inquiry would not reopen.

In October 2009, it was reported that consultants Mott MacDonald had won a contract to investigate the possibility of new crossings between Tower Bridge and the Dartford Crossing.

Despite having abandoned the bridge the previous year and saying he favoured a tunnel crossing at Silvertown, Johnson resurrected the project, renamed Gallions Reach Crossing, as a lower capacity crossing that could start as a ferry service but could be upgraded to a fixed link later.

In 2023, as part of a consultation into the extension of the Docklands Light Railway to Thamesmead – TfL affirmed that they had no plans to deliver a road bridge in the area, and that they would &quot;explore the removal of the [bridge] safeguarding&quot; as it &quot;conflicts with the vision for new homes, jobs and high-quality town centres&quot;. The DLR extension would instead provide a cross-river link in the area.

==Location==



This annotated satellite photograph shows the location of the proposed bridge, the nearest upstream and downstream road crossings and nearby towns and areas of interest.

==See also==
* Lower Thames Crossing, a 2009 proposal, still ongoing, for a new crossing somewhere in the Dartford and Gravesend area.

==Bibliography==
*Asher, Wayne. 2018. Rings Around London - Orbital Motorways and The Battle For Homes Before Roads. 

== References ==
== External links ==
* Public Inquiry website for Thames Gateway Bridge
* Thames Gateway Bridge project website, from Transport for London
* Thames bridge gets vital backing, from BBC News Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2408926" start="4" end="25" title="Thames Gateway Bridge" label="Thames Gateway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="59" end="71" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="80" end="86" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="258" end="271" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="277" end="292" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992612" start="394" end="417" title="Gallions Reach Crossing" label="Gallions Reach Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891228" start="455" end="473" title="Belvedere Crossing" label="Belvedere Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="609" end="621" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166794" start="630" end="647" title="Dartford Crossing" label="Dartford Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516864" start="658" end="675" title="Silvertown Tunnel" label="Silvertown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="801" end="808" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208139" start="816" end="840" title="London Borough of Newham" label="London Borough of Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q146774" start="846" end="856" title="Thamesmead" label="Thamesmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q693450" start="864" end="890" title="Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="Royal Borough of Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800584" start="903" end="907" title="A406 road" label="A406"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648878" start="908" end="911" title="A13 road (Great Britain)" label="A13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="924" end="931" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975622" start="941" end="946" title="A2016 road" label="A2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q146774" start="978" end="988" title="Thamesmead" label="Thamesmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116189" start="1007" end="1021" title="Thames Gateway" label="Thames Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="1040" end="1046" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="1107" end="1111" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423981" start="1149" end="1164" title="flight path" label="flight approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8982" start="1179" end="1198" title="London City Airport" label="London City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="1379" end="1402" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q935104" start="1466" end="1487" title="Greenwich foot tunnel" label="Greenwich foot tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q645207" start="1493" end="1513" title="Woolwich foot tunnel" label="Woolwich foot tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593299" start="1518" end="1532" title="Woolwich Ferry" label="Woolwich Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="1541" end="1564" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742030" start="1571" end="1592" title="King George V DLR station" label="King George V station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="1612" end="1636" title="Woolwich Arsenal railway station" label="Woolwich Arsenal station"/>
<link wikidata="Q880946" start="1724" end="1740" title="Blackwall Tunnel" label="Blackwall Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648777" start="1742" end="1746" title="A102 road" label="A102"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166794" start="1753" end="1770" title="Dartford Crossing" label="Dartford Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166794" start="1772" end="1776" title="A282 road" label="A282"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593299" start="1786" end="1800" title="Woolwich Ferry" label="Woolwich Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669447" start="1947" end="1963" title="public inquiry" label="public inquiries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="2024" end="2048" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="2163" end="2183" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q208139" start="2197" end="2221" title="London Borough of Newham" label="London Borough of Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q693450" start="2226" end="2253" title="Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="London Borough of Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="2275" end="2290" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="2296" end="2311" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669447" start="2574" end="2588" title="public inquiry" label="public inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="2610" end="2632" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q196232" start="2834" end="2854" title="Friends of the Earth" label="Friends of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q264023" start="4224" end="4236" title="Hazel Blears" label="Hazel Blears"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781526" start="4242" end="4297" title="Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government" label="Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="4478" end="4493" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="4988" end="5001" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695621" start="5757" end="5767" title="Silvertown" label="Silvertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992612" start="5810" end="5833" title="Gallions Reach Crossing" label="Gallions Reach Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329633" start="6007" end="6044" title="Docklands Light Railway extension to Thamesmead" label="Docklands Light Railway to Thamesmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q112609811" start="6183" end="6195" title="Safeguarding (planning law)" label="safeguarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350793" start="6572" end="6593" title="Lower Thames Crossing" label="Lower Thames Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="6947" end="6967" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="7009" end="7024" title="BBC News Online" label="BBC News Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628803" wikidata="Q936301" url="?curid=628803" title="River Barrow">
<text>The Barrow () is a river in Ireland. It is one of The Three Sisters; the other two being the River Suir and the River Nore. The Barrow is the longest of the three rivers and, at 192 km (120 mi), the second-longest river in Ireland, behind the River Shannon. The catchment area of the River Barrow is 3,067 km2 before the River Nore joins it a little over 20 km before its mouth. The river&#x27;s long term average flow rate, again before it is joined by River Nore, is 37.4 cubic metres per second. At the merger with the River Nore, its catchment area is ca. 5,500 km2 and its discharge over 80 m3/s.

==Course==
The source of the River Barrow is at Glenbarrow in the Slieve Bloom Mountains in County Laois.

Among the towns that the River Barrow passes through on its way to the sea beyond Waterford are Portarlington, Monasterevin, Athy, Carlow/Graiguecullen, Bagenalstown, Goresbridge, Graiguenamanagh and New Ross.

The river forms a natural border between, on its right bank, counties Kilkenny and Waterford and, on its left bank, counties Carlow and Wexford.

==Name==
The Irish hydronym &quot;Bhearú&quot; has been derived from the Proto-Celtic *&quot;boru-&quot; (&quot;boil, brew&quot;), which would make it cognate with &quot;Borvo&quot;, the Celtic god of minerals and spring water. Variant spellings include &quot;Berbae&quot; ( ca. 800/830), &quot;Barowe&quot; (1522), and &quot;Barragh&quot; (1641). Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Geography&quot; (2nd century AD) described a river called Βιργος (&quot;Birgu&quot;), which could be linked to the Proto-Indo-European *&quot;&quot;- &quot;to hide, to protect,&quot; referring to Waterford Harbour as a place of refuge.

The river&#x27;s name is associated to the legendary deeds of Dian Cecht, who slew three serpents found in the heart of The Morrígan&#x27;s infant son and threw them into the Barrow, thus causing it to boil.

:: &quot;Sloighedh la Domhnall ua Néill co Laighnibh co ros-indir o &quot;Bherbha&quot; siar go fairrge, &amp; do-bert bóromha mhór lais, &amp; do-rad forbhais for Ghallaibh, &amp; for Laighnibh co cenn da mhíos. As don chur-sin torchair Fionn, mac Goirmghiolla, Dunghal mac Dúnghaile I Riagáin, &amp; Ronán, mac Bruadair, mic Duibhgiolla, &amp; aroile saor-chlanna do Laighnibh amaille friu.&quot;

Translation:
::&quot;An army was led by Domnall ua Néill into Leinster; and he plundered from the Berbha eastwards to the sea; and he carried off a great prey of cattle; and he laid siege to the Norsemen and the Leinstermen for two months. On this occasion were slain Fionn, son of Goirmghilla; Dunghal, son of Dunghal Ua Riagain; Ronan, son of Bruadar, son of Duibhghilla, and other nobles of the Leinstermen along with them.&quot;

== History ==
The Barrow historically provided a natural boundary between the kingdoms of Laigin on the eastern shore and Osraige on the western shore.

There was a proverb quoted by Sir John Davies that &quot;whoso lives by west of the Barrow, lives west of the law&quot;.

==Barrow navigation==
The River Barrow forms a major part of Ireland&#x27;s inland waterways network, providing an inland link between the port of Waterford and the Grand Canal, which in turn connects Dublin to the River Shannon. There are three sections to the navigation:
*The tidal River Barrow, which together with the tidal reaches of its tributaries, the River Suir and River Nore, constitute 88 km (55 miles) of tidal river navigation.
*The non-tidal river navigation featuring 23 locks, continuing 66 km (41 miles) inland from the tidal limit of the Barrow at St Mullin&#x27;s to Athy.
*The Barrow Line of the Grand Canal connects to the river at Athy and continues northwards a further 45 km (28 miles) with 9 locks, connecting to the mainline of the Grand Canal at Lowtown, and so to Dublin.

==Recreation==
Parts of the Barrow attract kayakers and swimmers, primarily in the summer months. The Barrow Way is a 120 kilometre long-distance walk along the Barrow, one of Ireland&#x27;s National Waymarked Trails. The trail follows the Barrow Line, and then along the towpaths along the non-tidal part of the river, ending in St. Mullins.

==See also==
* Rivers of Ireland
* List of rivers of Ireland
* The Three Sisters

==References==
==External links==

* Barrow Valley Guide website
* River Barrow website
* IWAI – The Barrow Navigation
*Barrow River Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q936301" start="4" end="10" title="River Barrow" label="Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="19" end="24" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="28" end="35" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q772332" start="50" end="67" title="The Three Sisters (Ireland)" label="The Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128134" start="93" end="103" title="River Suir" label="River Suir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048506" start="112" end="122" title="River Nore" label="River Nore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="243" end="256" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="651" end="661" title="Glenbarrow" label="Glenbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658989" start="669" end="691" title="Slieve Bloom Mountains" label="Slieve Bloom Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q55299" start="695" end="707" title="County Laois" label="County Laois"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="792" end="801" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989246" start="806" end="819" title="Portarlington, County Laois" label="Portarlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q522012" start="821" end="833" title="Monasterevin" label="Monasterevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251091" start="835" end="839" title="Athy" label="Athy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211703" start="841" end="847" title="Carlow" label="Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593474" start="848" end="861" title="Graiguecullen" label="Graiguecullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q735855" start="863" end="875" title="Bagenalstown" label="Bagenalstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q253027" start="877" end="888" title="Goresbridge" label="Goresbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114609" start="890" end="905" title="Graiguenamanagh" label="Graiguenamanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016292" start="910" end="918" title="New Ross" label="New Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q932103" start="1086" end="1094" title="hydronym" label="hydronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="1140" end="1152" title="Proto-Celtic" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1218" end="1225" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q893905" start="1237" end="1242" title="Borvo" label="Borvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="1415" end="1422" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="1436" end="1445" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1551" end="1570" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788727" start="1632" end="1649" title="Waterford Harbour" label="Waterford Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194924" start="1735" end="1745" title="Dian Cecht" label="Dian Cecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q828550" start="1793" end="1805" title="The Morrígan" label="The Morrígan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152971" start="2322" end="2338" title="Domnall ua Néill" label="Domnall ua Néill"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="2344" end="2352" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="2400" end="2407" title="Irish Sea" label="the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293452" start="2477" end="2485" title="Norse Gaels" label="Norsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444722" start="2806" end="2812" title="Laigin" label="Laigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q199383" start="2838" end="2845" title="Osraige" label="Osraige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529003" start="2899" end="2914" title="Sir John Davies" label="Sir John Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542537" start="3156" end="3167" title="Grand Canal (Ireland)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3192" end="3198" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="3206" end="3219" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128134" start="3352" end="3362" title="River Suir" label="River Suir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048506" start="3367" end="3377" title="River Nore" label="River Nore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921562" start="3559" end="3575" title="St Mullin&amp;#x27;s" label="St Mullin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q251091" start="3579" end="3583" title="Athy" label="Athy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542537" start="3609" end="3620" title="Grand Canal (Ireland)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q251091" start="3646" end="3650" title="Athy" label="Athy"/>
<link wikidata="Q785898" start="4153" end="4170" title="Rivers of Ireland" label="Rivers of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247222" start="4173" end="4198" title="List of rivers of Ireland" label="List of rivers of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q772332" start="4201" end="4218" title="The Three Sisters (Ireland)" label="The Three Sisters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628809" wikidata="Q559316" url="?curid=628809" title="Richard the Justiciar">
<text>Richard the Justiciar (858–921), also known as Richard of Autun, was count of Autun from 880 and the first margrave and duke of Burgundy. He attained suzerainty over all the counties of Burgundy save Mâcon and by 890 he was referred to as &quot;dux&quot; (duke) and by 900 as &quot;marchio&quot; (margrave). By 918 he was being called &quot;dux Burgundionem&quot; or &quot;dux Burgundiae&quot;, which probably signified less the existence of a unified Burgundian duchy than feudal suzerainty over a multiplicity of counties in a specific region.

== Life ==
Richard was a Bosonid, the son of Bivin of Gorze and Richildis. His elder brother was Boso of Provence and his younger sister was Richildis, second wife of Charles the Bald.

In 875, after the death of the Emperor Louis II, Richard and Boso accompanied Charles to Italy for his imperial coronation. In February 876, in Pavia, while preparing for his return journey, Charles nominated Boso &quot;Duke and Viceroy of Italy and Duke of Provence&quot;. In 877, on Charles&#x27;s death, Boso returned to France and confided the realm of Italy and the Duchy of Provence to Richard and Hugh the Abbot as &quot;missi dominici&quot;.
In 879, Boso declared himself &quot;King of Provence&quot; following the death of Louis the Stammerer, but Richard defected from Boso and took Boso&#x27;s county of Autun, which Carloman II confirmed to him in 880. The two joined battle on the Saône and Richard captured Mâcon and garrisoned it in the name of Carloman and Louis III under the command of Bernard Plantapilosa, a relative of the hereditary counts of Mâcon. After taking Lyon, he besieged his brother&#x27;s capital of Vienne, where he was joined by Louis, Carloman, and the emperor Charles the Fat. Richard eventually drove Boso out in 882 and captured his wife Ermengard and children Engelberga and Louis, sending them as prisoners to Autun. Boso went into hiding in Provence.

After the death of Charles the Fat in 888, Richard supported the claim of Duke Rudolph to be King of Upper Burgundy and married his sister Adelaide, daughter of Conrad II of Auxerre. Richard also supported the coronation of his nephew Louis as King of Provence in 890.

Richard died and was buried at Sens. He was exhorted by a bishop at his deathbed to beg a pardon for shedding so much blood in his life. He responded:
==Family==
By his wife Adelaide (married 888), daughter of Conrad II, Count of Auxerre, and Waldrada of Worms, he had several sons and daughters:
* Rudolph, successor and later King of Francia
* Hugh the Black, later Duke of Burgundy
* Boso, married Bertha, daughter of Boso, Margrave of Tuscany
* Ermengard, married Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy
* Adelaide, married Reginar II, Count of Hainaut
* Richilda, married Litaud I, Count of Mâcon

==See also==
* Dukes of Burgundy family tree

==References==
==Sources==
* Bouchard, Constance B. &quot;The Bosonids or Rising to Power in the Late Carolingian Age.&quot; &quot;French Historical Studies&quot;, Vol. 15, No. 3. (Spring, 1988), pp 407–431.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559316" start="0" end="21" title="Richard the Justiciar" label="Richard the Justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q559316" start="47" end="63" title="Richard the Justiciar" label="Richard of Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q190827" start="69" end="83" title="count of Autun" label="count of Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="120" end="136" title="duke of Burgundy" label="duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="200" end="205" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q894485" start="572" end="579" title="Bosonid" label="Bosonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q605836" start="592" end="606" title="Bivin of Gorze" label="Bivin of Gorze"/>
<link wikidata="Q73806" start="644" end="660" title="Boso of Provence" label="Boso of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q235776" start="688" end="697" title="Richilde of Provence" label="Richildis"/>
<link wikidata="Q71231" start="714" end="730" title="Charles the Bald" label="Charles the Bald"/>
<link wikidata="Q215204" start="764" end="780" title="Emperor Louis II" label="Emperor Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="877" end="882" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="962" end="978" title="King of Italy" label="Viceroy of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q641160" start="983" end="999" title="List of rulers of Provence" label="Duke of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q698303" start="1137" end="1151" title="Hugh the Abbot" label="Hugh the Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370258" start="1161" end="1175" title="missi dominici" label="missi dominici"/>
<link wikidata="Q182840" start="1265" end="1284" title="Louis the Stammerer" label="Louis the Stammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190827" start="1348" end="1353" title="Autun" label="Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q192846" start="1361" end="1372" title="Carloman II" label="Carloman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="1427" end="1432" title="Saône" label="Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="1454" end="1459" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193112" start="1506" end="1515" title="Louis III of France" label="Louis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q822663" start="1537" end="1557" title="Bernard Plantapilosa" label="Bernard Plantapilosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424981" start="1588" end="1603" title="counts of Mâcon" label="counts of Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1618" end="1622" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="1666" end="1672" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q150712" start="1730" end="1745" title="Charles the Fat" label="Charles the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q273602" start="1810" end="1819" title="Ermengard of Provence" label="Ermengard"/>
<link wikidata="Q310435" start="1848" end="1853" title="Louis the Blind" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q437435" start="2001" end="2013" title="Rudolph I of Upper Burgundy" label="Duke Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q889901" start="2020" end="2042" title="King of Burgundy" label="King of Upper Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145718" start="2088" end="2108" title="Conrad II of Auxerre" label="Conrad II of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="2228" end="2232" title="Sens" label="Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973116" start="2371" end="2379" title="Adelaide of Auxerre (born c. 849)" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q145718" start="2407" end="2416" title="Conrad II, Duke of Transjurane Burgundy" label="Conrad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669605" start="2418" end="2434" title="Count of Auxerre" label="Count of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273273" start="2496" end="2503" title="Rudolph, Duke of Burgundy" label="Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q551518" start="2543" end="2557" title="Hugh, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q705998" start="2618" end="2643" title="Boso, Margrave of Tuscany" label="Boso, Margrave of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q549930" start="2665" end="2690" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy" label="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q735666" start="2711" end="2739" title="Reginar II, Count of Hainaut" label="Reginar II, Count of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2760" end="2784" title="Litaud I, Count of Mâcon" label="Litaud I, Count of Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="2801" end="2830" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628811" wikidata="Q133017" url="?curid=628811" title="Chlorella">
<text>Chlorella is a genus of about thirteen species of single-celled or colonial green algae of the division Chlorophyta. The cells are spherical in shape, about 2 to 10 μm in diameter, and are without flagella. Their chloroplasts contain the green photosynthetic pigments chlorophyll-a and -b. In ideal conditions cells of &quot;Chlorella&quot; multiply rapidly, requiring only carbon dioxide, water, sunlight, and a small amount of minerals to reproduce.

The name &quot;Chlorella&quot; is taken from the Greek χλώρος, &quot;chlōros/ khlōros&quot;, meaning green, and the Latin diminutive suffix -&quot;ella&quot;, meaning small. German biochemist and cell physiologist Otto Heinrich Warburg, awarded with the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1931 for his research on cell respiration, also studied photosynthesis in &quot;Chlorella&quot;. In 1961, Melvin Calvin of the University of California received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his research on the pathways of carbon dioxide assimilation in plants using &quot;Chlorella&quot;.

&quot;Chlorella&quot; has been considered as a source of food and energy because its photosynthetic efficiency can reach 8%, which exceeds that of other highly efficient crops such as sugar cane.

== Description ==
&quot;Chlorella&quot; consists of small, rounded cells which are spherical, subspherical, or ellipsoidal, and may be surrounded by a layer of mucilage. The cells contain a single chloroplast which is parietal (lying against the inner side of the cell membrane), with a single pyrenoid that is surrounded by grains of starch.

===Reproduction===
Reproduction occurs by the formation of autospores; zoospores or gametes are not known to be produced in &quot;Chlorella&quot;. In autosporulation, the contents of the cell divide into two, four or sometimes eight protoplasts. Each daughter protoplast rounds off, and are liberated by the rupture of the parent cell wall. On release, each autospore grows to become a new individual. The daughter cell may remain attached to the parent cell wall, thereby forming colonies of cells. The presence of sulphur in the culture medium is considered essential for cell division. It takes place even in the dark with sulphur alone as the source material but under light conditions nitrogen also required in addition. Pearsall and Loose (1937) reported the occurrence of motile cells in &quot;Chlorella&quot;. Bendix (1964) also observed that &quot;Chlorella&quot; produces motile cells which might be gametes. These observations have an important bearing on the concept of the life cycle of &quot;Chlorella,&quot; which at present is considered to be strictly asexual in character.

Asexual reproduction in &quot;Chlorella ellipsoides&quot; has been studied in detail and the following four phases have been observed during the asexual reproduction.
#Growth phase - During this phase the cells grow in size by utilizing the photosynthetic products.
#Ripening phase - In this phase the cells mature and prepare themselves for division.
#Post ripening phase - During this phase, each mature cell divides twice either in dark or in light. The cells formed in dark are known as dark to light phase, cells again grow in size.
#Division phase - During this phase the parent cell wall ruptures and unicells are released.

== Taxonomy ==
&quot;Chlorella&quot; was first described by Martinus Beijerinck in 1890. Since then, over a hundred taxa have been described within the genus. However, biochemical and genomic data has revealed that many of these species were not closely related to each other, even being placed in a separate class Chlorophyceae. In other words, the &quot;green ball&quot; form of &quot;Chlorella&quot; appears to be a product of convergent evolution and not a natural taxon. Identifying &quot;Chlorella&quot;-like algae based on morphological features alone is generally not possible.

Some strains of &quot;Chlorella&quot; used for food are incorrectly identified, or correspond to genera that were classified out of true &quot;Chlorella&quot;. For example, &quot;Heterochlorella luteoviridis&quot; is typically known as &quot;Chlorella luteoviridis&quot; which is no longer considered a valid name.

== As a food source ==

When first harvested, &quot;Chlorella&quot; was suggested as an inexpensive protein supplement to the human diet. According to the American Cancer Society, &quot;available scientific studies do not support its effectiveness for preventing or treating cancer or any other disease in humans&quot;.

Under certain growing conditions, &quot;Chlorella&quot; yields oils that are high in polyunsaturated fats—&quot;Chlorella minutissima&quot; has yielded eicosapentaenoic acid at 39.9% of total lipids.

=== History ===
Following global fears of an uncontrollable human population boom during the late 1940s and the early 1950s, &quot;Chlorella&quot; was seen as a new and promising primary food source and as a possible solution to the then-current world hunger crisis. Many people during this time thought hunger would be an overwhelming problem and saw &quot;Chlorella&quot; as a way to end this crisis by providing large amounts of high-quality food for a relatively low cost.

Many institutions began to research the algae, including the Carnegie Institution, the Rockefeller Foundation, the NIH, UC Berkeley, the Atomic Energy Commission, and Stanford University. Following World War II, many Europeans were starving, and many Malthusians attributed this not only to the war, but also to the inability of the world to produce enough food to support the increasing population. According to a 1946 FAO report, the world would need to produce 25 to 35% more food in 1960 than in 1939 to keep up with the increasing population, while health improvements would require a 90 to 100% increase. Because meat was costly and energy-intensive to produce, protein shortages were also an issue. Increasing cultivated area alone would go only so far in providing adequate nutrition to the population. The USDA calculated that, to feed the U.S. population by 1975, it would have to add 200 million acres (800,000 km2) of land, but only 45 million were available. One way to combat national food shortages was to increase the land available for farmers, yet the American frontier and farm land had long since been extinguished in trade for expansion and urban life. Hopes rested solely on new agricultural techniques and technologies. Because of these circumstances, an alternative solution was needed.

To cope with the upcoming postwar population boom in the United States and elsewhere, researchers decided to tap into the unexploited sea resources. Initial testing by the Stanford Research Institute showed &quot;Chlorella&quot; (when growing in warm, sunny, shallow conditions) could convert 20% of solar energy into a plant that, when dried, contains 50% protein. In addition, &quot;Chlorella&quot; contains fat and vitamins. The plant&#x27;s photosynthetic efficiency allows it to yield more protein per unit area than any plant—one scientist predicted 10,000 tons of protein a year could be produced with just 20 workers staffing a 1000-acre (4-km2) &quot;Chlorella&quot; farm. The pilot research performed at Stanford and elsewhere led to immense press from journalists and newspapers, yet did not lead to large-scale algae production. &quot;Chlorella&quot; seemed like a viable option because of the technological advances in agriculture at the time and the widespread acclaim it got from experts and scientists who studied it. Algae researchers had even hoped to add a neutralized &quot;Chlorella&quot; powder to conventional food products, as a way to fortify them with vitamins and minerals.

When the preliminary laboratory results were published, the scientific community at first backed the possibilities of &quot;Chlorella&quot;. &quot;Science News Letter&quot; praised the optimistic results in an article entitled &quot;Algae to Feed the Starving&quot;. John Burlew, the editor of the Carnegie Institution of Washington book &quot;Algal Culture-from Laboratory to Pilot Plant&quot;, stated, &quot;the algae culture may fill a very real need&quot;, which &quot;Science News Letter&quot; turned into &quot;future populations of the world will be kept from starving by the production of improved or educated algae related to the green scum on ponds&quot;. The cover of the magazine also featured Arthur D. Little&#x27;s Cambridge laboratory, which was a supposed future food factory. A few years later, the magazine published an article entitled &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s Dinner&quot;, which stated, &quot;There is no doubt in the mind of scientists that the farms of the future will actually be factories.&quot; &quot;Science Digest&quot; also reported, &quot;common pond scum would soon become the world&#x27;s most important agricultural crop.&quot; However, in the decades since those claims were made, algae have not been cultivated on that large of a scale.

=== Current status ===
Since the growing world food problem of the 1940s was solved by better crop efficiency and other advances in traditional agriculture, &quot;Chlorella&quot; has not seen the kind of public and scientific interest that it had in the 1940s. &quot;Chlorella&quot; has only a niche market for companies promoting it as a dietary supplement.

==== Production difficulties ====

The experimental research was carried out in laboratories, rather than in the field, and
scientists discovered that &quot;Chlorella&quot; would be much more difficult to produce than previously thought. To be practical, the algae grown would have to be placed either in artificial light or in shade to produce at its maximum photosynthetic efficiency. In addition, for the &quot;Chlorella&quot; to be as productive as the world would require, it would have to be grown in carbonated water, which would have added millions to the production cost. A sophisticated process, and additional cost, was required to harvest the crop and for &quot;Chlorella&quot; to be a viable food source, its cell walls would have to be pulverized. The plant could reach its nutritional potential only in highly modified artificial situations. Another problem was developing sufficiently palatable food products from &quot;Chlorella.&quot;

Although the production of &quot;Chlorella&quot; looked promising and involved creative technology, it has not to date been cultivated on the scale some had predicted. It has not been sold on the scale of &quot;Spirulina&quot;, soybean products, or whole grains. Costs have remained high, and &quot;Chlorella&quot; has for the most part been sold as a health food, for cosmetics, or as animal feed. After a decade of experimentation, studies showed that following exposure to sunlight, &quot;Chlorella&quot; captured just 2.5% of the solar energy, not much better than conventional crops. &quot;Chlorella&quot;, too, was found by scientists in the 1960s to be impossible for humans and other animals to digest in its natural state due to the tough cell walls encapsulating the nutrients, which presented further problems for its use in American food production.

== Use in carbon dioxide reduction and oxygen production ==

In 1965, the Russian CELSS experiment BIOS-3 determined that 8 m2 of exposed &quot;Chlorella&quot; could remove carbon dioxide and replace oxygen within the sealed environment for a single human. The algae were grown in vats underneath artificial light.

== Dietary supplement==

&quot;Chlorella&quot; is consumed as a dietary supplement. Some manufacturers of &quot;Chlorella&quot; products have falsely asserted that it has health benefits, including an ability to treat cancer, for which the American Cancer Society stated &quot;available scientific studies do not support its effectiveness for preventing or treating cancer or any other disease in humans&quot;. The United States Food and Drug Administration has issued warning letters to supplement companies for falsely advertising health benefits of consuming chlorella products, such as one company in October 2020.

There is some support from animal studies of chlorella&#x27;s ability to detoxify insecticides. &quot;Chlorella protothecoides&quot; accelerated the detoxification of rats poisoned with chlordecone, a persistent insecticide, decreasing the half-life of the toxin from 40 to 19 days. The ingested algae passed through the gastrointestinal tract unharmed, interrupted the enteric recirculation of the persistent insecticide, and subsequently eliminated the bound chlordecone with the feces.

== Health concerns ==
A 2002 study showed that &quot;Chlorella&quot; cell walls contain lipopolysaccharides, endotoxins found in Gram-negative bacteria that affect the immune system and may cause inflammation. However, more recent studies have found that the lipopolysaccharides in organisms other than Gram-negative bacteria, for example in cyanobacteria, are considerably different from the lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria.

== See also ==

* Calvin cycle
* List of ineffective cancer treatments
* Quorn: food made from mycoprotein
* Soyuz 28, a 1978 space mission which included experiments on &quot;Chlorella
* Spirulina (dietary supplement)
* Chlorellosis, a disease caused by the infection of &quot;Chlorella&quot;.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="15" end="20" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="57" end="61" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="67" end="75" title="Colony (biology)" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="76" end="87" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q264543" start="104" end="115" title="Chlorophyta" label="Chlorophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="165" end="167" title="Micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="197" end="205" title="flagella" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="213" end="225" title="chloroplasts" label="chloroplasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q133878" start="268" end="281" title="chlorophyll-a" label="chlorophyll-a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943387" start="286" end="288" title="chlorophyll b" label="-b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="374" end="388" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="390" end="395" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="397" end="405" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="429" end="436" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="502" end="507" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="569" end="574" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="634" end="644" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76464" start="667" end="688" title="Otto Heinrich Warburg" label="Otto Heinrich Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="707" end="744" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="773" end="789" title="cell respiration" label="cell respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49347" start="854" end="867" title="Melvin Calvin" label="Melvin Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="875" end="899" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="913" end="937" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q220389" start="974" end="1011" title="Calvin cycle" label="carbon dioxide assimilation in plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187915" start="1127" end="1152" title="photosynthetic efficiency" label="photosynthetic efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="1226" end="1236" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q424275" start="1399" end="1407" title="mucilage" label="mucilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="1436" end="1447" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q574470" start="1533" end="1541" title="pyrenoid" label="pyrenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975518" start="1642" end="1651" title="autospore" label="autospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q220341" start="1654" end="1662" title="zoospore" label="zoospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126500" start="1816" end="1826" title="protoplast" label="protoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="2099" end="2106" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25539274" start="3367" end="3386" title="Martinus Beijerinck" label="Martinus Beijerinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q132609" start="3622" end="3635" title="Chlorophyceae" label="Chlorophyceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="3737" end="3757" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4073" end="4101" title="Heterochlorella luteoviridis" label="Heterochlorella luteoviridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="4365" end="4388" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="4616" end="4635" title="polyunsaturated fat" label="polyunsaturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q409990" start="4683" end="4704" title="eicosapentaenoic acid" label="eicosapentaenoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043963" start="5271" end="5291" title="Carnegie Institution of Washington" label="Carnegie Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="5297" end="5319" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="5325" end="5328" title="National Institutes of Health" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5330" end="5341" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="5347" end="5371" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="5377" end="5396" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5408" end="5420" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q828341" start="5461" end="5472" title="Malthusianism" label="Malthusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="5630" end="5633" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="6025" end="6029" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="6694" end="6721" title="SRI International" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313730" start="7871" end="7890" title="Science News Letter" label="Science News Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043963" start="8022" end="8056" title="Carnegie Institution of Washington" label="Carnegie Institution of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q709066" start="8430" end="8446" title="Arthur D. Little" label="Arthur D. Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260191" start="8749" end="8763" title="Science Digest" label="Science Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q210064" start="9660" end="9676" title="artificial light" label="artificial light"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="9862" end="9878" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q285335" start="10520" end="10529" title="Spirulina (dietary supplement)" label="Spirulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="10537" end="10544" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836947" start="10695" end="10706" title="animal feed" label="animal feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548765" start="11254" end="11259" title="Controlled Ecological Life Support System" label="CELSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q864735" start="11271" end="11277" title="BIOS-3" label="BIOS-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="11552" end="11570" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="11728" end="11751" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="11917" end="11945" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544127" start="11957" end="11972" title="FDA warning letter" label="warning letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="12190" end="12202" title="insecticides" label="insecticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q423892" start="12294" end="12305" title="chlordecone" label="chlordecone"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="12686" end="12704" title="lipopolysaccharide" label="lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="12707" end="12716" title="endotoxin" label="endotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="12727" end="12749" title="Gram-negative bacteria" label="Gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="12766" end="12779" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="12794" end="12806" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220389" start="13057" end="13069" title="Calvin cycle" label="Calvin cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010279" start="13072" end="13109" title="List of ineffective cancer treatments" label="List of ineffective cancer treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123676" start="13112" end="13117" title="Quorn" label="Quorn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13148" end="13156" title="Soyuz 28#Mission highlights" label="Soyuz 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q285335" start="13227" end="13257" title="Spirulina (dietary supplement)" label="Spirulina (dietary supplement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105662492" start="13260" end="13272" title="Chlorellosis" label="Chlorellosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628815" wikidata="Q551518" url="?curid=628815" title="Hugh the Black">
<text>Hugh the Black (died 952) was Duke of Burgundy from 923 until his death in 952. He was a Bosonid through his father, who was the younger brother of Boso of Provence.

Hugh was the son of Richard of Autun, duke of Burgundy, and Adelaide of Auxerre. He succeeded his older brother Rudolph as duke of Burgundy, when Rudolph was elected king of West Francia, in 923. 

Following Rudolph&#x27;s death in 936, Hugh may have had aspirations to follow his brother onto the throne and refused to recognize Louis IV as king of West Francia. As a result, Louis sent Hugh the Great who captured Auxerre and Sens. The Duchy of Burgundy was divided between Hugh the Great and Hugh the Black.

It is unknown whether Hugh married. He probably died without living offspring, as he was succeeded by Gilbert of Chalon, who became the ruler of the Duchy of Burgundy &quot;de facto&quot; (he was not duke &quot;de jure&quot;).

==See also==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q551518" start="0" end="14" title="Hugh the Black" label="Hugh the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="30" end="46" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q894485" start="89" end="96" title="Bosonid" label="Bosonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q73806" start="148" end="164" title="Boso of Provence" label="Boso of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q559316" start="187" end="203" title="Richard of Autun" label="Richard of Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973116" start="227" end="246" title="Adelaide of Auxerre (born c. 849)" label="Adelaide of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273273" start="279" end="286" title="Rudolph of France" label="Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="341" end="353" title="West Francia" label="West Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193658" start="497" end="505" title="Louis IV of France" label="Louis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q317933" start="555" end="569" title="Hugh the Great" label="Hugh the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q167600" start="583" end="590" title="Auxerre" label="Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="595" end="599" title="Sens" label="Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q549930" start="781" end="798" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy" label="Gilbert of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="921" end="950" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628817" wikidata="Q532471" url="?curid=628817" title="Battle of Fallujah">
<text>Battle of Fallujah may refer to:
* The 1941 Battle of Fallujah during the Anglo-Iraqi War
* First Battle of Fallujah, April 2004 operation by US forces against Iraqi guerillas 
* Second Battle of Fallujah, joint American, Iraqi government, and British offensive in November and December 2004
* Fall of Fallujah, winter 2013–14 offensive of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) against the Iraqi government
* Siege of Fallujah (2016), February to May 2016 offensive of the Iraqi government against ISIL
* Third Battle of Fallujah, offensive by the Iraqi government against ISIL in May and June 2016

==See also==
* Fallujah during the Iraq War (2003)
* War in Iraq (2013–2017), war between Iraq and ISIL
* Gulf War (1990–91)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532471" start="0" end="18" title="Battle of Fallujah" label="Battle of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35" end="62" title="Anglo Iraqi War#Battle of Fallujah" label="The 1941 Battle of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537159" start="92" end="116" title="First Battle of Fallujah" label="First Battle of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330136" start="179" end="204" title="Second Battle of Fallujah" label="Second Battle of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639207" start="294" end="310" title="Battle of Fallujah (2014)" label="Fall of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23137890" start="419" end="443" title="Siege of Fallujah (2016)" label="Siege of Fallujah (2016)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205448" start="515" end="539" title="Third Battle of Fallujah" label="Third Battle of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166195" start="625" end="653" title="Fallujah during the Iraq War" label="Fallujah during the Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984356" start="663" end="686" title="War in Iraq (2013–2017)" label="War in Iraq (2013–2017)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="709" end="713" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="716" end="724" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628818" wikidata="Q4892845" url="?curid=628818" title="Bernal v. Fainter">
<text>Bernal v. Fainter, 467 U.S. 216 (1984), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Equal Protection Clause prohibited the state of Texas from barring noncitizens from applying for commission as a notary public.

==Background==
A native of Mexico applied to be a notary public in Texas. Citing a Texas law that required notaries public to be citizens of the United States, Texas&#x27; Secretary of State denied the application. After losing an administrative appeal, the applicant filed a lawsuit in federal court. The trial court ruled in favor of the applicant and found that under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, Texas&#x27; citizenship requirement did not pass either strict scrutiny or rational basis review. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed, holding that the rational basis test was the proper standard of review and that under this standard, the citizenship requirement &quot;bears a rational relationship to the state&#x27;s interest in the proper and orderly handling of a countless variety of legal documents of importance to the state.&quot;

==Opinion of the Court==
Citing &quot;Graham v. Richardson&quot;, the Supreme Court recognized that legal aliens are a suspect class, and therefore any law applying to legal aliens as a class is subject to strict scrutiny. The Court also recognized a &quot;political function&quot; exception that subjects alienage classification laws to a lower standard of review for &quot;positions intimately related to the process of democratic self-governance.&quot; However, the Court held that since the requirements of being a notary are essentially ministerial (that is, without judgment or discretion, either the person fits the statutory requirement to have a document authenticated or they do not), and the only real requirement of a notary was to follow the law, being a notary does not have any special character of citizenship that would require one to necessarily be a citizen. The Court noted that this is unlike the role played by other individuals in who work in judicial systems, such as judges or police officer, where a locality may require police officers to be citizens because they act on behalf of the state and have considerable discretion in how the law is enforced. Consequently, the Supreme Court struck down the Texas law that required a notary to be a citizen. The Court also noted in &quot;dictum&quot; that notary commissions are issued by the Texas Secretary of State, who is not required to be a citizen despite holding the &quot;highest appointive position&quot; in Texas.

===Dissenting opinion===
Justice William Rehnquist wrote a one-sentence dissenting opinion stating: &quot;I dissent for the reasons stated in my dissenting opinion in &quot;Sugarman v. Dougall&quot;.&quot; In &quot;Sugarman&quot;, Justice Rehnquist argued that alienage is not a suspect classification.

==See also==
*&quot;Torcaso v. Watkins&quot; (1961): religious test to be a notary found unconstitutional
*List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="63" end="97" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="113" end="136" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="161" end="166" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="226" end="239" title="notary public" label="notary public"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="648" end="702" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623621" start="760" end="775" title="strict scrutiny" label="strict scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295753" start="779" end="800" title="rational basis review" label="rational basis review"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="806" end="858" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593390" start="1213" end="1233" title="Graham v. Richardson" label="Graham v. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649163" start="1294" end="1307" title="Suspect classification" label="suspect class"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="2044" end="2051" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q384593" start="2177" end="2191" title="police officer" label="police officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658870" start="2482" end="2488" title="dictum" label="dictum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444388" start="2537" end="2561" title="Texas Secretary of State" label="Texas Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="2703" end="2720" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635035" start="2843" end="2862" title="Sugarman v. Dougall" label="Sugarman v. Dougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825517" start="2994" end="3012" title="Torcaso v. Watkins" label="Torcaso v. Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602535" start="3081" end="3134" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467" label="List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628819" wikidata="Q549930" url="?curid=628819" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Gilbert (or Giselbert) of Chalon (died 8 April 956) was count of Chalon, Autun, Troyes, Avallon and Dijon, and duke of Burgundy between 952 and 956. He became the ruler of the Duchy of Burgundy &quot;de facto&quot; (he was not Duke &quot;de jure&quot;). By his wife Ermengarde, he had two daughters: Adelais and Liutgarde. Gilbert never managed to maintain the independence of the duchy in the struggles for power of 10th-century France. In 952, he became a vassal of Hugh the Great, count of Paris, and married his oldest daughter, Liutgard, to Hugh&#x27;s son Otto of Paris. Adelais married Robert of Vermandois.

==References==
==Sources==

==See also==
*Duke of Burgundy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q549930" start="0" end="7" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q549930" start="12" end="21" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy" label="Giselbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q549930" start="23" end="32" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy" label="of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541653" start="56" end="71" title="count of Chalon" label="count of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190827" start="73" end="78" title="Autun" label="Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489" start="80" end="86" title="Troyes" label="Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207572" start="88" end="95" title="Avallon" label="Avallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="100" end="105" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="111" end="127" title="duke of Burgundy" label="duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317933" start="468" end="482" title="Hugh the Great" label="Hugh the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q742124" start="562" end="575" title="Otto, Duke of Burgundy" label="Otto of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q772443" start="593" end="613" title="Robert of Vermandois" label="Robert of Vermandois"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="658" end="674" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628825" wikidata="Q742124" url="?curid=628825" title="Otto, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Otto of Burgundy ( 944 – 22 February 965) was Duke of Burgundy from 956 to his death. 

Otto was a son of Hugh the Great, duke of the Franks, and his wife Hedwig of Saxony, a sister of Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor. He was a brother of King Hugh Capet of France.

He became duke through his wife Liutgarde, daughter of Gilbert, who held most of the counties of Burgundy. He had no known descendants.

His brother, Henry I, Duke of Burgundy, succeeded him as Duke of Burgundy.

==See also==
*Duke of Burgundy

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742124" start="0" end="16" title="Otto, Duke of Burgundy" label="Otto of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="46" end="62" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317933" start="106" end="140" title="Hugh the Great" label="Hugh the Great, duke of the Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43961" start="155" end="171" title="Hedwig of Saxony" label="Hedwig of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="185" end="211" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159575" start="238" end="248" title="Hugh Capet" label="Hugh Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q549930" start="316" end="323" title="Gilbert, Duke of Burgundy" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="358" end="366" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="411" end="436" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="455" end="471" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="488" end="504" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628827" wikidata="Q7077891" url="?curid=628827" title="Odo of Paris">
<text>Odo of Paris may refer to:
* Odo, Count of Paris (860 - 898) 
* Odo, Duke of Burgundy (944 – 965)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208086" start="29" end="48" title="Odo, Count of Paris" label="Odo, Count of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q742124" start="64" end="85" title="Odo, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo, Duke of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628829" wikidata="Q709699" url="?curid=628829" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Henry I (946 – 15 October 1002), called the Great, was Duke of Burgundy from 965 to his death and Count of Nevers through his first marriage. He is sometimes known as Odo-Henry or Otto-Henry (in French &quot;Eudes-Henri&quot;), since his birth name was &quot;Odo&quot; and he only adopted &quot;Henry&quot; on being elected duke of Burgundy.

==Life==

He was a younger son of Hugh the Great, Duke of the Franks, and Hedwig of Saxony and thus the younger brother of King Hugh Capet. As Odo, he entered the church at a young age and was a cleric at the time of the death of his brother Otto, Duke of Burgundy, on 22 February 965. He was elected by the Burgundian counts to succeed his brother and they gave him the name Henry. However Otto-Henry only held three counties of his own, his vassals holding the remaining six that comprised the core of that held by Richard the Justiciar who died in 921.

In 978, Henry participated in the invasion of Lotharingia and the defence of Paris from a counter-raid.

In 972, he married Gerberga, the widow of Adalbert II of Italy, who had sought refuge at Autun. Through Gerberga, he had a stepson named Otto-William. This marriage allowed Henry to rule the County of Nevers.

He married a second time to Gersenda, daughter of William II of Gascony. As Henry had no child, Otto-William became a legitimate contender to inherit the Duchy of Burgundy. So did Henry&#x27;s nephew, the king Robert II of France. This resulted in a war of succession (from 1003 to 1005) between Otto-William and Robert II. Otto-William eventually gave up the Duchy but kept in the Western Frankish Kingdom, the county of Mâcon, the county of Beaune and the advowson for the abbey of St-Benigne in Dijon.

==Family==
Henry died without any sons of his own two wives. He adopted Otto-William making him a possible heir of the Duchy of Burgundy.

Odo-Henry had at least one illegitimate child by an unknown mother:

* Odo of Beaune († after August 25, 1005), viscount of Beaune.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="0" end="7" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="40" end="49" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="55" end="71" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q777511" start="98" end="113" title="Counts and dukes of Nevers" label="Count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="167" end="176" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo-Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="180" end="190" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Otto-Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q317933" start="377" end="391" title="Hugh the Great" label="Hugh the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q947869" start="393" end="411" title="Duke of the Franks" label="Duke of the Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43961" start="417" end="433" title="Hedwig of Saxony" label="Hedwig of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q159575" start="471" end="481" title="Hugh Capet" label="Hugh Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q742124" start="585" end="589" title="Otto, Duke of Burgundy" label="Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q559316" start="860" end="881" title="Richard, Duke of Burgundy" label="Richard the Justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106856793" start="934" end="957" title="Franco-German war of 978–980" label="invasion of Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="977" end="982" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159249" start="1024" end="1032" title="Gerberga, Queen of Italy" label="Gerberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q347480" start="1047" end="1067" title="Adalbert of Italy" label="Adalbert II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190827" start="1094" end="1099" title="Autun" label="Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q928859" start="1142" end="1154" title="Otto-William, Count of Burgundy" label="Otto-William"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1243" end="1251" title="Gersenda of Gascony" label="Gersenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974876" start="1265" end="1286" title="William Sánchez of Gascony" label="William II of Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="1369" end="1386" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178918" start="1425" end="1444" title="Robert II of France" label="Robert II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="1637" end="1642" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16121" start="1658" end="1664" title="Beaune" label="Beaune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="1713" end="1718" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="1840" end="1857" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628831" wikidata="Q108403330" url="?curid=628831" title="Bruce Grant (biologist)">
<text>Bruce S. Grant is emeritus professor of biology at the College of William and Mary. He has a particular research interest in the peppered moth, and published a book, Observing Evolution: Peppered Moths and the Discovery of Parallel Melanism in 2021.

Grant has a B.S. in Biology from Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania in 1964, an M.S. in Genetics from North Carolina State University, Raleigh in 1966 and a Ph.D. in Genetics from North Carolina State University, Raleigh in 1968.

An article on his contributions in research, teaching, and mentoring was published in 2005 in &quot;Genetics&quot;.

==Views==
In a review of &quot;Creationism&#x27;s Trojan Horse: The Wedge of Intelligent Design&quot;, Grant wrote:

:Neo-creationists imitate Paley’s designed-watch metaphor and peddle it like a Hong Kong Rolex, insisting it is authentic science and not religion. But of course it is religion: the intelligence in Intelligent Design demands the existence of a supernatural force or agent, so we might as well call that agent God, for short.

==Publications==
* Grant, Bruce S. 2021. Industrial Melanism, eLS, Vol 2: 1–12, DOI:10.1002/9780470015902.a0029393 https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470015902.a0029393
* Grant, Bruce. 2020. VIGNETTE 10.3 Industrial Melanism: Genetic Adaptation to Pollution in, Fundamentals of Ecotoxicology: The Science of Pollution Fifth Edition, by Michael C. Newman, CRC Press Taylor &amp; Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL
* Cook LM, Grant BS, Saccheri IJ, and Mallet J. 2012. Selective bird predation on the peppered moth: the last experiment of Michael Majerus. Biology Letters, https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2011.1136
* Grant, Bruce S. 2009. &#x27;Industrial melanism&#x27;. In: &quot;Evolution: The First Four Billion Years&quot;, edited by Ruse, M. and J. Travis. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. pp. 652–656.
* Noor, M.A.F., R.S. Parnell, and B.S. Grant. 2008. A Reversible Color Polyphenism in American Peppered Moth (Biston betularia cognataria) Caterpillars. PLoS ONE 3(9):e3142 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003142 http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0003142
* Grant, Bruce S. 2005. Industrial Melanism. In: &quot;Encyclopedia of Life Sciences&quot;. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd: Chichester www.els.net [doi:10.1038/npg.els.0004150]
* Grant, Bruce. 2004. &#x27;Intentional Deception: Intelligent Design&#x27;s Wedge of Creationism&#x27;. &quot;Skeptic&quot; 11: 84-86. http://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/archives/2004/04-06-01.html
* Grant, B. S. 2004. &#x27;Allelic melanism in American and British peppered moths&#x27;. &quot;Journal of Heredity&quot; 95:97-102.
* Grant, Bruce. 2003. &#x27;Industrial melanism, vignette 10.3.&#x27; In: Newman, M.C. and M.A. Unger, &quot;Fundamentals of Ecotoxicology 2e&quot;. Boca Raton: Lewis Publishers 226-228.
* Grant, B. S. and L. L. Wiseman. 2002. &#x27;Recent history of melanism in American peppered moths.&#x27; &quot;Journal of Heredity&quot; 93:86-90.
* Grant, Bruce S. 2002. &#x27;Sour grapes of wrath.&#x27; &quot;Science&quot; 297:940-941. 
*Cook, L. M. &amp; B. S. Grant. 2000. &#x27;Frequency of insularia during the decline in melanics in the peppered moth Biston betularia in Britain.&#x27; &quot;Heredity&quot; 85: 580-585.
* Grant, Bruce S. and Cyril A. Clarke, 1999. &#x27;An examination of intraseasonal variation in the incidence of melanism in peppered moths, Biston betularia (Geometridae).&#x27; &quot;Journal of the Lepidopterists&#x27; Society&quot; 53: 99-103.
* Grant, Bruce S. 1999. &#x27;Fine tuning the peppered moth paradigm.&#x27; &quot;Evolution&quot; 53: 980-984.
* Grant, B. S., A. D. Cook, C. A. Clarke, and D. F. Owen. 1998. &#x27;Geographic and temporal variation in the incidence of melanism in peppered moth populations in America and Britain.&#x27; &quot;Journal of Heredity&quot; 89: 465-471.
* Grant, B. S., D. F. Owen, and C. A. Clarke. 1996. &#x27;Parallel rise and fall of melanic peppered moths in America and Britain.&#x27; &quot;Journal of Heredity&quot; 87: 351-357.
* Grant, Bruce, Denis F. Owen and Cyril A. Clarke. 1995. Decline of melanic moths. Nature 373: 565. 
* Asami, Takahiro and Bruce Grant. 1995. &#x27;Melanism has not evolved in Japanese Biston betularia (Geometridae).&#x27; &quot;Journal of the Lepidopterists&#x27; Society&quot; 49: 88-91.
* Clarke, Cyril A., Bruce Grant, Frieda M.M. Clarke and Takahiro Asami, 1994. &#x27;A long term assessment of Biston betularia (L.) in one UK locality (Caldy Common near West Kirby, Wirral), 1959-1993, and glimpses elsewhere.&#x27; &quot;Linnean&quot; 10: 18-26.
* Clarke, Cyril A., Frieda M.M. Clarke and Bruce Grant, 1993. &#x27;Biston betularia (Geometridae), the peppered moth, in Wirral, England: an experiment in assembling.&#x27; &quot;Journal of the Lepidopterists&#x27; Society&quot; 47: 17-21.
* Grant, Bruce and Rory J. Howlett. 1988. &#x27;Background selection by the peppered moth (Biston betularia Linn.): individual differences.&#x27; &quot;Biological Journal of the Linnean Society&quot; 33: 217-232.

==References==


== External links ==
* Official page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108403330" start="0" end="14" title="Bruce Grant (biologist)" label="Bruce S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="40" end="47" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="55" end="82" title="College of William and Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="129" end="142" title="peppered moth" label="peppered moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928377" start="284" end="321" title="Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania" label="Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="356" end="387" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="434" end="465" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100575" start="585" end="593" title="Genetics (journal)" label="Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="633" end="697" title="Creationism&amp;#x27;s Trojan Horse: The Wedge of Intelligent Design" label="Creationism&amp;#x27;s Trojan Horse: The Wedge of Intelligent Design"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628832" wikidata="Q928859" url="?curid=628832" title="Otto-William, Count of Burgundy">
<text>Otto-William (; ; 958 – 21 September 1026 AD) was count of Mâcon, Nevers, and Burgundy.

==Life==
Otto was born in 958 during the joint reign of his grandfather, King Berengar II of Italy, and his father, King Adalbert. His mother was Gerberga.

After Adalbert&#x27;s death in 971/5, Gerberga married for a second time, to Henry I, Duke of Burgundy, the younger brother of King Hugh Capet. Gerberga and Henry had no children together. Since Henry had no legitimate son of his own, he adopted Otto-William making him a possible heir of the Duchy of Burgundy.

While the son of a king, Otto did not seek a royal wife. In , he married Ermentrude of Roucy, whose maternal grandmother, Gerberga of Saxony, was a sister of Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor, and by this marriage alliance created a web of consanguinity between later kings of France, Germany, Burgundy and the Carolingians. Even Otto&#x27;s children&#x27;s spouses, although from great families, came from widespread and scattered parts of France.

This marriage brought to Otto-William the County of Mâcon as well as many other rights on the left bank of the Saône in the province of Besançon. The new Count of Mâcon consolidated there his political grip making what would be later be the Free County of Burgundy around Dole.

From his mother Otto could have inherited the County of Nevers before 990. However he left Nevers to his stepson Landric and rather claimed the County of Beaune in which the dowry of Gerberga was.

The Duchy of Burgundy was eventually annexed to the crown of France by King Robert II, nephew of Henry I, Duke of Burgundy, in 1005.

On the left-bank of the Saône, determined to be sovereign ruler of his own lands, Otto revolted against the Emperor Henry II in 1016. This was after Rudolph III of Burgundy, the last king of Burgundy and Arles, had done homage to Henry at Strasbourg, making him his guard and heir. On Otto&#x27;s death, the Free County fell under the suzerainty of the German emperors.

Otto died on 21 September 1026 at the age of 64 and was buried in St-Benigne of Dijon.

==Marriage and issue==

Otto&#x27;s first wife was Ermentrude of Roucy. She bore Otto&#x27;s issue:
* Guy (–1006) had been associated as count of Mâcon from 995.
* Matilda, married Landri of Nevers, Count of Nevers
* Gerberga, married William II, Count of Provence
* Reginald I, Count of Burgundy (–1057). He was married to Alice of Normandy.
* Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Aquitaine

Otto remarried late in life to a wife named Adelaide. Some scholars have identified her as the four-times widowed Adelaide-Blanche of Anjou, but the identity is not directly attested and has been disputed by some studying the question.

==See also==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*101
*

==External links==
* Baldwin, Stewart, FASG, Adélaïde/Alix alias Blanche of Anjou, Henry Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q928859" start="0" end="12" title="Otto-William, Count of Burgundy" label="Otto-William"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="59" end="64" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166997" start="66" end="72" title="Nevers" label="Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="78" end="86" title="county of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314521" start="167" end="187" title="Berengar II of Italy" label="Berengar II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q347480" start="205" end="218" title="Adalbert of Ivrea" label="King Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159249" start="235" end="243" title="Gerberga, mother of Otto-William" label="Gerberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="323" end="348" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159575" start="378" end="388" title="Hugh Capet" label="Hugh Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="539" end="556" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913065" start="632" end="651" title="Ermentrude de Roucy" label="Ermentrude of Roucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168669" start="681" end="699" title="Gerberga of Saxony" label="Gerberga of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="717" end="743" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="792" end="805" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="863" end="875" title="Carolingian dynasty" label="Carolingians"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="1054" end="1059" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="1113" end="1118" title="Saône" label="Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="1138" end="1146" title="Besançon" label="Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424981" start="1156" end="1170" title="Count of Mâcon" label="Count of Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="1243" end="1266" title="Free County of Burgundy" label="Free County of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205586" start="1274" end="1278" title="Dole, Jura" label="Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q166997" start="1337" end="1343" title="Nevers" label="Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16121" start="1435" end="1441" title="Beaune" label="Beaune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159249" start="1464" end="1472" title="Gerberga, mother of Otto-William" label="Gerberga"/>
<link wikidata="Q178918" start="1550" end="1564" title="Robert II of France" label="King Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q709699" start="1576" end="1601" title="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Henry I, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103556" start="1721" end="1737" title="Emperor Henry II" label="Emperor Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q504792" start="1762" end="1785" title="Rudolph III of Burgundy" label="Rudolph III of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1852" end="1862" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="2064" end="2069" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913065" start="2123" end="2142" title="Ermentrude of Roucy" label="Ermentrude of Roucy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2174" end="2177" title="Guy I of Mâcon" label="Guy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2253" end="2269" title="Landri of Nevers" label="Landri of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582803" start="2307" end="2336" title="William II, Count of Provence" label="William II, Count of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q723932" start="2339" end="2368" title="Reginald I, Count of Burgundy" label="Reginald I, Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728803" start="2396" end="2413" title="Alice of Normandy" label="Alice of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185368" start="2417" end="2456" title="Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Aquitaine" label="Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q261934" start="2572" end="2597" title="Adelaide-Blanche of Anjou" label="Adelaide-Blanche of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="2709" end="2738" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628836" wikidata="Q346934" url="?curid=628836" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Robert I (1011 – 21 March 1076), known as the Old or the Headstrong (), was Duke of Burgundy from 1032 to his death. Robert was the third son of King Robert II of France and Constance of Arles. His brother was Henry I of France.

==Life==
In 1025, with the death of his eldest brother Hugh Magnus, he and Henry rebelled against their father and defeated him, forcing him back to Paris. In 1031, after the death of his father the king, Robert participated in a rebellion against his brother, in which he was supported by his mother, Constance of Arles. Peace was only achieved when Robert was given Burgundy (1032).

Throughout his reign, he was little more than a robber baron who had no control over his vassals, whose estates he often plundered, especially those of the Church. He seized the income of the diocese of Autun and the wine of the canons of Dijon. He burgled the abbey of St-Germain at Auxerre. In 1048, he repudiated his wife, Helie of Semur followed by the assassination of her brother Joceran and the murdering of her father, Lord Dalmace I of Semur, with his own hands. In that same year, the bishop of Langres, Harduoin, refused to dedicate the church of Sennecy so as not &quot;to be exposed to the violence of the duke.&quot;

His first son, Hugh, died in battle at a young age and his second son, Henry, also predeceased him. He was succeeded by Henry&#x27;s eldest son, his grandson, Hugh I.

==Family==

He married his first wife, Helie of Semur, about 1033, and repudiated her in 1048. Helie was the daughter of Dalmas I of Semur. Robert and Helie had five children:
#Hugh (1034–1059), killed in battle
#Henry (1035–ca.1074). He died shortly before his father, thus making his son Robert&#x27;s heir. His children included Hugh I, Duke of Burgundy (1057–1093), Odo I, Duke of Burgundy (1058–1103), and Henry, Count of Portugal (1066–1112), among others
#Robert (1040–1113), poisoned; married Violante, daughter of Roger I of Sicily
#Simon (1045–1087)
#Constance (1046–1093), married Alfonso VI of León and Castile
From his second wife, Ermengarde, daughter of Fulk III of Anjou, he had one daughter:
#Hildegarde (c.1056–1104), married William VIII of Aquitaine

==References==
==Sources==
*
*Gwatking, H. M., Whitney, J. P., et al. &quot;Cambridge Medieval History: Volume III—Germany and the Western Empire&quot;. Cambridge University Press: London, 1930.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q346934" start="0" end="8" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q346934" start="42" end="49" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy" label="the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q346934" start="53" end="67" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy" label="the Headstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="76" end="92" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178918" start="150" end="169" title="Robert II of France" label="Robert II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231068" start="174" end="192" title="Constance of Arles" label="Constance of Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178908" start="210" end="227" title="Henry I of France" label="Henry I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="379" end="384" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133060" start="664" end="676" title="Robber baron (feudalism)" label="robber baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q521384" start="808" end="824" title="diocese of Autun" label="diocese of Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="855" end="860" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935662" start="877" end="907" title="abbey of St-Germain at Auxerre" label="abbey of St-Germain at Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10263836" start="1048" end="1066" title="Dalmace I of Semur" label="Dalmace I of Semur"/>
<link wikidata="Q871038" start="1111" end="1128" title="bishop of Langres" label="bishop of Langres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1174" end="1181" title="Sennecy" label="Sennecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q117683" start="1407" end="1413" title="Hugh I of Burgundy" label="Hugh I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10263836" start="1537" end="1554" title="Dalmas I of Semur" label="Dalmas I of Semur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351549" start="1629" end="1634" title="Henry, son of Robert I of Burgundy" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q117683" start="1748" end="1772" title="Hugh I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh I, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q544125" start="1786" end="1809" title="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319625" start="1827" end="1851" title="Henry, Count of Portugal" label="Henry, Count of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="1939" end="1956" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745448" start="1977" end="1986" title="Constance of Burgundy" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q235080" start="2008" end="2038" title="Alfonso VI of León and Castile" label="Alfonso VI of León and Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q263343" start="2061" end="2071" title="Ermengarde of Anjou, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Ermengarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q454017" start="2085" end="2102" title="Fulk III of Anjou" label="Fulk III of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761624" start="2126" end="2136" title="Hildegarde of Burgundy" label="Hildegarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q462896" start="2160" end="2185" title="William VIII of Aquitaine" label="William VIII of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497791" start="2217" end="2232" title="H. M. Gwatkin" label="Gwatking, H. M."/>
<link wikidata="Q4470223" start="2234" end="2248" title="J. P. Whitney" label="Whitney, J. P."/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="2340" end="2366" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2368" end="2374" title="London" label="London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628839" wikidata="Q3260557" url="?curid=628839" title="Louis-Georges de Bréquigny">
<text>Louis-Georges-Oudard-Feudrix de Bréquigny (22 February 1714 – 3 July 1795), was a French scholar. He was born at Granville, Manche in Normandy.

His first publications were anonymous: a &quot;History of the Revolutions of Genoa up to the Peace of 1748&quot; (; 1750), and a series of &quot;Lives of the Greek Orators&quot; (; 1752). In 1754 he was given the task of completing the work of Eusèbe de Laurière, later continued by Denis-François Secousse, on the Ordonnances des Rois de France de la 3e Race. Secousse had published nine volumes and Bréquigny published five more up to 1790. In 1811, Emmanuel de Pastoret published the last eleven volumes. Elected a member of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres in 1759, he contributed a &quot;History of Postumus, Emperor of the Gauls&quot; (; vol. XXX, 1760) to the collected works of that illustrious society, and also a &quot;Dissertation on the Establishment of the Religion and Empire of Muhammad&quot; (; vol. XXXII, 1761–1763).

After the close of the Seven Years&#x27; War he was sent to search in the archives of Great Britain for documents bearing upon the history of France, more particularly upon that of the French provinces which once belonged to England. This mission (1764–1766) was very fruitful in results: Bréquigny brought back from it copies of about 7000 documents, which are now in the . A useful selection of these documents was published (unfortunately without adequate critical treatment) by Jacques Joseph Champollion-Figeac, under the title &quot;Letters of Kings, Queens and Other Persons of the Courts of France and England, from Louis VII to Henry IV&quot; () (collection of &quot;Unpublished Documents Relating to the History of France&quot; (), 2 vols., 1839, 1847).

Bréquigny himself drew the material for many important studies from the rich mine which he had thus exploited. These were included in the collection of the :
* &quot;Dissertation on the Differences between France and England during the Reign of Charles the Fair&quot; (; vol. XLI)
* &quot;Dissertation on the Life of Mary, Queen of France, Sister of Henry VIII, King of England&quot; (; vol. XLII)
*four &quot;Dissertations to Serve the History of the Town of Calais&quot; (; vols. XLIII and L)
* &quot;Dissertation on the Negotiations Concerning the Marriage Plans of Elizabeth, Queen of England, First with the Duke of Anjou, Then with the Duke of Alençon, Both Brothers of King Charles IX of France&quot; (; vol. I)

This last was read to the Academy on 22 January 1793, the morrow of Louis XVI&#x27;s execution. Meanwhile, Bréquigny had taken part in three great and erudite works.

To the &quot;Chronological Table of Diplomas, Charters, Letters, and Printed Acts Concerning the History of France&quot; () he contributed three volumes in collaboration with Mouchet (1769–1783). Charged with the supervision of a large collection of documents bearing on French history, analogous to Rymer&#x27;s , he published the first volume (&quot;Diplomas, Charters, Letters, and Other Documents Relating to French Affairs, etc.&quot;, in Latin: , 1791). The Revolution interrupted him in his collection of &quot;Dissertations Concerning the History, Sciences, Letters, and Arts of the Chinese&quot; ), begun in 1776 at the instance of the minister Bertin, when fifteen volumes had appeared.

See the note on Bréquigny at the end of vol. I of the &quot;Dissertations of the &quot; (; 1808); the introduction to vol. IV of the &quot;Chronological Table of Diplomas&quot; (1836); Champollion-Figeac&#x27;s preface to the &quot;Letters of Kings and Queens&quot;; the &quot;Committee of Historical Works&quot; (), by X. Charmes, vol. I &quot;passim&quot;; N. Oursel, &quot;New Norman Biography&quot; (; 1886); and the &quot;Catalogue of Manuscripts of the Duchesne and Bréquigny Collections&quot; (; in the Bibliothèque Nationale), by René Poupardin (1905).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3260557" start="0" end="41" title="Louis-Georges de Bréquigny" label="Louis-Georges-Oudard-Feudrix de Bréquigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q333559" start="113" end="130" title="Granville, Manche" label="Granville, Manche"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="134" end="142" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337526" start="677" end="720" title="Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres" label="Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q312603" start="764" end="772" title="Postumus" label="Postumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="930" end="938" title="Islam" label="Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="943" end="949" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="953" end="961" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="1019" end="1040" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1082" end="1095" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q545045" start="1478" end="1511" title="Jacques Joseph Champollion-Figeac" label="Jacques Joseph Champollion-Figeac"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="2006" end="2022" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q588852" start="2078" end="2099" title="Mary Tudor, Queen of France" label="Mary, Queen of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="2330" end="2357" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth, Queen of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="2374" end="2387" title="Henry III of France" label="Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q318380" start="2403" end="2418" title="Francis, Duke of Anjou" label="Duke of Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134309" start="2442" end="2462" title="Charles IX of France" label="Charles IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="2549" end="2558" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q431174" start="2948" end="2953" title="Thomas Rymer" label="Rymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3112" end="3122" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364458" start="3884" end="3898" title="René Poupardin" label="René Poupardin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628840" wikidata="Q4749454" url="?curid=628840" title="Amy Winfrey">
<text>Amy Winfrey (born October 1975) is an American animator, screenwriter, songwriter, director and voice actress. She is best known for creating the web series &quot;Making Fiends&quot; that was later picked up by Nickelodeon in 2008, and for directing several episodes of &quot;BoJack Horseman&quot;, including &quot;The View From Halfway Down&quot; and &quot;Free Churro&quot;, which were each nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program at the 71st and 72nd Primetime Creative Arts Emmys.

==Career==
Winfrey studied animation at UCLA and made a 3D film called &quot;The Bad Plant&quot;, which won her a silver medal at the Student Academy Awards in 2000. While attending school, Winfrey worked as an animator on &quot;South Park&quot; starting with the pilot episode, &#x27;&quot;The Spirit of Christmas: Jesus vs. Santa&quot;&#x27; in 1995. When Comedy Central picked up the series, Winfrey remained part of the animation team and continued to work on the show, pausing her schooling to work on the feature film &quot;South Park Bigger, Longer &amp; Uncut&quot;.

In a UCLA class, Winfrey made a website dedicated to traffic cones. Because of many visitors on the traffic cone website, Winfrey decided to create a series of short web cartoons, and the result was &quot;Muffin Films&quot;. The first was created as a thesis project in 2000 and lasted twelve episodes, one for each muffin in a dozen. The series explored different styles of Flash animation through twelve different shorts, using muffins as the subject of the stories. To celebrate the 10th Anniversary of Muffin Films, Amy Winfrey created six additional cartoons for the series.

In 2001&quot;,&quot; Winfrey created another web series, &quot;Big Bunny.&quot; Winfrey provided all of the voice acting, except for the eponymous character who is voiced by her husband, Peter Merryman. Winfrey pitched it as a series for NBC and Fox in 2002, but neither picked it up.

In 2008, Winfrey started &quot;Squid and Frog&quot;, short cartoons about a red squid and an orange frog, who sing about various things, such as that you can&#x27;t learn surgery from television.

On 6 October 2018, Winfrey released a web cartoon called &quot;Hooray For Hell&quot;, co-created by Peter Merryman. The series is about a girl who wakes up in Hell after voting for president and gets a ticket to Heaven. There are three episodes available on YouTube. They can be found by clicking the link in the description of the trailer on Winfrey&#x27;s main channel. After a hiatus, the show&#x27;s final two episodes were uploaded on May 27, 2020.

=== &quot;Making Fiends&quot; ===

Winfrey created &quot;Making Fiends&quot; in 2003 as a web cartoon. The series has 21 episodes created between 2003 and 2005. Winfrey voiced several characters, including Charlotte. Winfrey was able to produce web animation full time after she began selling merchandise of her characters online. Nickelodeon contacted Winfrey in early 2004 about bringing &quot;Making Fiends&quot; on TV. The series only had one season, airing from October 4 to November 1, 2008, on the secondary channel Nicktoons Network. Viacom, now Paramount Global, retained the rights to the property after the series was canceled. Despite the limited run, the series was named &quot;Best Television Series&quot; at Annecy International Animation Film Festival in 2008.

===Recent work===
For a five-year period between 2014 and 2019, Winfrey worked as director on all six seasons of the Netflix animated series &quot;BoJack Horseman,&quot; typically working on three episodes per season, including some of the series&#x27; most notable episodes, Zoës and Zeldas, Brand New Couch, Hank After Dark, Thoughts and Prayers, Ruthie, Free Churro, The New Client, and the show&#x27;s penultimate episode, &#x27;The View From Halfway Down.&#x27; She was nominated twice for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program by the Academy of Television Arts &amp; Sciences for &quot;Free Churro&quot; and &quot;The View From Halfway Down&quot;. She also worked on the second season of &#x27;Greatest Party Story Ever&#x27;, an animated episode of &quot;Adam Ruins Everything,&quot; the first season of &quot;Tuca &amp; Bertie&quot;. She used to be a supervising producer on &quot;Velma&quot; before it was cancelled.

== Personal life ==
Winfrey resides in Los Angeles, California with her husband, Peter Merryman. She has also been an educator teaching animation at the UCLA Animation Workshop.

==Web series==

=== &quot;Muffin Films&quot; ===
Episode list
=== &quot;Big Bunny (2001)&quot; ===
Episode list
== Filmography ==
=== Television ===
=== Film ===
=== Short Film ===
=== Other Works ===
==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*&quot;Muffin Films&quot;
*&quot;Big Bunny&quot;
*&quot;Making Fiends&quot;
*&quot;Squid and Frog&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4749454" start="0" end="11" title="Amy Winfrey" label="Amy Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q266569" start="47" end="55" title="animator" label="animator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="57" end="69" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161258" start="163" end="176" title="Making Fiends (web series)" label="Making Fiends"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739587" start="198" end="222" title="Making Fiends (TV series)" label="picked up by Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17733404" start="276" end="291" title="BoJack Horseman" label="BoJack Horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q85808760" start="315" end="341" title="The View From Halfway Down" label="The View From Halfway Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q65061145" start="358" end="369" title="Free Churro" label="Free Churro"/>
<link wikidata="Q337926" start="409" end="462" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q67646363" start="470" end="474" title="71st Primetime Creative Arts Emmys" label="71st"/>
<link wikidata="Q97860748" start="479" end="513" title="72nd Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards" label="72nd Primetime Creative Arts Emmys"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="556" end="560" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="572" end="579" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D film"/>
<link wikidata="Q375039" start="650" end="672" title="Student Academy Awards" label="Student Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="745" end="755" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q278560" start="801" end="853" title="The Spirit of Christmas (short films)" label="&amp;quot;The Spirit of Christmas: Jesus vs. Santa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="874" end="888" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1046" end="1083" title="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut" label="South Park Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1911" end="1914" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="1919" end="1922" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="2414" end="2421" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161258" start="2668" end="2681" title="Making Fiends (web series)" label="Making Fiends"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589090" start="2817" end="2826" title="Charlotte (Making Fiends)" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="2942" end="2953" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739587" start="3001" end="3032" title="Making Fiends (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Making Fiends&amp;quot; on TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="3153" end="3159" title="Viacom (2005–2019)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="3165" end="3181" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408677" start="3334" end="3378" title="Annecy International Animation Film Festival" label="Annecy International Animation Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="3506" end="3513" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17733404" start="3536" end="3551" title="BoJack Horseman" label="BoJack Horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953048" start="3665" end="3680" title="Zoës and Zeldas" label="Zoës and Zeldas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084155" start="3682" end="3697" title="Brand New Couch" label="Brand New Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084946" start="3699" end="3714" title="Hank After Dark" label="Hank After Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085239" start="3716" end="3736" title="Thoughts and Prayers (BoJack Horseman)" label="Thoughts and Prayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085246" start="3738" end="3744" title="Ruthie (BoJack Horseman)" label="Ruthie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65061145" start="3746" end="3757" title="Free Churro" label="Free Churro"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807982" start="3759" end="3773" title="The New Client" label="The New Client"/>
<link wikidata="Q85808760" start="3822" end="3848" title="The View From Halfway Down" label="The View From Halfway Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q337926" start="3888" end="3941" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q427611" start="3949" end="3990" title="Academy of Television Arts &amp;amp; Sciences" label="Academy of Television Arts &amp;amp; Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674140" start="4109" end="4134" title="Greatest Party Story Ever" label="Greatest Party Story Ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065419" start="4171" end="4192" title="Adam Ruins Everything" label="Adam Ruins Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958428" start="4226" end="4243" title="Tuca &amp;amp; Bertie" label="Tuca &amp;amp; Bertie"/>
<link wikidata="Q114496061" start="4298" end="4303" title="Velma (TV series)" label="Velma"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4375" end="4398" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628842" wikidata="Q117683" url="?curid=628842" title="Hugh I, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Hugh I (1057 – August 29, 1093) was duke of Burgundy between 1076 and 1079. Hugh was son of Henry of Burgundy and grandson of Duke Robert I. He inherited Burgundy from his grandfather, following the premature death of Henry, but abdicated shortly afterwards to his brother Eudes I, in order to become a monk at Cluny. He briefly fought the Moors in the Iberian Peninsula with Sancho of Aragón. 

His entry to Cluny in 1079, after sustaining injuries in battle, and at the same time as Guy, count of Macon and Guigues II, count of Albon, drew criticism from the pope Gregory VII. Gregory thought he had not made sure the duchy was at peace, and was thus endangering the lives of many christians. He took vows as a monk and later became prior of the Benedictine Abbey of Cluny. 

==See also==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117683" start="0" end="6" title="Hugh I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh I"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="36" end="52" title="duke of Burgundy" label="duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351549" start="92" end="109" title="Henry, son of Robert I of Burgundy" label="Henry of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q346934" start="131" end="139" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q544125" start="273" end="280" title="Eudes I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Eudes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192982" start="311" end="316" title="Cluny" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="340" end="345" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="353" end="370" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q344802" start="376" end="392" title="Sancho of Aragón" label="Sancho of Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="566" end="577" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="748" end="759" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="760" end="774" title="Cluny Abbey" label="Abbey of Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="792" end="821" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628843" wikidata="Q263583" url="?curid=628843" title="House on Haunted Hill">
<text>House on Haunted Hill is a 1959 American horror film produced and directed by William Castle, written by Robb White and starring Vincent Price, Carol Ohmart, Richard Long, Alan Marshal, Carolyn Craig, and Elisha Cook Jr. Price plays an eccentric millionaire, Frederick Loren, who, along with his wife Annabelle, has invited five people to the house for a &quot;haunted house&quot; party. Whoever stays in the house for one night will earn $10,000. As the night progresses, the guests are trapped within the house with an assortment of terrors. This film is perhaps best known for its promotional gimmick Emergo.

The film uses many props used in carnival haunted houses to generate fear and terror. The film is in the public domain.

==Plot==
Millonaire Frederick Loren invites five people to a party he is throwing for his fourth wife, Annabelle, in an allegedly haunted house he has rented. He promises to give each guest $10,000 with the stipulation that they stay the entire night in the house after the doors are locked at midnight, all the windows are barred, and there are no phones or radios to use. The guests are test pilot Lance Schroeder; newspaper columnist Ruth Bridges; psychiatrist Dr. David Trent; Nora Manning, who works for one of Loren&#x27;s companies; and the house&#x27;s owner, Watson Pritchard. All are strangers to both the Lorens and each other.

The Lorens have a tense relationship. Frederick is convinced that Annabelle tried to poison him to acquire his wealth, which Annabelle denies, attributing his suspicions to paranoia and jealousy. Watson believes that the house is genuinely haunted by the ghosts of those murdered there, including his own brother; he claims to have spent one night there before and &quot;was almost dead&quot; when found the next morning. He gives a tour of the house, including a vat of acid in the basement, which a previous resident used to kill his wife. When Lance and Nora remain behind to further explore the basement, Lance is locked in an empty room and struck on the head, while a ghost confronts Nora.

Annabelle privately warns Lance that her husband is scheming something and that she suspects him of murdering his second and third wives after his first wife disappeared. The guests learn the party&#x27;s rules downstairs, and each is given a gun for protection. Having encountered further apparitions, Nora decides against staying the night, but the caretakers lock the doors five minutes early, taking that option out of the guests&#x27; hands.

Hearing a scream, Lance and David find Annabelle&#x27;s corpse, suspended to suggest that she hanged herself. However, the absence of a perch immediately arouses suspicions of murder. Nora confronts Lance and tells him that an unseen assailant strangled her and left her for dead. In light of Annabelle&#x27;s warnings, they both suspect Frederick. He tells her to remain out of sight so that her attacker will still think that she is dead. Lance and David propose that everyone stay in their rooms and shoot anyone who enters to survive the night. Thus the innocents will have no reason to leave their rooms and the killer must stay put or admit guilt.

Nora is chased from her room into the basement by Annabelle&#x27;s ghost. Aroused by the ghostly sounds, David concludes that the killer is about and proposes that he and Frederick split up to search the house. Lance uncovers a secret room at the end of the second-floor hall, but the door shuts behind him once he enters, trapping him. David instead meets with Annabelle, who faked her death using a hanging harness and sedatives. Secretly lovers, the two of them have orchestrated the various mishaps to manipulate Nora into killing Frederick. Nora, seeing Frederick enter the basement with a gun in his hand, shoots him. After she flees, David slips in to dispose of Frederick&#x27;s body in the vat of acid, and the lights go out.

Annabelle walks to the basement to confirm that her husband is dead. A skeleton rises from the acid, accuses her in Frederick&#x27;s voice, and shoves her into the vat. Frederick emerges from the shadows, holding the puppeteer control unit that he used to manipulate the skeleton and revealing that he had known their plot all along.

After Nora, Watson, and Ruth release Lance from the secret room, Nora admits that she shot Frederick. When they arrive in the cellar, Frederick explains that he loaded her gun with blanks, that his wife and David plotted to kill him, and that they both died in the vat of acid. He says that he is ready for justice to decide if he is innocent or guilty. Watson remains convinced that the house is haunted, with David and Annabelle now added to its ranks of ghosts, and that he will be the next victim.

==Cast==
* Vincent Price as Frederick Loren
* Carol Ohmart as Annabelle Loren
* Richard Long as Lance Schroeder
* Alan Marshal as Dr. David Trent
* Carolyn Craig as Nora Manning
* Elisha Cook Jr. as Watson Pritchard (credited as Elisha Cook)
* Julie Mitchum as Ruth Bridgers
* Leona Anderson as Mrs. Slydes
* Howard Hoffman as Jonas Slydes

==Production==

Exterior shots of the house were filmed at the historic Ennis House in Los Feliz, California, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright and built in 1924. The bulk of the film was shot on sound stages, depicting the interior of the house in a combination of styles, including 1890s Victorian, with gas chandeliers and sconces. The poster for the film included an illustration of a house in yet a third style, that of a fanciful four-story Romanesque structure.

The theatrical trailer promoted the film as &quot;The House on Haunted Hill&quot;, although all advertising material and the title on the film itself were simply titled &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot;.

The film is perhaps best known for a promotional gimmick used in the film&#x27;s original theatrical release called &quot;Emergo&quot;. In some theaters that showed the film, exhibitors rigged an elaborate pulley system near the theater screen which allowed a plastic skeleton to be flown over the audience during a corresponding scene late in the film. (Several modern repertory cinemas including the Film Forum, Loew&#x27;s Jersey Theatre, and Music Box Theatre (Chicago) have hosted revival screenings of the film during which the &quot;Emergo&quot; gimmick has been recreated.)

It was reported that Carol Ohmart was supposed to record the theme in the opening credits, but the idea was scrapped.

==Release==
&quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; was originally released theatrically by Allied Artists. &quot;In the theatre,&quot; recalled Aerosmith&#x27;s Steven Tyler, &quot;they had a wire and a ghost came down and made everybody jump out of their seats. The girl you were with screamed, you screamed, and then, you know, everybody went home happy.&quot;

Thanks in part to Castle&#x27;s gimmickry, the film was a huge success. Alfred Hitchcock took notice of the low-budget film&#x27;s performance at the box office and made his own low-budget horror film, which became the critically acclaimed hit &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960). Castle was himself a Hitchcock fan and tried to imitate Hitchcock&#x27;s work in his later films such as &quot;Homicidal&quot; (1961).

Lorimar Productions released the film on VHS cassette on CBS/Fox Video&#x27;s Key Video in October 1985. Two major studios have released it on home video in remastered versions. Warner Home Video released the film on DVD as a tie-in to the release of the 1999 remake. In 2005, the film was colorized by Legend Films. The color version was released on DVD the same year by 20th Century Fox. Extras prepared by Legend Films for the Fox DVD release included an audio commentary track by comedian Michael J. Nelson of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot;, two versions of the trailer, and a slideshow of images from the film&#x27;s original press book.

Johnny Legend released a 50th anniversary DVD containing many extras such as both the original theatrical trailer and TV spots plus several William Castle and Vincent Price theatrical trailers, a Carol Ohmart profile and &quot;golden age&quot; TV shows starring Vincent Price. A DivX file of the colorized version with the commentary embedded is available as part of Nelson&#x27;s RiffTrax On Demand service. In 2009, a newly recorded commentary by Nelson, Kevin Murphy and Bill Corbett was released by RiffTrax. The RiffTrax team performed a Live RiffTrax of &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; on 28 October 2010.

&quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; was released in a restored Blu-ray edition as part of Shout! Factory&#x27;s 2014 &quot;Vincent Price Collection II&quot;.

On 28 September 2011, the estate of William Castle released an annotated screenplay from &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; which is a copy of the shooting script along with Castle&#x27;s &quot;margin notes&quot; and the leather-bound style Castle used for his shooting script. This edition includes introductions from Joe Dante and Castle&#x27;s daughter Terry. It also features its own version of &quot;Emergo&quot; in which the skeleton appears to readers via a &quot;flip page&quot; method. Mondo Media re-released the film 2015 as part of his Mondo X Chiller series on 28 March 2015 in the Alamo Drafthouse in Yonkers, New York.

==Reception and legacy==
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has received a &quot;fresh&quot; 80% rating based on 43 retrospective reviews, with an average rating of 7.20/10. Allmovie has praised the film retrospectively, writing, &quot;Campy and creepy in equal measures, &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; deserves its status as a horror classic.&quot;

The film was also spoofed by RiffTrax on February 9, 2009 and again live in Nashville which was released on DVD on May 16, 2011 (the latter also featured two shorts: &quot;Magical Disappearing Money&quot; and &quot;Paper and I&quot;).

==Remakes==
The film was remade as the 1999 film &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot;, which had a 2007 sequel titled &quot;Return to House on Haunted Hill&quot;. The 1999 film was released to negative reviews but was a box office success, while the 2007 sequel was direct-to-video and widely panned.

As of 2017, another remake is in development along with a prequel to the original film, with the latter being written by Castle&#x27;s daughter Terry Castle.

==See also==
* List of American films of 1959
* List of ghost films

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; at AllMovie
* &quot;House on Haunted Hill&quot; on VincentPrice.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="41" end="52" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q934087" start="78" end="92" title="William Castle" label="William Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340803" start="105" end="115" title="Robb White" label="Robb White"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="129" end="142" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044492" start="144" end="156" title="Carol Ohmart" label="Carol Ohmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q339593" start="158" end="170" title="Richard Long (actor)" label="Richard Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830551" start="172" end="184" title="Alan Marshal (actor)" label="Alan Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251151" start="186" end="199" title="Carolyn Craig" label="Carolyn Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330714" start="205" end="220" title="Elisha Cook Jr." label="Elisha Cook Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6926874" start="604" end="610" title="Movie gimmick" label="Emergo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="718" end="731" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q545599" start="864" end="877" title="haunted house" label="haunted house"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="1629" end="1634" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883956" start="2613" end="2627" title="Suicide by hanging" label="hanged herself"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="4759" end="4772" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044492" start="4794" end="4806" title="Carol Ohmart" label="Carol Ohmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q339593" start="4828" end="4840" title="Richard Long (actor)" label="Richard Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830551" start="4862" end="4874" title="Alan Marshal (actor)" label="Alan Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251151" start="4896" end="4909" title="Carolyn Craig" label="Carolyn Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330714" start="4928" end="4943" title="Elisha Cook Jr." label="Elisha Cook Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3189245" start="4992" end="5005" title="Julie Mitchum" label="Julie Mitchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19559954" start="5025" end="5039" title="Leona Anderson" label="Leona Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q578184" start="5161" end="5172" title="Ennis House" label="Ennis House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682727" start="5176" end="5197" title="Los Feliz, California" label="Los Feliz, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="5211" end="5229" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="5376" end="5385" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="5533" end="5553" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="5560" end="5578" title="film trailer" label="theatrical trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448940" start="6163" end="6173" title="Film Forum" label="Film Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666598" start="6175" end="6201" title="Loew&amp;#x27;s Jersey Theatre" label="Loew&amp;#x27;s Jersey Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941454" start="6207" end="6234" title="Music Box Theatre (Chicago)" label="Music Box Theatre (Chicago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756484" start="6549" end="6563" title="Allied Artists Pictures Corporation" label="Allied Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="6602" end="6611" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="6619" end="6631" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="6894" end="6910" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="7072" end="7078" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456124" start="7204" end="7213" title="Homicidal" label="Homicidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152955" start="7229" end="7248" title="Lorimar Productions" label="Lorimar Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="7270" end="7273" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="7286" end="7299" title="CBS/Fox Video" label="CBS/Fox Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="7307" end="7316" title="Key Video" label="Key Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="7407" end="7424" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="7446" end="7449" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057264" start="7484" end="7495" title="House on Haunted Hill (1999)" label="1999 remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634411" start="7519" end="7528" title="Film colorization" label="colorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517735" start="7532" end="7544" title="Legend Films" label="Legend Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="7601" end="7617" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="7687" end="7703" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q674380" start="7722" end="7739" title="Michael J. Nelson" label="Michael J. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="7749" end="7777" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944117" start="7883" end="7896" title="Johnny Legend" label="Johnny Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q934087" start="8023" end="8037" title="William Castle" label="William Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044492" start="8079" end="8091" title="Carol Ohmart" label="Carol Ohmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q202519" start="8162" end="8166" title="DivX" label="DivX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="8264" end="8282" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax On Demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594562" start="8340" end="8352" title="Kevin Murphy (actor)" label="Kevin Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q691500" start="8357" end="8369" title="Bill Corbett" label="Bill Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="8559" end="8566" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="8586" end="8600" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q455279" start="8973" end="8982" title="Joe Dante" label="Joe Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270595" start="9149" end="9160" title="Mondo Media" label="Mondo Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705954" start="9249" end="9265" title="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema" label="Alamo Drafthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128114" start="9269" end="9286" title="Yonkers, New York" label="Yonkers, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="9317" end="9332" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q477809" start="9456" end="9464" title="Allmovie" label="Allmovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="9665" end="9673" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="9712" end="9721" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057264" start="9927" end="9948" title="House on Haunted Hill (1999 film)" label="House on Haunted Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316883" start="9993" end="10024" title="Return to House on Haunted Hill" label="Return to House on Haunted Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248215" start="10345" end="10375" title="List of American films of 1959" label="List of American films of 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109823" start="10378" end="10397" title="List of ghost films" label="List of ghost films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628846" wikidata="Q544125" url="?curid=628846" title="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Odo I ( 1060 – 1101/2 Tarsus), also known as Eudes, surnamed Borel and called &quot;the Red&quot;, was duke of Burgundy between 1079 and 1102. Odo was the second son of Henry of Burgundy and grandson of Robert I. He became the duke following the abdication of his older brother, Hugh I, who retired to become a Benedictine monk at Cluny.

He participated in the French expedition to the Iberian peninsula, started after the Battle of Sagrajas and ending with little accomplished in the failed Siege of Tudela in 1087. Later, he participated in the Crusade of 1101, where he died, while in Asia Minor, in 1101/2.

In a charter from his expedition to the Iberian peninsula, he admitted he had withheld property belonging to the abbey of Saint-Philibert de Tournus, an abbey patronized by his aunt Constance, wife of Alfonso VI of León and Castile. In 1101, when leaving on crusade, he made a gift and a will in favor of the abbey of Molesme. Also when leaving on crusade, he signed a charter of renunciation at St. Beningne de Dijon and another at the priory of Gevrey-Chambertin.

An incident is reported of Odo by an eyewitness, Eadmer, biographer of Anselm of Canterbury. While Saint Anselm was progressing through Odo&#x27;s territory on his way to Rome in 1097, the bandit, expecting great treasure in the archbishop&#x27;s retinue, prepared to ambush and loot it. Coming upon the prelate&#x27;s train, the duke asked for the archbishop, whom they had not found. Anselm promptly came forward and took the duke by surprise, saying &quot;My lord duke, suffer me to embrace thee.&quot; The flabbergasted duke immediately allowed the bishop to embrace him and offered himself as Anselm&#x27;s humble servant.

==Family==

Odo married Sibylla of Burgundy, daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy. They had:
*Helie of Burgundy 1080–1141, wife of Bertrand of Toulouse and William III of Ponthieu
*Florine of Burgundy 1083–1097, wife of Sweyn the Crusader, prince of Denmark
*Hugh II of Burgundy 1084–1143
*Henry 1087–1125, a priest

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*Gwatkin, H.M., Whitney, J.P. (ed) &quot;The Cambridge Medieval History: Volume II—The Rise of the Saracens and the Foundations of the Western Empire&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 1926.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q544125" start="0" end="5" title="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="22" end="28" title="Tarsus, Mersin" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544125" start="45" end="50" title="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Eudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q544125" start="61" end="66" title="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Borel"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="103" end="119" title="duke of Burgundy" label="duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351549" start="169" end="186" title="Henry, son of Robert I of Burgundy" label="Henry of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q346934" start="203" end="211" title="Robert I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="311" end="322" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192982" start="331" end="336" title="Cluny" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q392538" start="424" end="442" title="Battle of Sagrajas" label="Battle of Sagrajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210269" start="493" end="508" title="Siege of Tudela" label="Siege of Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q51653" start="548" end="563" title="Crusade of 1101" label="Crusade of 1101"/>
<link wikidata="Q456181" start="735" end="761" title="Saint-Philibert de Tournus" label="Saint-Philibert de Tournus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745448" start="795" end="804" title="Constance of Burgundy" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q235080" start="814" end="844" title="Alfonso VI of León and Castile" label="Alfonso VI of León and Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q334044" start="922" end="938" title="Molesme Abbey" label="abbey of Molesme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711691" start="1009" end="1030" title="Dijon Cathedral" label="St. Beningne de Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969321" start="1050" end="1077" title="Château de Gevrey-Chambertin" label="priory of Gevrey-Chambertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q725614" start="1129" end="1135" title="Eadmer" label="Eadmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="1151" end="1171" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Anselm of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069992" start="1733" end="1752" title="Sybilla of Burgundy" label="Sibylla of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q519641" start="1766" end="1794" title="William I, Count of Burgundy" label="William I, Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144886" start="1807" end="1824" title="Helie of Burgundy" label="Helie of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q547970" start="1844" end="1864" title="Bertrand of Toulouse" label="Bertrand of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394358" start="1869" end="1892" title="William III of Ponthieu" label="William III of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q574943" start="1894" end="1913" title="Florine of Burgundy" label="Florine of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498722" start="1933" end="1951" title="Sweyn the Crusader" label="Sweyn the Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q530661" start="1972" end="1991" title="Hugh II of Burgundy" label="Hugh II of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497791" start="2070" end="2083" title="H. M. Gwatkin" label="Gwatkin, H.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="2226" end="2252" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628848" wikidata="Q530661" url="?curid=628848" title="Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Hugh II (1084 – 6 February 1143) was Duke of Burgundy between 1103 and 1143. Hugh was son of Odo I, Duke of Burgundy. Hugh was selected &quot;custos&quot; for the monastery of St. Benigne, and this office would be held by his descendants until the end of the twelfth century.

In 1124, Hugh and his brother-in-law, William III, Count of Ponthieu, dispatched forces to Reims to support their overlord, King Louis VI of France, in his conflict with Emperor Henry V.

==Marriage and issue==
In c.1115, Hugh married Matilda of Mayenne, daughter of Walter, Count of Mayenne and Adelina de Presles.

They had the following:
* Aigeline (b.1116), married Hugh I, Count of Vaudemont
* Clemence (b.1117), married Geoffrey III of Donzy
* Odo II, Duke of Burgundy, (1118–1162) married Maria of Champagne
* Gauthier, Archbishop of Besançon (1120–1180)
* Hugh le Roux (1121–1171) married Isabel of Chalon
* Robert, Bishop of Autun (1122–1140)
* Henry, Bishop of Autun (1124–1170)
* Raymond, Count of Grignon (1125–1156) married Agnes of Montpensier
* Sibylla (1126–1150), married Roger II of Sicily
* Ducissa (b.1128), married Raymond de Grancy
* Matilda (1130–1159), married William VII of Montpellier
* Aremburge (b.1132), Nun

==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==See also==
* Dukes of Burgundy family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q530661" start="0" end="7" title="Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="37" end="53" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q544125" start="93" end="116" title="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo I, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394358" start="315" end="345" title="William III, Count of Ponthieu" label="William III, Count of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="368" end="373" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q165883" start="406" end="424" title="Louis VI of France" label="Louis VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="447" end="462" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q536101" start="727" end="751" title="Odo II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo II, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="841" end="853" title="Hugh le Roux" label="Hugh le Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q269917" start="1037" end="1044" title="Sibylla of Burgundy" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="1066" end="1084" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226820" start="1162" end="1188" title="William VII of Montpellier" label="William VII of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1263" end="1292" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628849" wikidata="Q536101" url="?curid=628849" title="Odo II, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Odo II (1118 – 27 June (or 27 September) 1162) was Duke of Burgundy between 1143 and 1162.

== Family ==
Odo was the eldest son of Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy and Matilda of Mayenne, daughter of Gauthier, Count of Mayenne and Adelina de Presles. Odo married Marie, daughter of Theobald II, Count of Champagne and Matilda of Carinthia. 

Odo and Marie had:
* Alix (1146–1192), married in 1164 to Archambaud (died 1169), son of Archambaud VII (died 1171), Lord of Bourbon and had one daughter, Mathilde
*Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy, his successor in the duchy
* Mahaut (died 1202), married Robert IV, Count of Auvergne

==References==
==Sources==
*
*95

|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q536101" start="0" end="6" title="Odo II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="51" end="67" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q530661" start="131" end="156" title="Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361369" start="275" end="306" title="Theobald II, Count of Champagne" label="Theobald II, Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q434632" start="311" end="331" title="Matilda of Carinthia" label="Matilda of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="424" end="438" title="Archambaud VII de Bourbon" label="Archambaud VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148154" start="452" end="467" title="Sire de Bourbon" label="Lord of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q448433" start="490" end="498" title="Mathilde of Bourbon" label="Mathilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q464908" start="500" end="526" title="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="585" end="613" title="Robert IV, Count of Auvergne" label="Robert IV, Count of Auvergne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628852" wikidata="Q1113673" url="?curid=628852" title="Combined Chiefs of Staff">
<text>The Combined Chiefs of Staff (CCS) was the supreme military staff for the United States and Britain during World War II. It set all the major policy decisions for the two nations, subject to the approvals of British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

==History==
It emerged from the meetings of the Arcadia Conference in Washington, from December 22, 1941, to January 14, 1942. Shortly after Pearl Harbor, Prime Minister Churchill and his senior military staff used Arcadia as an opportunity to lay out the general strategy for the war. The American Army Chief of Staff George Marshall came up with the idea of a combined board, and sold it to Roosevelt and together the two sold the idea to Churchill. Churchill&#x27;s military aides were much less favorable, and General Alan Brooke, the chief of the British Armed Forces, was strongly opposed. Brooke believed that if the Western Allies were placed under international unified commands the United States would become dominant, and also feared that the situation of the CCS in Washington D.C. would leave Britain unable to initiate military policy. However, Brooke was left behind in London to handle the daily details of running the British war effort, and was not consulted. Charles de Gaulle requested Free French representation on the committee but was declined along with the other Western Allies.

As part of Marshall&#x27;s plan, Roosevelt also set up a Joint Chiefs of Staff on the American side. The combined board was permanently stationed at the United States Public Health Service Building in Washington, where Field Marshal John Dill represented the British half. The CCS was constituted from the British Chiefs of Staff Committee and the American Joint Chiefs of Staff, The American unit was created in part to present a common front to the British Chiefs of Staff. It held its first formal meeting on 9 February 1942 to coordinate U.S. military operations between War and Navy Departments.

The CCS charter was approved by President Roosevelt 21 April 1942. The American members of the CCS were General George C. Marshall, the United States Army chief of staff, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Harold R. Stark (replaced early in 1942 by Admiral Ernest J. King); and the Chief (later Commanding General) of the Army Air Forces, Lt. Gen. Henry H. Arnold. In July 1942 a fourth member was added, the President&#x27;s personal Chief of Staff, Admiral William D. Leahy, who chaired the US Joint Chiefs of Staff.

On the British side the Chiefs of Staff only normally attended during the heads of states&#x27; conferences. Instead the British Joint Staff Mission was permanently situated in Washington, D.C. to represent British interests. The British members were a representative of the prime minister, in his capacity as Minister of Defence, and the Chiefs of Staff Committee, which consisted of the First Sea Lord, the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, and the Chief of the Air Staff, or the Washington representative of each. The representative of the Prime Minister was Field Marshal Sir John Dill and after his death Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson. The Washington representatives of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, who normally met with the United States members in place of their principals, were the senior officers from their respective services on the British Joint Staff Mission in Washington. In the course of the war, the First Sea Lord was represented by Admiral Sir Charles Little, Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham, Admiral Sir Percy Noble, and Admiral Sir James Somerville; the Chief of the Imperial General Staff was represented by Lt. Gen. Sir Colville Wemyss and Lt. Gen. G. N. Macready; and the Chief of the Air Staff was represented by Air Marshal D. C. S. Evill, Air Marshal Sir William L. Welsh, and Air Marshal Douglas Colyer. Dill, a close friend of Marshall, often took the American position and prevented polarizations that would undermine effectiveness.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff organization included the Combined Secretariat and a number of committees.

In the spring of 1942, Britain and the United States agreed on a worldwide division of strategic responsibility. On 24 March 1942, the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff were designated as primarily responsible for the war in the Pacific, and the British Chiefs for the Middle East-Indian Ocean region, while the European-Mediterranean-Atlantic area would be a combined responsibility of both staffs. China was designated a separate theater commanded by its chief of state, Chiang Kai-shek, though within the United States&#x27; sphere of responsibility. Six days later the Joint Chiefs of Staff divided the Pacific theater into three areas: the Pacific Ocean Areas (POA), the South West Pacific Area (SWPA), and the Southeast Pacific Area. The Pacific Ocean Area command formally became operational on 8 May.

The CCS usually held its meetings in Washington. The full CCS usually met only during the great wartime conferences on grand strategy, such as at Casablanca (see List of Allied World War II conferences). The meetings of heads of government at those conferences were designed to reach formal agreement on issues thoroughly staffed by the CCS. At the Casablanca Conference in January 1943, General Frank Maxwell Andrews was appointed commander of all United States forces in the European Theater of Operations.

Although it was responsible to both the British and American governments, the CCS controlled forces from many different countries in all theaters, including the Pacific, India and North Africa. Representatives of allied nations were not members of the CCS but accepted procedure included consultation with &quot;Military Representatives of Associated Powers&quot; on strategic issues; see Pacific War Council.

The end of the war left the status of the CCS uncertain. Although Marshall and some American military leaders favored retaining it or a similar organization, the majority of the American public and government favored abandoning the bilateral Anglo-American command structure in favor of either multilateral pacts such as the United Nations or a return to United States non-interventionism. Many Americans also disapproved of British imperialism. However, support for closer bilateral military integration rose due to the beginning of the Cold War, including the exposure of Soviet espionage in the United States.

Much cooperation continued between the British and American militaries after the war including the Combined Chiefs of Staff structure, and it was used again during the Berlin Blockade of 1948. At the same time other major Western European countries increased their demands for representation in the CCS, as they all would all require American assistance in the event of a Soviet Armed Forces offensive into Western Europe. The formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which had a multilateral unified command between Anglo-America and Western Europe, eliminated the need for the CCS. The British government agreed to the dissolution of the CCS in exchange for closer cooperation with the United States Department of Defense in 1949.

==Present day==
Both the US Joint Chiefs of Staff and the UK&#x27;s Chiefs of Staff Committee met as a &quot;Combined Chiefs of Staff Committee&quot; around March 2013, the first time since their World War II meetings. This was held in Washington DC. Subsequent meetings were held in London 2014 and in the National Defense University, May 2015.

==See also==
* United Kingdom-United States relations in World War II

==References==
==Further reading==
* Adams, Henry H. &quot;Witness to Power: The Life of Fleet Admiral William D. Leahy&quot; (1985) 
* Bercuson, David, and Holger Herwig. &quot;One Christmas in Washington: Roosevelt and Churchill Forge the Grand Alliance&quot; (2005)
* Butler, J.R.M. et al. &quot;Grand Strategy. Volume II. September 1939 – June 1941 &quot; (London: HMSO, 1976), official British history
* Cline, Ray S. &quot;Washington Command Post: The Operations Division&quot; Vol. 4. Office of the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army, 1951.
* Danchev, Alex. &quot;Being Friends: The Combined Chiefs of Staff and the Making of Allied Strategy in the Second World War&quot; (1992)
* Davis, Vernon E. &quot;The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in World War II: Organizational Development&quot; (Historical Section, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1953)
* Freuding, Christian. &quot;Organising for War: Strategic Culture and the Organisation of High Command in Britain and Germany, 1850–1945: A Comparative Perspective.&quot; &quot;Defence Studies&quot; (2010) 10#3 pp: 431–460.
* Jackson, William Godfrey Fothergill. &quot;The chiefs: the story of the United Kingdom chiefs of staff&quot; (Potomac Books Inc, 1992), 504pp; includes postwar
* Jordan, Jonathan W., &quot;American Warlords: How Roosevelt&#x27;s High Command Led America to Victory in World War II&quot; (NAL/Caliber 2015). 
* Leahy, William D. &quot;I Was There: the Personal Story of the Chief of Staff to Presidents Roosevelt and Truman, based on his notes and diaries made at the time&quot; (Whittlesey House, 1950)
* Matloff, Maurice and Edwin M. Snell. &quot;Strategic planning for coalition warfare, 1941–1942&quot; (United States Army in World War II: The War Department; &quot;Green Books&quot;&quot; series)) (1953) Kindle edition
* Matloff, Maurice. &quot;Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare 1943–1945&quot; (US Army Green Book) (1951) Kindle edition
* Rice, Anthony J. &quot;Command and control: the essence of coalition warfare.&quot; &quot;Parameters&quot; (1997) v 27 pp: 152–167.
* Rigby, David. &quot;Allied Master Strategists: The Combined Chiefs of Staff in World War II&quot; (2012) excerpt and text search; online review
* Roberts, Andrew. &quot;Masters and Commanders: How Four Titans Won the War in the West, 1941–1945&quot; (2009), covers the interactions of Roosevelt, Churchill, Marshall, and Brooke.
* Rosen, S. McKee. &quot;The combined boards of the Second World War: An experiment in international administration&quot; (Columbia University Press, 1951)

==External links==
*United States Army in World War II – The War Department – Washington Command Post: The Operations Division; Chapter VI. Organizing The High Command For World War II &quot;Development of the Joint and Combined Chiefs of Staff System&quot; 
*Conference Proceedings of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, 1941–1945, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1113673" start="4" end="28" title="Combined Chiefs of Staff" label="Combined Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113673" start="30" end="33" title="Combined Chiefs of Staff" label="CCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="51" end="65" title="military staff" label="military staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="74" end="87" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="92" end="99" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="107" end="119" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="231" end="248" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="268" end="289" title="Franklin D Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q631382" start="340" end="358" title="Arcadia Conference" label="Arcadia Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="611" end="626" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="814" end="825" title="Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Alan Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="844" end="864" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1070" end="1085" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="1270" end="1287" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="1298" end="1309" title="Free France" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="1454" end="1475" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875918" start="1550" end="1594" title="United States Public Health Service Building" label="United States Public Health Service Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q727175" start="1630" end="1639" title="John Dill" label="John Dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="1754" end="1775" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077288" start="1848" end="1871" title="Chiefs of Staff Committee" label="British Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="2103" end="2110" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="2111" end="2129" title="George C. Marshall" label="George C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2135" end="2153" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q700730" start="2209" end="2224" title="Harold R. Stark" label="Harold R. Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q366731" start="2260" end="2274" title="Ernest J. King" label="Ernest J. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="2351" end="2366" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="Henry H. Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q729082" start="2462" end="2478" title="William D. Leahy" label="William D. Leahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="2798" end="2812" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="2833" end="2852" title="Minister of Defence" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="2912" end="2926" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="2932" end="2967" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="2977" end="2999" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="3088" end="3101" title="Field Marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q727175" start="3106" end="3115" title="John Dill" label="John Dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q280748" start="3154" end="3175" title="Henry Maitland Wilson" label="Henry Maitland Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080277" start="3502" end="3516" title="Charles Little (Royal Navy officer)" label="Charles Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q39940" start="3530" end="3547" title="Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope" label="Andrew Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899708" start="3561" end="3572" title="Percy Noble (Royal Navy officer)" label="Percy Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916006" start="3578" end="3585" title="Admiral (United Kingdom)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q955867" start="3590" end="3606" title="James Somerville" label="James Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150302" start="3680" end="3695" title="Colville Wemyss" label="Colville Wemyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585502" start="3709" end="3723" title="Gordon Macready" label="G. N. Macready"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301449" start="3787" end="3801" title="Douglas Evill" label="D. C. S. Evill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579693" start="3819" end="3835" title="William Welsh (RAF officer)" label="William L. Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3853" end="3867" title="Douglas Colyer" label="Douglas Colyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="4572" end="4587" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="4672" end="4693" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359773" start="4744" end="4763" title="Pacific Ocean Areas (command)" label="Pacific Ocean Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="4775" end="4798" title="South West Pacific Area (command)" label="South West Pacific Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569374" start="4815" end="4837" title="Southeast Pacific Area" label="Southeast Pacific Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q502093" start="5055" end="5065" title="Casablanca Conference (1943)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q282384" start="5071" end="5110" title="List of Allied World War II conferences" label="List of Allied World War II conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636089" start="5305" end="5326" title="Frank Maxwell Andrews" label="Frank Maxwell Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060817" start="5386" end="5416" title="European Theater of Operations" label="European Theater of Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122759" start="5808" end="5827" title="Pacific War Council" label="Pacific War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413574" start="6124" end="6136" title="Multilateralism" label="multilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6155" end="6169" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155530" start="6185" end="6218" title="United States non-interventionism" label="United States non-interventionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6255" end="6274" title="British Empire" label="British imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6368" end="6376" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31854" start="6404" end="6441" title="Soviet espionage in the United States" label="Soviet espionage in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="6612" end="6627" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="6816" end="6835" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="6888" end="6922" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959818" start="6936" end="6964" title="Structure of NATO" label="multilateral unified command"/>
<link wikidata="Q27353" start="6973" end="6986" title="Anglo-America" label="Anglo-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="6991" end="7005" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="7144" end="7179" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="7218" end="7239" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077288" start="7258" end="7283" title="Chiefs of Staff Committee" label="Chiefs of Staff Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642478" start="7552" end="7606" title="United Kingdom-United States relations in World War II" label="United Kingdom-United States relations in World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628853" wikidata="Q464908" url="?curid=628853" title="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Hugh III (1142 – 25 August 1192) was Duke of Burgundy between 1162 and 1192. As duke, Burgundy was invaded by King Philip II and Hugh was forced to sue for peace. Hugh then joined the Third Crusade, distinguishing himself at Arsuf and Acre, where he died in 1192.

==Life==
Hugh was the eldest son of Duke Odo II and Marie, daughter of Theobald II, Count of Champagne.

The rule of Hugh III marked the ending of a period of relative peace in the duchy of Burgundy. Hugh was a belligerent man and soon was involved in conflicts against King Louis VII of France over their borders. When Philip Augustus succeeded Louis in 1180, Hugh seized the opportunity and forced several men to change their allegiance to Burgundy. Philip II was not happy with the loss of his vassals and invaded the duchy, besieging Châtillon in 1186. The town fell and with it, its garrison, commanded by Odo, Hugh&#x27;s heir. A peace was negotiated and Hugh had to pay a high ransom for his son and give up ambitions over French territory.

In 1187, Hugh transferred the capital of Burgundy to Dijon, and endeavoured to turn the city into a major commercial centre.

==Joins crusade==
Hugh then turned his energies to the Holy Land, embarking in the Third Crusade in the retinue of Philip II. Hugh played a major role in the victory of the Battle of Arsuf (7 September 1191) and at the Siege of Acre. When Philip returned to France in July 1191, he left Hugh in charge of the French troops. In January 1192, Hugh traveled to Ascalon and argued with Richard I of England over pay for his troops. He died 25 August 1192 at Acre.

==Marriage and issue==
He was married twice:

Firstly, in 1165, to Alice (1145–1200), daughter of Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine; he repudiated her in 1183.
With his first wife he had:
*Odo III (1166–1218), his successor in the Duchy
*Alexander (1170–1206), Lord of Montaigu, married Beatrix of Montaigu
*Douce (1175 – 1219), married in 1196 Simon of Semur (d. 1219), Lord of Luzy
*Alice (1177–1266), married Béraud VII, Lord of Mercœur and Robert VI, Dauphin d&#x27;Auvergne (d. 1252)

Secondly, in 1183, to Beatrice (1161–1228), Countess of Albon and Dauphine of Viennois, daughter of Guigues, Count of Albon and Dauphin of Viennois.
With his second wife, he had:
* Guigues VI (1184–1237), Dauphin of Viennois
* Mahaut (1190–1242), married in 1214 John I, Count of Châlon and Auxonne (1190–1267)
* Margaret (1192–1243), married in 1222 Amadeus IV (1197–1253), Count of Savoy

==See also==
* Duke of Burgundy

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464908" start="0" end="8" title="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh III"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="37" end="53" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="115" end="124" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q25638012" start="148" end="161" title="sue for peace" label="sue for peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="184" end="197" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q940026" start="225" end="230" title="Battle of Arsuf" label="Arsuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="235" end="239" title="Siege of Acre (1189–1191)" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q536101" start="306" end="312" title="Odo II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q361369" start="336" end="367" title="Theobald II, Count of Champagne" label="Theobald II, Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="446" end="463" title="duchy of Burgundy" label="duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="540" end="559" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="585" end="600" title="Philip Augustus" label="Philip Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="762" end="768" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="786" end="791" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q529944" start="876" end="879" title="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="1067" end="1072" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="1223" end="1236" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q940026" start="1313" end="1328" title="Battle of Arsuf" label="Battle of Arsuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="1359" end="1372" title="Siege of Acre (1189–1191)" label="Siege of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="1498" end="1505" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="1522" end="1542" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="1594" end="1598" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="1699" end="1727" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q529944" start="1785" end="1792" title="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q898905" start="1950" end="1955" title="Semur-en-Brionnais" label="Semur"/>
<link wikidata="Q292132" start="2108" end="2116" title="Béatrice of Albon" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173020" start="2130" end="2172" title="List of counts of Albon and dauphins of Viennois" label="Countess of Albon and Dauphine of Viennois"/>
<link wikidata="Q332820" start="2186" end="2233" title="Guigues V of Albon" label="Guigues, Count of Albon and Dauphin of Viennois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319070" start="2267" end="2277" title="Guigues VI of Viennois" label="Guigues VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q943867" start="2349" end="2384" title="John, Count of Chalon" label="John I, Count of Châlon and Auxonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768921" start="2399" end="2407" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Countess of Savoy" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q451949" start="2437" end="2447" title="Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070615" start="2461" end="2475" title="Count of Savoy" label="Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="2492" end="2508" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628856" wikidata="Q529944" url="?curid=628856" title="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Eudes III (1166 – 1218), commonly known in English as Odo III, was Duke of Burgundy between 1192 and 1218. Odo was the eldest son of Duke Hugh III and his first wife Alice, daughter of Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine.

==Life==
Odo did not follow his father&#x27;s aggressive policies towards France and proved a worthy ally of King Philip II of France in his wars against John, King of England, and Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor. Of a phlegmatic temperament, he fought bravely against the latter in the Battle of Bouvines, where he lost, according to contemporary chroniclers, two horses beneath him. 

Odo was also an important figure in the Crusade against the Cathars. When Philip II refused to get involved, Odo stepped forward with the support of the local bishops and his vassals and organized the campaign of 1209 against the Cathar strongholds. Before leaving on crusade against the Cathars, Odo pledged the castle of Ile-d&#x27;Ouche and the village of Crimolois to the Knights Templar to assist them in the defense of the Catholic faith.

==Marriages and issue==
In 1194, Odo married Theresa of Portugal (1156–1218), the daughter of Afonso I of Portugal and Matilda of Savoy. She was repudiated in 1195, having produced no children.

In 1199, Odo married Alice of Vergy (1182–1252), the daughter of Hugh, Seigneur de Vergy, by Gillette de Trainel. This marriage produced:
* Joan (1200–1223), married Raoul II of Lusignan (died 1250), Seigneur d&#x27;Issoudun and Count of Eu.
* Alice (1204–1266) married Robert I (died 1262) Count of Clermont and Dauphin of Auvergne
* Hugh IV (1213–1272), his successor in the duchy
*Beatrice (born 1216), married Humbert III of Thoire (died 1279)

==References==
==Sources==
*
*


==See also==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q529944" start="0" end="9" title="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Eudes III"/>
<link wikidata="Q529944" start="54" end="61" title="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="67" end="83" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464908" start="138" end="146" title="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh III"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="185" end="213" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="330" end="349" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="370" end="391" title="John, King of England" label="John, King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q151457" start="397" end="424" title="Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q830626" start="499" end="517" title="Battle of Bouvines" label="Battle of Bouvines"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="639" end="666" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Crusade against the Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="829" end="835" title="Cathar" label="Cathar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="975" end="990" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703679" start="1090" end="1109" title="Theresa of Portugal, Countess of Flanders" label="Theresa of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="1139" end="1159" title="Afonso I of Portugal" label="Afonso I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234234" start="1164" end="1180" title="Matilda of Savoy, Queen of Portugal" label="Matilda of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703501" start="1261" end="1275" title="Alice of Vergy" label="Alice of Vergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718349" start="1406" end="1426" title="Raoul II of Lusignan" label="Raoul II of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778258" start="1469" end="1480" title="Count of Eu" label="Count of Eu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1510" end="1518" title="Robert V, Dauphin" label="Robert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q536174" start="1575" end="1582" title="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1736" end="1765" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628859" wikidata="Q15401669" url="?curid=628859" title="Les Essarts, Forbes family estate">
<text>is the Forbes family estate at Saint-Briac, France, and the international family seat of the descendants of James Grant Forbes (b. Shanghai, China), a member of the Forbes family of China and Boston who settled in Brittany at . He is the grandfather of two famous politicians, Brice Lalonde, a Green Party candidate for President of France in 1981, and former US Secretary of State John Forbes Kerry, the Democratic nominee for President of the United States of America in 2004. Many of the Forbes family have socialized during summers spent in Brittany at .

 had been occupied and used as a Nazi headquarters during World War II. When the Germans fled, they bombed and burnt it down. The sprawling estate was rebuilt in 1954.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193704" start="31" end="42" title="Saint-Briac" label="Saint-Briac"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="44" end="50" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065143" start="165" end="178" title="Forbes family" label="Forbes family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512092" start="277" end="290" title="Brice Lalonde" label="Brice Lalonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q613786" start="294" end="305" title="French Green Party" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="333" end="339" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="382" end="399" title="John Kerry" label="John Forbes Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="405" end="415" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="428" end="469" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="545" end="553" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628863" wikidata="Q536174" url="?curid=628863" title="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Hugh IV (9 March 1213 – 27 or 30 October 1272) was Duke of Burgundy from 1218 and titular King of Thessalonica from 1266 until his death in 1272. Hugh was the son of Odo III, Duke of Burgundy, and Alice de Vergy.

==Issue==
Hugh married twice, first to Yolande of Dreux when he was 16 and she 17 years of age. He then married Beatrice of Navarre, when he was 45. 
With Yolande, he had:
* Margaret, Lady of Molinot (1230s–1277), married first to William III, lord of Mont St Jean and then to Guy VI, viscount of Limoges; their daughter was the first wife of Duke Arthur II of Brittany
* Odo (1230–1266), who married Countess Matilda II of Nevers
* John (1231–1268), who married Agnes of Dampierre and had Beatrice, heiress of Bourbon
* Adelaide, who married Duke Henry III of Brabant
* Robert II (1248–1306), successor in the Duchy of Burgundy
With Beatrice, he had:
* Hugh, viscount of Avallon
* Margaret, lady of Vitteaux, wife of John I of Chalon-Arlay
*Joan, a nun
* Beatrice, lady of Grignon (ca.1260–1329), who married Hugh XIII of Lusignan
*Isabella, who married King Rudolf I of Germany

==Early years==
His father died during the war of War of the Succession of Champagne in 1218. Hugh was an opponent of the regency of the County of Champagne by Blanche of Castile. With his father&#x27;s death in 1218, he switched sides and joined the rebels in 1229. This led to blows with Theobald IV, Count of Champagne. 

Hugh IV, through a transaction with John l&#x27;Antique de Chalon, gave up the barony of Salon for the counties of Chalon and Auxonne in 1237, which expanded the Duchy and the regional economy benefited from the growing wine trade.

==Crusades==
In 1239, Hugh joined the Barons&#x27; Crusade led by King Theobald I of Navarre and supported by Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor. During this crusade, he was one of the nobles who sought battle with the Muslims against the advice of King Theobald and the Military Orders. Realizing that the expedition was disadvantageous, he opted to withdraw to Ascalon with Walter IV, Count of Brienne and a few others, avoiding the disastrous battle of Gaza. Soon after, King Theobald left for France and Richard of Cornwall arrived. He chose to ally with him, aid in rebuilding Ascalon and negotiated a peace with Egypt in 1241. He returned to Burgundy afterwards. 

Hugh arrived at Cyprus by May 1249 and joined Louis IX of France on the Seventh Crusade. He led one of the two camps of the army that crossed during the siege of Mansurah, the other camp being led by the King of France himself. He was taken prisoner with his king during the retreat of Fariskur, following the betrayal of a treacherous sergeant. He would not be released until March 1252, as such he returned home.

In 1266, he met with Baldwin II, Latin Emperor, who sold Hugh the title of king of Thessalonica in exchange for reconquering his lost domains. Although it had been recaptured by Epirus more than 40 years before. The sale would only remain valid until Hugh aided in Baldwin&#x27;s reconquest and should he fail to uphold his end, the title would pass to Charles I of Anjou and his heirs. The invasion wouldn&#x27;t come to pass, as Pope Gregory X, under the false promise of Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos to unite the churches, staved off any attempts.

In 1270, Hugh joined the Eighth Crusade. But after King Louis IX died, he returned home.

==Death==
Hugh IV died on 27 October 1272 (Aged 60) at Villaines-en-Duismois, France. His burial place is unknown.

==See also==
* Dukes of Burgundy family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q536174" start="0" end="7" title="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="51" end="67" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254103" start="90" end="110" title="King of Thessalonica" label="King of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q529944" start="166" end="191" title="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo III, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703501" start="197" end="211" title="Alice of Vergy" label="Alice de Vergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q551752" start="253" end="269" title="Yolande of Dreux, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Yolande of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703683" start="326" end="345" title="Beatrice of Navarre, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Beatrice of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q506501" start="562" end="583" title="Arthur II of Brittany" label="Arthur II of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385987" start="586" end="589" title="Odo, Count of Nevers" label="Odo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223228" start="624" end="644" title="Matilda II of Nevers" label="Matilda II of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395633" start="647" end="651" title="John of Burgundy (1231–1268)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q394438" start="677" end="695" title="Agnes of Dampierre" label="Agnes of Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q510987" start="704" end="712" title="Beatrice of Burgundy, Lady of Bourbon" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q591233" start="725" end="732" title="Bourbonnais" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q377613" start="735" end="743" title="Adelaide of Burgundy, Duchess of Brabant" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q703296" start="762" end="782" title="Henry III of Brabant" label="Henry III of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="785" end="794" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207572" start="886" end="893" title="Avallon" label="Avallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q958876" start="932" end="954" title="John I of Chalon-Arlay" label="John I of Chalon-Arlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q432467" start="1024" end="1045" title="Hugh XIII of Lusignan" label="Hugh XIII of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q394709" start="1047" end="1055" title="Isabella of Burgundy, Queen of Germany" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="1074" end="1093" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf I of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119008" start="1145" end="1179" title="War of the Succession of Champagne" label="War of the Succession of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q353" start="1255" end="1273" title="Blanche of Castile" label="Blanche of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="1385" end="1416" title="Theobald IV, Count of Champagne" label="Theobald IV, Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q943867" start="1456" end="1485" title="John, Count of Chalon" label="John l&amp;#x27;Antique de Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203645" start="1535" end="1541" title="Chalon-sur-Saône" label="Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20161" start="1546" end="1553" title="Auxonne" label="Auxonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788485" start="1691" end="1711" title="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade" label="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="1724" end="1745" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="1763" end="1795" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q611914" start="2027" end="2054" title="Walter IV, Count of Brienne" label="Walter IV, Count of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q109285058" start="2097" end="2111" title="Battle at Gaza (1239)" label="battle of Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="2159" end="2178" title="Richard, Earl of Cornwall" label="Richard of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="2233" end="2240" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2269" end="2274" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="2368" end="2386" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="2394" end="2409" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528398" start="2475" end="2492" title="Battle of Mansurah (1250)" label="siege of Mansurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148862" start="2597" end="2616" title="Battle of Fariskur (1250)" label="retreat of Fariskur"/>
<link wikidata="Q269573" start="2759" end="2784" title="Baldwin II, Latin Emperor" label="Baldwin II, Latin Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q325461" start="2821" end="2833" title="Kingdom of Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="2916" end="2922" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="3091" end="3109" title="Charles I of Anjou" label="Charles I of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q161740" start="3169" end="3183" title="Pope Gregory X" label="Pope Gregory X"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="3220" end="3244" title="Michael VIII Palaiologos" label="Michael VIII Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q243684" start="3319" end="3333" title="Eighth Crusade" label="Eighth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="3515" end="3544" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628869" wikidata="Q1602861" url="?curid=628869" title="List of members of the International Olympic Committee">
<text>This is a list of members of the [[International Olympic Committee]]. According to the Olympic Charter, the members of the IOC &quot;represent and promote the interests of the IOC and of the Olympic Movement in their countries and in the organisations of the Olympic Movement in which they serve&quot;. Currently, there are 109 members and 39 honorary members.

==Current members==
The chairperson of an international organization, who represents an Olympic sport (e.g. the chairman of World Athletics), is represented in the IOC &quot;ex officio&quot; (i.e., because of that position).
* Athletes&#x27; Commission members are elected for eight-year terms.

==Honorary Members==
Most honorary members are former members who, after finishing their terms of office, are made honorary members.

==Former members==

===Original members===
== References ==
==External links==
* IOC Members list</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1602861" start="18" end="68" title="List of members of the International Olympic Committee" label="members of the [[International Olympic Committee]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q877541" start="87" end="102" title="Olympic Charter" label="Olympic Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="486" end="501" title="World Athletics" label="World Athletics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628885" wikidata="Q1385987" url="?curid=628885" title="Odo, Count of Nevers">
<text>Odo of Burgundy, in French &quot;Eudes de Bourgogne&quot; (1230 – 4 August 1266), was the Count of Nevers, Auxerre and Tonnerre and son of Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy and Yolande of Dreux.

In 1265, Odo became one of the last European barons to lead a crusading force to the Holy Land. Among his fifty knights was Erard of Valery. He defended Acre when Sultan Baybars I harassed it on 1 June 1266 in advance of his besieging Safad. He died at Acre on 7 August 1266 and was buried in the church of Saint Nicholas. He left all his wealth to pay his followers and to endow hospitals and religious institutions. He was described by the Templar of Tyre as a &quot;holy man&quot;, and his tomb attracted veneration. Within a year of his death, the poet Rutebeuf wrote a &quot;Complainte du comte Eudes de Nevers&quot;, a lament for a valiant knight and also for the city that lost its defender.

Burgundy passed to Odo&#x27;s brother, Robert.

==Marriage and children==
Odo married Maud of Dampierre and they had:
*Yolande, Countess of Nevers (1247–1280), married (1) John Tristan, Count of Valois, and (2) Count Robert III of Flanders
*Margaret, Countess of Tonnerre (1250–1308), married King Charles I of Naples
*Adelaide, Countess of Auxerre (1251–1290), married John I of Chalon, Lord of Rochefort
*Joan (1253–1271), died young

==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==See also==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1385987" start="0" end="15" title="Odo, Count of Nevers" label="Odo of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q777511" start="90" end="105" title="Count of Nevers" label="Count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669605" start="107" end="114" title="County of Auxerre" label="Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991449" start="119" end="127" title="Count of Tonnerre" label="Tonnerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q536174" start="139" end="164" title="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q551752" start="169" end="185" title="Yolande of Dreux, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Yolande of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="273" end="282" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="312" end="327" title="Erard of Valery" label="Erard of Valery"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="341" end="345" title="Akko" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q192960" start="358" end="367" title="Baybars I" label="Baybars I"/>
<link wikidata="Q98077954" start="413" end="428" title="Siege of Safed (1266)" label="besieging Safad"/>
<link wikidata="Q466450" start="630" end="645" title="Templar of Tyre" label="Templar of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q918599" start="745" end="753" title="Rutebeuf" label="Rutebeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="927" end="933" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q223228" start="974" end="991" title="Maud of Dampierre" label="Maud of Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q287614" start="1007" end="1034" title="Yolande II, Countess of Nevers" label="Yolande, Countess of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q648617" start="1060" end="1089" title="John Tristan, Count of Valois" label="John Tristan, Count of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q252724" start="1105" end="1127" title="Robert III of Flanders" label="Robert III of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q258027" start="1129" end="1159" title="Margaret, Countess of Tonnerre" label="Margaret, Countess of Tonnerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="1186" end="1205" title="Charles I of Naples" label="Charles I of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q783535" start="1207" end="1236" title="Adelaide, Countess of Auxerre" label="Adelaide, Countess of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391177" start="1258" end="1274" title="John I of Chalon-Auxerre" label="John I of Chalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q379369" start="1284" end="1293" title="Rochefort-sur-Nenon" label="Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1371" end="1400" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628887" wikidata="Q503063" url="?curid=628887" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Robert II (1248 – 21 March 1306) was Duke of Burgundy between 1272 and 1306 as well as titular king of Thessalonica. 

Robert was the third son of Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy, and Yolande of Dreux.

He married Agnes, youngest daughter of Louis IX of France, in 1279. They had the following children:

*Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy (1294–1315)
*Blanche (1288–1348), married Edward, Count of Savoy
*Margaret (1290–1315), married king Louis X of France
*Joan (1293–1348), married count of Maine and Valois, king Philip VI of France
*Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy (1295–1350)
*Louis, Prince of Achaea (1297–1316), married Matilda of Hainaut
*Mary (1298–1336) married Edward I, Count of Bar
*Robert, Count of Tonnerre (1302–1334), married Joanna, heiress of Tonnerre

In 1284, Robert was invested with the duchy of Dauphiné by Rudolf of Habsburg. This was followed by two years of warfare which was ended when King PhilipIV of France paid Robert 20,000 to renounce his claim to the Dauphiné. He was among the French negotiators for the 1303 Treaty of Paris that ended the 1294–1303 Gascon War.

Robert ended the practice of giving away parts of the Burgundian estate to younger sons and as dowries to the daughters. From then on, the entire duchy (albeit diminished by earlier dowries) passed via primogeniture unfragmented to the duke&#x27;s eldest son.

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*
* .


==See also==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="0" end="9" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="37" end="53" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254103" start="95" end="115" title="king of Thessalonica" label="king of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q536174" start="147" end="172" title="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q551752" start="178" end="194" title="Yolande of Dreux, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Yolande of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q237486" start="208" end="213" title="Agnes of France, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="236" end="254" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q707654" start="300" end="324" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q552160" start="338" end="345" title="Blanche of Burgundy, Countess of Savoy" label="Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q739378" start="367" end="389" title="Edward, Count of Savoy" label="Edward, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70590" start="391" end="399" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Queen of France" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="426" end="443" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231742" start="445" end="449" title="Joan the Lame of Burgundy" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="503" end="522" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="524" end="548" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="562" end="567" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761540" start="569" end="585" title="Prince of Achaea" label="Prince of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q287015" start="607" end="625" title="Matilda of Hainaut" label="Matilda of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q670516" start="652" end="674" title="Edward I, Count of Bar" label="Edward I, Count of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q151999" start="799" end="807" title="Dauphiné" label="Dauphiné"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="811" end="829" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="894" end="907" title="Philip IV of France" label="King PhilipIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="911" end="917" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q151999" start="966" end="974" title="Dauphiné" label="Dauphiné"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964075" start="1020" end="1040" title="1303 Treaty of Paris" label="1303 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533921" start="1066" end="1076" title="Gascon War" label="Gascon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="1281" end="1294" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1409" end="1438" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628890" wikidata="Q772332" url="?curid=628890" title="The Three Sisters (Ireland)">
<text>The Three Sisters () are three rivers in Ireland: the River Barrow, the River Nore and the River Suir. The Suir and Nore rise in the same mountainous area in County Tipperary, near the Devil&#x27;s Bit, while the Barrow rises in the Slieve Bloom Mountains in County Laois. The Nore flows into the Barrow about 17 km before the Suir and Barrow join to form an estuary called Waterford Harbour east of the city of Waterford. The rivers fan out to drain a large portion of the southern part of the island, including Counties Tipperary, Carlow, Kilkenny, Wexford and Waterford, among others.

The lengths of the three rivers of the Three Sisters are the Barrow - 192 km (119 mi), the Suir - 185 km (115 mi) and the Nore - 140 km (87 mi).

The combined catchment area of the Three Sisters is 9,207 km2, made up of the Suir&#x27;s (3,610 km2), the Barrow&#x27;s (3,067 km2) and the Nore&#x27;s (2,530 km2).

The combined long term average flow rate of the Three Sisters into Waterford Harbour is 157 m3/s, almost half of which is made up of the Suir&#x27;s (76.9 m3/s), followed by the Nore&#x27;s (42.9 m3/s) and the Barrow&#x27;s (37.4 m3/s).

The Barrow Bridge crosses two of the Three Sisters, the Nore and the Barrow. They then join the River Suir just downstream of the bridge. This place is known in Irish as &quot;Cumar na dTrí Uisce&quot;, &quot;the confluence of the three waters&quot;. The Nore joins the Barrow some four kilometres north of New Ross and the combined waters of the three sisters that can be seen from Cheekpoint. The combined waters of all three sisters are then visible all the way down the estuary from Cheekpoint on.

In ancient times, the area bounded by the Suir and the Barrow formed the Kingdom of Ossory. This name is retained today for dioceses in both the Roman Catholic Church and the Church of Ireland.
&lt;poem&gt;The first, the gentle Shure that making way
By sweet Clonmell, adorns rich Waterford;
The next, the stubborne Newre, whose waters gray,
By faire Kilkenny and Rosseponte boord,
The third, the goodly Barow, which doth hoorde
Great heaps of Salmons in his deepe bosome:
All which long sundred, doe at last accord
To ioyne in one, ere to the sea they come,
So flowing all from one, all one at last become.&lt;/poem&gt;
Excerpt from Edmund Spencer&#x27;s Irish rivers . 1552-1559

==References==
==External links==
* Guide to navigating the Three Sisters estuary (from the Inland Waterways Association of Ireland)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q772332" start="0" end="17" title="The Three Sisters (Ireland)" label="The Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="41" end="48" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q936301" start="54" end="66" title="River Barrow" label="River Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048506" start="72" end="82" title="River Nore" label="River Nore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128134" start="91" end="101" title="River Suir" label="River Suir"/>
<link wikidata="Q184618" start="158" end="174" title="County Tipperary" label="County Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429577" start="185" end="201" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Bit" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658989" start="233" end="255" title="Slieve Bloom Mountains" label="Slieve Bloom Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q55299" start="259" end="271" title="County Laois" label="County Laois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788727" start="374" end="391" title="Waterford Harbour" label="Waterford Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="412" end="421" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184618" start="522" end="531" title="County Tipperary" label="Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181882" start="533" end="539" title="County Carlow" label="Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180231" start="541" end="549" title="County Kilkenny" label="Kilkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="551" end="558" title="County Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="563" end="572" title="County Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863863" start="1144" end="1157" title="Barrow Bridge" label="Barrow Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016292" start="1447" end="1455" title="New Ross" label="New Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798550" start="1716" end="1723" title="Petty kingdom" label="Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q199383" start="1727" end="1733" title="Kingdom of Osraige" label="Ossory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1788" end="1809" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="1818" end="1835" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628895" wikidata="Q7820393" url="?curid=628895" title="Toms River">
<text>The Toms River is a freshwater river and estuary in Ocean County, New Jersey, United States. The river rises in the Pine Barrens of northern Ocean County, then flows southeast and east, where it is fed by several tributaries, and flows in a meandering course through wetlands. The river empties into Barnegat Bay—an inlet of the Atlantic Ocean—and the Intracoastal Waterway at Mile 14.6.

== Geography ==
Much of the headwaters of the Toms River are in the New Jersey Pine Barrens. The lower of the river is a broad tidal estuary that is navigable within the community of Toms River. The river empties into the western side of Barnegat Bay, with mid-channel depths of .

At , the Toms River subwatershed is the largest drainage area of any river in the Barnegat Bay watershed. It includes 11 municipalities in Ocean County and portions of southwestern Monmouth County. The lowest sections of the river provide convenient locations for marinas and yacht clubs, and bases for fishing and crabbing. Canoeing and kayaking are also popular on the river, which can be paddled for from Don Connor Boulevard, below County Route 528 to Barnegat Bay.

== History ==
The Toms River has appeared on maps of the region since the New Netherland colony, although it has not always been named. The earliest-known written reference to it is from 1687. Into the late 1700s, it was most-often referred to as Goose Creek or Goose Neck Creek. Post-colonial cartographers switched between &#x27;Goose Creek—as seen on Thomas Jefferys&#x27; 1776 map and Aaron Arrowsmith&#x27;s 1804 map— and Toms Creek, as in Mathew Carey&#x27;s 1795 State Map of New Jersey. The cartographers Henry Charles Carey and Isaac Lea attempted to address any confusion by choosing &quot;Goose or Toms Cr.&quot; in their 1814 map.

In 1822, Carey and Lea co-published another map that entirely removed the name Goose Creek. Subsequent maps would use the name Toms River.

== Etymology ==
The origin of the name &quot;Toms River&quot; is unknown but there are several theories. According to historical author Edwin Salter, these are:
* A noted Native American called either &quot;Indian Tom&quot; or &quot;Thomas Pumha&quot;, who lived on the river&#x27;s north bank, in present-day Island Heights, assisted during the American Revolutionary War. Salter said:

* Local farmer and ferryman Thomas Luker, who came to the area in the late 1600s. Luker married the daughter of a local Lenape chief in 1695 and they established a homestead on the north bend, near the site of the downtown Toms River Post Office.
* Captain William Tom, an English civil officer for West Jersey from 1664 to 1674, who, during an exploratory expedition, visited the stream and the surrounding region. The river was named in his honor &quot;because he first brought it to the notice of the whites&quot; and persuaded them to settle there. According to Salter, the evidence to support this origin is inconclusive, but this was his preferred origin.

In 1992, during the town&#x27;s 225th anniversary, the township government and local historians officially recognized Thomas Luker as the Tom in the river&#x27;s name. During the celebration, a footbridge spanning the river in downtown Huddy Park was named in his honor.

== Pollution incidents ==
In the mid-to-late 20th century, the Toms River river and surrounding township experienced several contamination incidents that lead to the addition of at least two major areas to the United States Environmental Protection Agency&#x27;s (EPA) list of Superfund sites.

===Ciba-Geigy ===
Beginning in the early 1900s, Ciba-Geigy Chemical Corporation established a site in Dover Township—now Toms River Township—where it manufactured pigments and dyes. The manufacturing process created a large amount of sludge and toxic waste, which was initially disposed of in unlined pits located on-site. In the 1960s, the company built a -long pipeline to disposing of nearly two billion gallons of wastewater into the Atlantic Ocean.

In 1980, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) issued an order requiring the removal of approximately 15,000 drums from an on-site landfill dump and to initiate groundwater monitoring throughout the property, which included portions of the Pine Barrens and coastal wetlands. That same year, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) completed a preliminary assessment under the Potential Hazardous Waste Site Program. In 1983, the EPA placed the site on the Superfund National Priorities List.

The EPA has been cleaning up the site since the early 1980s. In September 2000, the agency ordered the excavation and bioremediation of about of contaminated soil. Cleanup of the on-site source areas began in October 2003, with off-site processing and treatment finishing in 2010.

According to the department&#x27;s website, the following milestones have been met so far:

The EPA ordered the site to undergo five reviews, each to be performed every five years. The first sitewide review was conducted in September 2003, and the final review is estimated to be completed in June 2025.

=== Reich Farm ===
In August 1971, the Reich family leased a large portion of their farm off Route 9 to independent waste hauler Nicholas Fernicola. The lease was to allow Fernicola to temporarily store used drums on the property, located approximately from an intermittent stream draining into the Toms River.

In December 1971, the Reichs discovered nearly 4,500 waste-filled drums from Union Carbide&#x27;s Bound Brook, New Jersey, plant, the source of which they identified by the labels on many of the drums. The labels also indicated the contents, which included &quot;blend of resin and oil&quot;, &quot;tar pitch&quot;, and &quot;lab waste solvent&quot;. Evidence of the waste being dumped was found on the property, in the form of trenches that had not existed before the land was rented. The full drums were leaching their contents into the soil and the nearby water table.

The Reichs sued Fernicola and Union Carbide, and in 1972, the court ordered an end to the dumping and the removal of the drums and contaminated soil. In early 1974, residents commented on an unusual smell and taste of their well water. The NJEPA inspected the site and found the groundwater was heavily contaminated with organic compounds, such as phenol and toluene.

The Reich Farm site was included on the EPA&#x27;s National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. After over two decades of remediation and testing, it was removed from the Superfund list in June 2021. The site was ordered to undergo five reviews to be conducted every five years by the EPA. The first sitewide review was performed in September 2003, and the final review was estimated to be completed between September and November 2023.

=== Cancer cluster ===
The Ciba-Geigy and Reich Farms sites resulted in the contamination of an overlapping area of groundwater during a coinciding period. In September 1997, the New Jersey Department of Health (NJDOH), at the request of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, evaluated childhood cancer incidences in Toms River. The NJDOH reviewed data from the State Cancer Registry (SCR) from 1979 to 1991. According to the summary report the NJDOH released: &quot;The results of the 1995 NJDHSS cancer evaluation indicated that Ocean County as a whole and the Toms River section of Dover ... had an excess of childhood brain and central nervous system (CNS) cancer relative to the entire State&quot;. The NJDOH reviewed the entire county but found Toms River, which was then known as Dover Township, was &quot;the only statistically significantly elevated town in the county&quot;.

As a result of the findings, the NJDOH ordered a case–control study of the area to examine and identify risks factors. The results of this study were made available in January 2003; according to the primary hypothesis, the cancer rates were related to the &quot;environmental exposure pathways&quot; reported over the previous 30 years. The study reported: &quot;No consistent patterns of association were seen between the environmental factors of primary interest and any of the cancer groupings during the postnatal exposure period&quot; and &quot;No consistent patterns of association were seen between the other environmental factors and any of the cancer groupings evaluated&quot;. The report acknowledged the findings could be easily biased due to the small sample size, and recommended the continuation of clean-up efforts at the Reich Farm and Ciba-Geigy sites. It was also recommended an additional five-year incidence evaluation be made once the data from 1996 to 2000 was available from the SCR.

A 2014 Pulitzer Prize-winning book, &quot;Toms River: A Story of Science and Salvation&quot;, examined the cancer cluster in detail. Recent public-private coalitions to restore the river and to preserve the wetland areas near its source in the Pinelands, as well as the EPA stage assessments, have resulted in an increase in water quality.

== Flood events ==
Because the Toms River is tidal with a direct feed into Barnegat Bay and a substantial subwatershed area, it is prone to flooding, particularly at the mouth. The United States Geological Survey (USGS) tracks and reports on significant flood events, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) tracks daily tide levels. The official USGS flood stage for the river is considered water levels at and above , and major flood events occur at and above .

=== 2010 Nor&#x27;easter ===
From March 12–15, 2010, a Nor&#x27;easter hit the New Jersey coastline. The Toms River USGS station (01408500) recorded its highest water level to that point since 1929, before which records were not tracked, and a record discharge of per second on March 15; the predicted discharge prior to the storm was only per second.

=== Hurricane Irene ===
On August 28, 2011, Hurricane Irene hit the eastern coast of the US for a second time, making landfall near the Little Egg Inlet, about south of the Toms River&#x27;s mouth. Irene was the first hurricane to make landfall in New Jersey since 1903. The storm surge that followed, combined with the rainfall from the hurricane and the wet conditions in the weeks prior, led to record USGS gage readings for over 40% of all stations with at least 20 years of data. The highest-recorded flood crest of the Toms River was recorded on August 29, 2011, at . The previous record was , set on September 23, 1938, after the 1938 New England hurricane. The river also saw significant water levels in November 2018 (), October 2005 (), and May 1984 ().

==Tributaries==
* Davenport Branch
* Ridgeway Branch
* Union Branch
* Wrangle Brook

==See also==
* List of New Jersey rivers
* List of cancer clusters
* Toms Canyon impact crater

== References ==
==External links==
* U.S. Geological Survey: NJ stream gaging stations
* Toms River Township web site
*Toms River Online
*TomsRiver.org - Community News, Business Directory and Events Portal
*The Toms River Times
*A History of Monmouth and Ocean Counties...
*Thomas Jefferys&#x27; 1776 map
*Aaron Arrowsmith&#x27;s 1804 Map of New Jersey
*Mathew Carey&#x27;s 1795 Map
*Carey&#x27;s 1814 State Map of New Jersey</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7820393" start="4" end="14" title="Toms River" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502564" start="52" end="76" title="Ocean County, New Jersey" label="Ocean County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095497" start="116" end="128" title="Pine Barrens (New Jersey)" label="Pine Barrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879596" start="300" end="312" title="Barnegat Bay" label="Barnegat Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="329" end="343" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q756421" start="352" end="373" title="Intracoastal Waterway" label="Intracoastal Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="417" end="427" title="River source" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095497" start="457" end="480" title="New Jersey Pine Barrens" label="New Jersey Pine Barrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="516" end="529" title="tidal estuary" label="tidal estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="572" end="582" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879596" start="627" end="639" title="Barnegat Bay" label="Barnegat Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="691" end="703" title="Drainage basin" label="subwatershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q502424" start="852" end="867" title="Monmouth County, New Jersey" label="Monmouth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q858995" start="1107" end="1123" title="County Route 528 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 528"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="1216" end="1230" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="1436" end="1449" title="Cartography" label="cartographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990658" start="1496" end="1517" title="Thomas Jefferys" label="Thomas Jefferys&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q301678" start="1531" end="1547" title="Aaron Arrowsmith" label="Aaron Arrowsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298537" start="1587" end="1599" title="Mathew Carey" label="Mathew Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q957065" start="1655" end="1674" title="Henry Charles Carey" label="Henry Charles Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q929918" start="1679" end="1688" title="Isaac Lea" label="Isaac Lea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2062" end="2074" title="Edwin Salter" label="Edwin Salter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2097" end="2112" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083556" start="2236" end="2250" title="Island Heights" label="Island Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2272" end="2298" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="2434" end="2440" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="2537" end="2559" title="United States Postal Service" label="Toms River Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273074" start="2613" end="2624" title="West Jersey" label="West Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="3459" end="3504" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="3526" end="3535" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="3592" end="3623" title="Ciba-Geigy" label="Ciba-Geigy Chemical Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091547" start="4008" end="4057" title="New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection" label="New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095497" start="4259" end="4271" title="New Jersey Pine Barrens" label="Pine Barrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="4314" end="4359" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975053" start="4491" end="4525" title="National Priorities List" label="Superfund National Priorities List"/>
<link wikidata="Q858695" start="5208" end="5215" title="County Route 506 (New Jersey)" label="Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="5504" end="5517" title="Union Carbide" label="Union Carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q895149" start="5525" end="5548" title="Bound Brook, New Jersey" label="Bound Brook, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="5986" end="5997" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="6321" end="6337" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="6348" end="6354" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="6359" end="6366" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975053" start="6420" end="6444" title="National Priorities List" label="National Priorities List"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788429" start="6991" end="7022" title="New Jersey Department of Health" label="New Jersey Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692019" start="7054" end="7102" title="Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry" label="Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q961652" start="7763" end="7781" title="case–control study" label="case–control study"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="8729" end="8743" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8764" end="8808" title="Toms River: A Story of Science and Salvation" label="Toms River: A Story of Science and Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="8862" end="8886" title="Public–private partnership" label="public-private coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="9169" end="9181" title="Drainage basin" label="subwatershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="9244" end="9275" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="9339" end="9386" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208712" start="9438" end="9449" title="flood stage" label="flood stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001587" start="9606" end="9621" title="Nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="Nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="9948" end="9963" title="Hurricane Irene" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649892" start="10040" end="10056" title="Little Egg Inlet" label="Little Egg Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="10179" end="10190" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q206897" start="10541" end="10567" title="1938 New England hurricane" label="1938 New England hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10687" end="10703" title="Davenport Branch" label="Davenport Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631778" start="10706" end="10721" title="Ridgeway Branch" label="Ridgeway Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153959" start="10724" end="10736" title="Union Branch" label="Union Branch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10739" end="10752" title="Wrangle Brook" label="Wrangle Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636662" start="10769" end="10794" title="List of New Jersey rivers" label="List of New Jersey rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608752" start="10797" end="10820" title="List of cancer clusters" label="List of cancer clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820382" start="10823" end="10848" title="Toms Canyon impact crater" label="Toms Canyon impact crater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628897" wikidata="Q707654" url="?curid=628897" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Hugh V (1294 – 9 May 1315) was Duke of Burgundy between 1306 and 1315.

Hugh was the eldest son of Duke Robert II of Burgundy and Agnes of France.

Hugh was betrothed to Catherine of Valois in 1302, but the betrothal was broken off 30 September 1312, and he had no known descendants. He was involved in the Crusader movement and was also titular King of Thessalonica, a title he sold in 1313 to his brother Louis in exchange for the latter&#x27;s rights to Burgundy. He was succeeded by his younger brother Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy.

==References==
== See also ==
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707654" start="0" end="6" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh V"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="31" end="47" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="104" end="125" title="Robert II of Burgundy" label="Robert II of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237486" start="130" end="145" title="Agnes of France, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Agnes of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q260269" start="170" end="189" title="Catherine of Valois (1303–1346)" label="Catherine of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="307" end="314" title="Crusade" label="Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q325461" start="346" end="366" title="Kingdom of Thessalonica" label="King of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="407" end="412" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="507" end="531" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="565" end="594" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628899" wikidata="Q3372504" url="?curid=628899" title="Paul de Rapin">
<text>Paul de Rapin (25 March 1661 – 25 April 1725), sieur of Thoyras (and therefore styled de Rapin de Thoyras), was a Huguenot historian writing under English patronage. His &quot;History of England&quot;, written and first published in French in 1724–27, was an influential exposition of the Whig view of history on both sides of the English Channel. 

==Early life and education==
The son of Jacques de Rapin, an &quot;avocat&quot; at Castres (Tarn); his mother Jeanne was the sister of Paul Pellisson, official historian to Louis XIV. He was educated at the Academy of Saumur, a Protestant academic institution. 

==Career==
In 1679, he became an advocate, but he never practised law. Soon after, he joined the army. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, and the death of his father led him to move to England with his brother. Inclined to a military career, but unable to find work, he went on to the Dutch Republic where he enlisted in a company of French army cadets at Utrecht, commanded by his cousin, Daniel de Rapin. Rapin met the 15-years-old Jean de Bodt and seven-year old Jean de Collas also Huguenots. They accompanied William III to England in 1688 (Glorious Revolution); Collas became a page of the queen Mary II of England. 

De Rapin and de Both joined in Ulster under the command of the 1st Earl of Athlone. During the Williamite war in Ireland de Rapin took part in the Siege of Carrickfergus, the Battle of the Boyne, and was wounded at the Siege of Limerick (1690). Soon afterwards he was promoted to captain; but in 1693 he was asked to become tutor to the Henry, Viscount Woodstock. Rapin accompanied his father William Bentinck, 1st Earl of Portland, a diplomat, at the Peace of Ryswick (1697), perhaps also to Paris in the year after; in a very costly entourage. Bentinck was sent as ambassador to Paris for six months. While there, he opened negotiations with Louis XIV for a partition of the Spanish monarchy, and as William&#x27;s representative, signed the two partition treaties, known as the Treaty of The Hague (1698). Because of this Treaty all the diplomats settled in the Hague. In April 1699 Paul de Rapin married the widow Marie-Anne Testart (1676–1749) in a tiny village called Sloterdijk outside Amsterdam. 

In 1701, Bentinck resigned all his offices in the royal household. A parliamentary enquiry found him guilty of high treason for his role in the secret negotiations over the Treaty of The Hague (1698). The House of Commons&#x27; dubious conviction was overturned by the House of Lords. However, he lost all his Irish estates after a critical report by a parliamentary committee. Travelling with his 19-year-old pupil between 1701 and 1703 to Hanover, Vienna and Toscane, both parties sent letters to Bentinck. Numerous letters shed light on the preparation of the voyage, the problematic relationship between the teenager and his teacher. Sophia of Hanover admired the guy. After 1704 – when Henry married – de Rapin started secretly a new project, writing a new, impartial history of England. 

In 1705, he visited or lived in the Prussian town Wesel, as one of his children was baptized there. Wesel had a considerable Huguenot community, almost a thousand in 1697. The French architect and engineer Jean de Bodt was reshaping Wesel citadel in the style of Vauban. With the financial participation of the Dutch, the largest fortress in Brandenburg-Prussia at the time was built over the next 40 years – as a barricade against the expansionist ambitions of Louis XIV. Rapin settled there perhaps with the protection of Frederick I of Prussia and Sophia of Hanover, the English heir presumptive. He may have disagreed with the Second Stadtholderless period too. In 1706 his wife received a considerable amount of money and jewelry; Rapin was involved as executor of the will of his sister-in-law, the wealthy Henriette Testart. 

Rapin de Thoyras and his wife probably had eleven children, four were baptized in the Hague and six in Wesel; five died young. 

He was the author of a &quot;Dissertation sur les Whigs et les Torys&quot; (1717), which was immediately translated into German, Dutch, Danish, and English.

==&quot;Histoire d&#x27;Angleterre&quot;==
It was at Wesel that he began his great work: &quot;Histoire d&#x27;Angleterre&quot; (&quot;History of England&quot;), an impartial account written for foreigners rather than for Englishmen. Rapin&#x27;s ‘History’ begins with the landing of Julius Cæsar and ends with the accession of William and Mary. It was continued in French by David Durand (d. 1763), a Huguenot refugee. He added to Rapin&#x27;s ‘History’ vols. xi. and xii. treating the reign of William III, published at the Hague in 1734–5. 

* Volume I (1724): an account of Britain from the time of the Ancient British down to the Norman Conquest; 
* Volume II: from William the Conqueror to Henry III; 
* Volume III: from Edward I to Henry V; 
* Volume IV: from Henry VI to Henry VII; 
* Volume V: Henry VIII; 
* Volume VI: from Edward VI to Elizabeth I;
* Volume VII (1725): James I and the beginning of Charles I;
* Volume VIII: Charles I;
* Volume IX (1727): Charles II;
* Volume X: James II and William III and Mary II.

&quot;L&#x27;Histoire d&#x27;Angleterre&quot; was published monthly with illustrations and allegorical end pieces designed and engraved by François Morellon la Cave, and with a dedicatory epistle to King George I. The written style is lucid and effective. He stopped writing after dealing with the execution of Charles I of England in 1649.

All volumes of his work were translated to English in a total of 14 volumes from 1727 by the Reverend Nicolas Tindal. Tindal began this great task while a chaplain to the Royal Navy, as attested in his foreword to an early volume. He added large numbers of informative notes throughout the volumes, which were illustrated with engravings, maps and genealogical tables of great quality. Illustrations were commissioned from Jacobus Houbraken. Many of the borders being designed by Thomas Gainsborough and George Vertue. Tindal also added a &quot;Continuation&quot; to the History, covering the years from the accession of James VI and I to that of George I of Great Britain.

Although written in French this work was produced for the endorsement of the British monarchy, and at the time of its publication, for the House of Hanover. For this reason the epistle Dedicatory, printed beneath a very elegant engraving of the Royal Arms, is of interest. The following is a translation of it:

&lt;poem&gt;
To His Britannic Majesty, GEORGE I:
Sire,
&quot;The liberty which I take in offering this History of England to YOUR MAJESTY, is based uniquely on the nature of this Work, in which I have set myself the task of instructing Foreigners in the origin and the progressions of the English Monarchy. As no-one takes more interest than Your Majesty in the glory of England, I have hoped that He would look with a favourable eye upon the feeble efforts which I have made to execute this design. The simple and faithful recital of the actions of the Kings, Your Predecessors, backed by the courage, the zeal, and the faithfulness of their English Subjects, is a kind of Panegyrique which can only be agreeable to Your Majesty. But He doubtless would not approve my temerity, if I were to undertake to add here that of Your Majesty, however abundant the material for it might be. That is a task which should be reserved for more eloquent pens than mine. I am content, SIRE, to have furnished for my Readers a ready means by which to compare the Reign of Your Majesty with the preceding Reigns, and the opportunity to observe, how attentive Your Majesty is to follow in the tracks of the Kings of England which were most distinguished by their virtues, and by their sincere love for their People – and with what care He distances himself from the false paths in which some have unfortunately gone astray. One will see clearly in this History, that the constant union of the Sovereign with his Parliament, is the most solid foundation for the glory of the Prince and the welfare of the Subjects; and from the little that one may have learnt of what is happening in England since Your Majesty took the Throne, one cannot but be convinced, that that indeed is the invariable principle upon which Your Majesty governs his conduct. I should account myself extremely fortunate, SIRE, if my zeal for Your Majesty should obtain for me a gracious acceptance of my very humble homage, and if Your Majesty were to deign to approve my sincere protestation, that I am, with a very profound respect, SIRE, the very humble and very obedient servant of Your Majesty,
THOYRAS RAPIN.&quot;&lt;/poem&gt;

The original version was almost the only English history available in France in the first half of the 18th century.

It was in his description of the reign of King Stephen of England that de Rapin made perhaps his most enduring contribution to English history: he was the first historian to describe the reign as an &quot;anarchy&quot;: &quot;In the fatal anarchy, the barons acting as sovereigns grievously oppressed the people and were so presumptuous as to coin their own money.&quot; As a result, the civil war between 1138 and 1153 is now widely referred to as The Anarchy.

Though de Rapin was of a strong constitution, the seventeen years he spent on the work ruined his health. One of his grandchildren was Theophile Cazenove.

==Notes==

==References==
== Sources ==
* Napoleon Bonaparte, &quot;Paul de Rapin-Thoyras,&quot; &quot;Napoleon’s Notes on English History made on the Eve of the French Revolution, illustrated from Contemporary Historians and referenced from the findings of Later Research by Henry Foljambe Hall&quot;. New York: E. P. Dutton &amp; Co., 1905, xx–xxv.

==External links==
*Portraits of Paul de Rapin at the National Portrait Gallery, London.
* Miriam Franchina, Paul Rapin Thoyras and the art of eighteenth-century historiography, Oxford Studies in the Enlightenment, 2021.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3372504" start="0" end="13" title="Paul de Rapin" label="Paul de Rapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="47" end="52" title="sieur" label="sieur"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="114" end="122" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="123" end="132" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="289" end="309" title="Whig view of history" label="Whig view of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="331" end="346" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188776" start="433" end="440" title="Castres" label="Castres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368276" start="485" end="499" title="Paul Pellisson" label="Paul Pellisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="523" end="532" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215328" start="557" end="574" title="Academy of Saumur" label="Academy of Saumur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="578" end="588" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q380075" start="646" end="654" title="advocate" label="advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="738" end="753" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="810" end="817" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="910" end="924" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="971" end="977" title="cadets" label="cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="981" end="988" title="Utrecht (city)" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q102284" start="1059" end="1071" title="Jean de Bodt" label="Jean de Bodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q317039" start="1091" end="1105" title="Jean de Collas" label="Jean de Collas"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="1111" end="1120" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="1139" end="1150" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="1171" end="1190" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="1227" end="1245" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="1280" end="1286" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910657" start="1312" end="1331" title="Godert de Ginkell, 1st Earl of Athlone" label="1st Earl of Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="1344" end="1369" title="Williamite war in Ireland" label="Williamite war in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020354" start="1405" end="1418" title="Carrickfergus" label="Carrickfergus"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="1424" end="1443" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713014" start="1468" end="1492" title="Siege of Limerick (1690)" label="Siege of Limerick (1690)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126107" start="1586" end="1611" title="Henry Bentinck, 1st Duke of Portland" label="Henry, Viscount Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q336463" start="1642" end="1680" title="William Bentinck, 1st Earl of Portland" label="William Bentinck, 1st Earl of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="1701" end="1717" title="Peace of Ryswick" label="Peace of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1893" end="1902" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119018" start="2030" end="2056" title="Treaty of The Hague (1698)" label="Treaty of The Hague (1698)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018576" start="2223" end="2233" title="Sloterdijk, Amsterdam" label="Sloterdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="2366" end="2378" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119018" start="2428" end="2454" title="Treaty of The Hague (1698)" label="Treaty of The Hague (1698)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3086" end="3094" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011" start="3100" end="3105" title="Wesel" label="Wesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102284" start="3256" end="3268" title="Jean de Bodt" label="Jean de Bodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q206217" start="3283" end="3296" title="Wesel citadel" label="Wesel citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192839" start="3313" end="3319" title="Vauban" label="Vauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q157367" start="3392" end="3411" title="Brandenburg-Prussia" label="Brandenburg-Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="3512" end="3521" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="3574" end="3596" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="3601" end="3618" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Sophia of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="3632" end="3648" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164986" start="3681" end="3710" title="Second Stadtholderless period" label="Second Stadtholderless period"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="4806" end="4821" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="4842" end="4863" title="William I of England" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="4867" end="4876" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="4898" end="4906" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="4910" end="4917" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="4938" end="4946" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="4950" end="4959" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="4974" end="4984" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="5005" end="5014" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5018" end="5029" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="5052" end="5059" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="5081" end="5090" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="5107" end="5116" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5138" end="5148" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="5162" end="5170" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="5175" end="5186" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="5191" end="5198" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085404" start="5340" end="5365" title="François Morellon la Cave" label="François Morellon la Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="5400" end="5413" title="George I of Great Britain" label="King George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="5512" end="5532" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340826" start="5636" end="5659" title="Nicolas Tindal" label="Reverend Nicolas Tindal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="5714" end="5724" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375551" start="5966" end="5983" title="Jacobus Houbraken" label="Jacobus Houbraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q192720" start="6023" end="6042" title="Thomas Gainsborough" label="Thomas Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q930477" start="6047" end="6060" title="George Vertue" label="George Vertue"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="6164" end="6178" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="6190" end="6215" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="6295" end="6311" title="British monarchy" label="British monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="6357" end="6373" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q591055" start="7204" end="7215" title="panegyric" label="Panegyrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="8877" end="8900" title="King Stephen of England" label="King Stephen of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="9223" end="9232" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="9284" end="9295" title="The Anarchy" label="The Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540392" start="9433" end="9451" title="Theophile Cazenove" label="Theophile Cazenove"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628901" wikidata="Q4648276" url="?curid=628901" title="A. R. B. Shuttleworth">
<text>Brigadier Allen Robert Betham Shuttleworth (20 February 1873 – 30 July 1935) was an officer in the British Indian Army and player of The Great Game.

Shuttleworth was born in Dapoli, North-West Provinces, India, to Allen Thornton Shuttleworth, who won the Albert Medal of the First Class, and Laura Phoebe Betham. His younger brother was Sir Digby Shuttleworth. Shuttleworth joined the British Army relatively late, beginning his career in the militia.

For a time in 1908, Shuttleworth was acting Consul in Kashgar while George Macartney was in England. During this time, Shuttleworth became involved in investigating the expeditions of Eizaburo Nomura and Zuicho Tachibana, even dining with them at Chini-Bagh. Shuttleworth reported his suspicions to Sir Francis Younghusband, and these suspicions about the two Japanese eventually made its way to Lord Morley, Secretary of State for India.

Shuttleworth died suddenly in Ajmer, Rajasthan.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4648276" start="10" end="42" title="A. R. B. Shuttleworth" label="Allen Robert Betham Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="99" end="118" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="133" end="147" title="The Great Game" label="The Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221789" start="175" end="181" title="Dapoli" label="Dapoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q138521" start="183" end="203" title="North-West Provinces" label="North-West Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117655" start="256" end="268" title="Albert Medal for Lifesaving" label="Albert Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17627057" start="342" end="360" title="Digby Shuttleworth" label="Digby Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="498" end="504" title="Consulate general" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="508" end="515" title="Kashgar" label="Kashgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q746126" start="522" end="538" title="George Macartney (British consul)" label="George Macartney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="623" end="634" title="Expeditions of Count Otani" label="expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350081" start="638" end="653" title="Eizaburo Nomura" label="Eizaburo Nomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q355941" start="658" end="674" title="Zuicho Tachibana" label="Zuicho Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101061" start="701" end="711" title="Chini-Bagh" label="Chini-Bagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q353816" start="757" end="777" title="Francis Younghusband" label="Francis Younghusband"/>
<link wikidata="Q333519" start="850" end="861" title="John Morley, 1st Viscount Morley of Blackburn" label="Lord Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q639769" start="863" end="891" title="Secretary of State for India" label="Secretary of State for India"/>
<link wikidata="Q200049" start="924" end="929" title="Ajmer" label="Ajmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="931" end="940" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628906" wikidata="Q707899" url="?curid=628906" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Odo IV or Eudes IV (1295 – 3 April 1349) was Duke of Burgundy from 1315 until his death and Count of Burgundy and Artois between 1330 and 1347, as well as titular King of Thessalonica from 1316 to 1320. He was the second son of Duke Robert II and Agnes of France.

==Life==

===Inheritances===
Odo succeeded his elder brother, Hugh V, in 1315. Odo defended the rights of his niece Joan against Philip the Tall, another uncle, after Louis X&#x27;s death in 1316. In 1318, Odo married Philip&#x27;s eldest daughter, Joan III, Countess of Burgundy (1308 – 1347). Thus allying himself with Philip V, who had become king of France.

On the death of his brother, Louis in 1316, Odo became titular king of Thessalonica. By 1320, Odo was complaining to the pope of the Angevins&#x27; usurpation of Thessalonica, yet later sold his rights as King of Thessalonica and Prince of Achaea to Louis, Count of Clermont.

Odo&#x27;s wife inherited the domains of her mother in 1330: the county of Artois and the county of Burgundy, the so-called Free County. Her claim to the County of Artois was challenged by Robert III of Artois, who at that time was a close friend and advisor of King Philip VI. The dispute ended abruptly when in December 1330 the documents used by Robert of Artois to support his claim were found to be forged on his instructions.

===War with England===
Odo was a loyal vassal of his brother-in-law, Philip of Valois, after he succeeded to the French throne as Philip VI. He belonged to Philip VI’s small circle of trusted advisors. He fought in many theatres of French warfare: the Low Countries, Brittany, Aquitaine. He fought the Flemings and was wounded at the Battle of Cassel in 1328.

In 1340, Odo first fought in Hainaut, helped capture the town of Antoing and later defended Saint-Omer in the battle there against Robert III of Artois. During the summer the French government became aware of plans for an Anglo-Flemish army under Robert of Artois to attack on Saint-Omer. The Duke entered Saint-Omer 15 July with several thousands men-at-arms and begun preparing the defences of the city. The slow progress of the English army also allowed further reinforcements led by John I, Count of Armagnac to arrive. On 26 July Robert of Artois offered battle to the garrison of Saint-Omer. Contrary to orders some hotheads charged out, their attack was beaten off, but their flight caused the Flemings to abandon their defensive works in pursuit. The Duke of Burgundy now decided to sally with the Count of Armagnac. During the battle the Duke got into a fierce fight with the English and Brugeois contingents and barely escaped back behind the walls. Meanwhile, however the Count of Armagnac had scattered the enemy left flank. The loss of most of his Flemish troops forced Robert of Artois to flee back to Flanders.

He took part in the War of the Breton Succession as a partisan of Charles of Blois serving as advisor to his nephew John, Duke of Normandy, during the latter’s campaign in Brittany autumn 1341.

He served together with the Duke of Normandy and the Chancellor of France, Guillaume Flote, as French ambassadors to a peace conference at Avignon in the summer 1344. The conference was however actively sabotaged by the English. Henry, Earl of Derby who had been announced as the head of the English delegation, claimed once he arrived at Avignon to be there only in a private capacity for devotional reasons and the minor English officials who were officially there had no instructions.

In 1346, he was in Guyenne combatting the English. In spring that year, the French government decided to field so far the strongest army in the south-west. The Duke of Burgundy followed John of Normandy south together with a substantial number of northern nobles and such dignitaries as Raoul II of Brienne, Count of Eu, the Constable of France, both Marshals and the Master of Crossbowmen. In April, Normandy laid siege to the town of Aiguillon, which controlled the confluence between the Lot and the Garonne. There they still remained in August, when John of Normandy was urgently recalled to the north to help stop Edward III, who had landed in Normandy. The French 1346 campaign in the south ended, having accomplished nothing.

In September, Edward III laid siege to Calais. As Artois became the main theatre of the war, relations between the Duke and King Philip VI plummeted. The Duke governed Artois on behalf of his wife, but the royal government increasingly disregarded local officials and even began making its own appointments. In December 1346, Philip suspended the Duke’s government altogether.

===Death and legacy===
Odo was present at the coronation of Pope Clement VI at Avignon 19 May 1342.

Perhaps the greatest legacy of Odo IV is seen in the subsequent Burgundian court of the Valois dukes, for Odo was a patron of the arts and the church and sponsored many young artists. He also endeavoured for good political connections and by marrying a French royal princess assured the good relations with the king. The premature death of his son Philip made his four-year-old grandson the heir presumptive. He succeeded Odo IV as Philip I after Odo died of the plague. Most sources place his death at Sens, on Friday, 3 April 1349. Some sources give the year as 1350.

==Family==






===Children===
By his wife Joan III, Odo had six sons, most of whom died young:
*a stillborn son (1322)
*Philip (1323–1346), Count of Auvergne
*John (1325–1327 or 1328)
*three sons who died young, born in 1327, 1330, and 1335

==Portrayal in film==
Odo (as Eudes) is a supporting character in &quot;Les Rois maudits&quot; (&quot;The Accursed Kings&quot;), a series of French historical novels by Maurice Druon. He was portrayed by in the 1972 French miniseries adaptation of the series, and by C. Florescu in the 2005 adaptation.

==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==Further reading==

*Anne-Lise Courtel, &quot;La chancellerie et les actes d&#x27;Eudes IV, duc de Bourgogne (1315–1349)&quot;, &quot;Bibliothèque de l&#x27;école des chartes&quot;, 135, 1 (1977): 23–71.
*Anne-Lise Courtel, &quot;La chancellerie et les actes d&#x27;Eudes IV, duc de Bourgogne (1315-1349) (second article)&quot;, &quot;Bibliothèque de l&#x27;école des chartes&quot;, 135, 1 (1977): 255–311.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="0" end="6" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="10" end="18" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Eudes IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="45" end="61" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15960093" start="92" end="109" title="Count of Burgundy" label="Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135302" start="114" end="120" title="Count of Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254103" start="163" end="183" title="King of Thessalonica" label="King of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="228" end="242" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q237486" start="247" end="262" title="Agnes of France, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Agnes of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q707654" start="327" end="333" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh V"/>
<link wikidata="Q230031" start="381" end="385" title="Joan II of Navarre" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="394" end="409" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q253821" start="514" end="544" title="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="657" end="662" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254103" start="833" end="853" title="King of Thessalonica" label="King of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761540" start="858" end="874" title="Prince of Achaea" label="Prince of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q536615" start="878" end="902" title="Louis I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Louis, Count of Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q159987" start="980" end="986" title="Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q16394" start="1029" end="1040" title="Franche-Comté" label="Free County"/>
<link wikidata="Q715056" start="1094" end="1114" title="Robert III of Artois" label="Robert III of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="1468" end="1477" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1590" end="1603" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="1605" end="1613" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="1615" end="1624" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237467" start="1672" end="1688" title="Battle of Cassel (1328)" label="Battle of Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q309460" start="1728" end="1735" title="County of Hainaut" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q95011" start="1764" end="1771" title="Antoing" label="Antoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q208793" start="1791" end="1801" title="Saint-Omer" label="Saint-Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q63701" start="1805" end="1821" title="battle of Saint-Omer" label="the battle there"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302784" start="2186" end="2211" title="John I of Armagnac" label="John I, Count of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q550172" start="2846" end="2874" title="War of the Breton Succession" label="War of the Breton Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q454063" start="2892" end="2908" title="Charles, Duke of Brittany" label="Charles of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="2942" end="2964" title="John II of France" label="John, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q225604" start="3250" end="3270" title="Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster" label="Henry, Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q849324" start="3529" end="3536" title="Guyenne" label="Guyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3552" end="3559" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007274" start="3797" end="3829" title="Raoul II of Brienne, Count of Eu" label="Raoul II of Brienne, Count of Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q346871" start="3835" end="3854" title="Constable of France" label="Constable of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q474485" start="3861" end="3869" title="Marshal of France" label="Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549458" start="3878" end="3899" title="Master of Crossbowmen" label="Master of Crossbowmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q404783" start="3946" end="3955" title="Aiguillon, Lot-et-Garonne" label="Aiguillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211766" start="4001" end="4004" title="Lot (river)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="4013" end="4020" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="4283" end="4289" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q170863" start="4682" end="4697" title="Pope Clement VI" label="Pope Clement VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="4701" end="4708" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="5114" end="5130" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="5155" end="5163" title="Philip I of Burgundy" label="Philip I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="5226" end="5230" title="Sens" label="Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q253821" start="5338" end="5346" title="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715" start="5416" end="5422" title="Philip of Burgundy, Count of Auvergne" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293937" start="5436" end="5453" title="Count of Auvergne" label="Count of Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q684593" start="5610" end="5626" title="Les Rois maudits" label="Les Rois maudits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="5686" end="5702" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223949" start="5707" end="5720" title="Maurice Druon" label="Maurice Druon"/>
<link wikidata="Q684593" start="5754" end="5782" title="Les Rois maudits (miniseries)" label="French miniseries adaptation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628920" wikidata="Q18715" url="?curid=628920" title="Philip I, Count of Auvergne">
<text>Philip of Burgundy (10 November 1323 – 10 August 1346) was Count of Auvergne and Boulogne (as Philip I) in right of his wife. He died during the Siege of Aiguillon.

==Biography==
Philip, born 10 November 1323, was the only son and heir of Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy, and of Joan III, Countess of Burgundy, daughter of King Philip V of France and Joan II, Countess of Burgundy. He married Joan I, Countess of Auvergne and Boulogne, in .

In 1340, Philip and his father defended the city of Saint-Omer against the assaults of Robert III of Artois. In 1346, he participated in the siege of Aiguillon, led by John, Duke of Normandy. It was during this siege that Philip died, after falling from his horse.

Philip had no other sons from his marriage to Joan. The House of Burgundy was then placed in the hands of his young son Philip (1346–1361), who died childless. After the death of the younger Philip, the dukedom of Burgundy became a part of the French crown, and was granted by John II of France to his youngest son, Philip the Bold.

Philip&#x27;s daughter, Joan (134411 September 1360), was betrothed to Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy from 1347 to 1355, and was raised at his court. When she was released from the engagement at age 10, she entered a convent at Poissy, where she remained for her final years.

==References==
==Sources==
*
*



==See also==
*Duchy of Burgundy
*Dukes of Burgundy family tree
*List of horse accidents</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18715" start="0" end="18" title="Philip I, Count of Auvergne" label="Philip of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293937" start="59" end="76" title="Count of Auvergne" label="Count of Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894615" start="81" end="89" title="Count of Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715" start="94" end="102" title="Philip I, Count of Auvergne" label="Philip I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60524534" start="145" end="163" title="Siege of Aiguillon" label="Siege of Aiguillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="240" end="264" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253821" start="273" end="303" title="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="322" end="340" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231760" start="345" end="374" title="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235458" start="387" end="428" title="Joan I, Countess of Auvergne" label="Joan I, Countess of Auvergne and Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q715056" start="523" end="543" title="Robert III of Artois" label="Robert III of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="604" end="626" title="John II of France" label="John, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="822" end="828" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="1018" end="1033" title="Philip the Bold" label="Philip the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q451995" start="1107" end="1133" title="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="1357" end="1374" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1376" end="1405" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623516" start="1407" end="1430" title="List of horse accidents" label="List of horse accidents"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628921" wikidata="Q3161406" url="?curid=628921" title="James Sharp (bishop)">
<text>James Sharp, or Sharpe, (4 May 1618 – 3 May 1679) was a minister in the Church of Scotland, or kirk, who served as Archbishop of St Andrews from 1661 to 1679. His support for Episcopalianism, or governance by bishops, brought him into conflict with elements of the kirk who advocated Presbyterianism. Twice the victim of assassination attempts, the second cost him his life.

==Biography==
James Sharp was born at Banff Castle on 4 May 1618, eldest son of William Sharp (1592–1638) and Isabel Leslie (1595-ca 1640). His father was property manager, or factor, for the Earl of Findlater; his mother was the daughter of the Laird of Kininvie. His younger brother, Sir William Sharp of Stonihill (1622–1685), was political agent to the Duke of Lauderdale, Scottish Secretary of State from 1661 to 1680.

In April 1653, Sharp married Helen Moncrieff, daughter of the laird of Randerston. They had seven children.

==Background==
Whilst Presbyterian or Episcopalian now implies differences in both governance and doctrine, this was not the case in the 17th century. &#x27;Episcopalian&#x27; meant governance by bishops, usually appointed by the monarch; &quot;Presbyterian&quot; implied rule by Elders, nominated by their congregations. The Protestant Reformation created a Church of Scotland, or &#x27;kirk&#x27;, that was Presbyterian in structure and Calvinist in doctrine. When bishops were introduced to the Scottish system in 1584, they were doctrinal Calvinists, who opposed many practices of the Church of England; these differences explain the failure of attempts to unify the two churches.

The 1638 National Covenant expelled bishops and established a Covenanter government, which ruled Scotland during the 1638 to 1651 Wars of the Three Kingdoms. In 1647, Royalist defeat in the First English Civil War split the Covenanters into moderate Engagers and Kirk Party fundamentalists; both sides believed the institution of monarchy was divinely ordered, but differed over who held ultimate authority in clerical affairs.

Attempts by the Scots to restore first Charles I, then his son Charles II to the English throne, ended with incorporation into the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland in 1652. The kirk split again, between a moderate majority known as Resolutioners, and &#x27;Protestors&#x27;, who blamed defeat on compromise with &#x27;malignants.&#x27; Differences between the two were both religious and political, including church government, religious toleration and the role of law in a &#x27;godly&#x27; society.

Since each split ended with the winners evicting the losers from their offices and ministries, it led to increasing bitterness. Lord Broghill, head of the Council of State for Scotland, summarised the position by saying &#x27;the Resolutioners love Charles Stuart and hate us, the Protesters love neither him nor us.&#x27; He fostered conflict between the two groups as deliberate policy.

==Career==
Sharp was educated at the local grammar school and in 1637, graduated from King&#x27;s College, Aberdeen. The university and Banff in general were centres of Episcopalian support and one of the few areas to oppose the 1638 National Covenant, which removed bishops from the kirk. 

Sharp went to Oxford, allegedly seeking a position in the Church of England, but returned to Scotland and by 1642, was a regent at the University of St Andrews. In 1648, he became minister for the parish of Crail, then a delegate to the kirk&#x27;s General Assembly in 1650. He accompanied the Scottish army in its invasion of England and was captured at Worcester in September 1651, before being released in 1652.

The Protesters sent a delegation to argue their case before Parliament in 1656; Sharp was selected to represent the Resolutioners and spent most of the next four years in London. By 1659, plans were being made by George Monck to restore Charles II to the thrones of England and Scotland. The Resolutioners wanted Charles to commit to a Presbyterian kirk; in May 1660, Sharp was sent to Breda to ensure he did so, but was unsuccessful in getting a response.

In January 1661, Sharp was appointed Royal Chaplain, and returned to St Andrews as Professor of Divinity. The March 1661 Rescissory Act returned the legal position in Scotland to that prevailing in 1633, removing the Covenanter reforms of 1638-1639. The restoration of bishops was confirmed by the Privy Council of Scotland on 6 September 1661.

Sharp was appointed Archbishop of St Andrews and Primate of Scotland and consecrated at Westminster Abbey in December 1661. The kirk was restored as the national church, independent sects banned and all office-holders were required to renounce the Covenant; about a third of the clergy refused, around 270 in total, and lost their positions as a result. Most occurred in the south-west of Scotland, an area particularly strong in its Covenanting sympathies; some took to preaching in the open fields, or conventicles, which often attracted thousands of worshippers.

After his appointment to the Privy Council of Scotland in June 1663, Sharp assumed responsibility for these evictions, making him a target for Presbyterian radicals. At the same time, his lobbying to be made Lord Chancellor brought him into conflict with Lauderdale and other political leaders. He took an active role in suppressing the Covenanter-backed Pentland Rising in November 1666; he is reported as having condemned to death eleven prisoners who surrendered on a promise of mercy, telling them &quot;You were pardoned as soldiers, but you are not acquitted as subjects&quot;.

On 9 July 1668, James Mitchell, a veteran of Rullion Green, tried to assassinate Sharp in Edinburgh. He was seated in his coach on the Royal Mile near his house at Blackfriars Wynd waiting for Bishop Andrew Honeyman to join him. Mitchell fired his pistol at Sharp but hit Honeyman instead. Mitchell was imprisoned on the Bass Rock for this crime but was not executed until 1676.

Soon after, the government issued the first in a series of &#x27;indulgences&#x27;, allowing the readmission of evicted clergy, even without subscribing to episcopacy. The kirk split once again, this time between moderates, led by Robert Leighton, and &#x27;hardline&#x27; Episcopalians under Sharp; over the next decade, policy alternated between persecution and reconciliation. 

In 1678, Sharp&#x27;s faction regained control and supported by the government, stepped up actions against non-conformists; 3,000 Lowland militia and 6,000 Highlanders, known as the &quot;Highland Host&quot;, were billeted in the Covenanting shires, as a form of punishment. James Mitchell, who had been arrested in 1673, was executed in 1678, making him a Presbyterian folk hero; Sharp gave evidence at his trial and was accused of perjury.

==Death==
On 2 May 1679, a group of nine Covenanters, led by David Hackston and his brother-in-law, John Balfour of Kinloch, were waiting at Magus Muir, hoping to ambush the Sheriff of Cupar. A Sharp appointee, the Sheriff was prominent in persecuting Covenanters but apparently heard about the proposed ambush and stayed home. Learning Sharp&#x27;s coach was on the road, they intercepted it instead; Sharp was stabbed several times, in front of his daughter Isabella, before being killed by a shot to the chest. One of the group, James Russell, claimed he told Sharp he &quot;...declared before the Lord that it was no particular interest, nor yet for any wrong that he had done to him, but because he had betrayed the church as Judas, and had wrung his hands, these 18 or 19 years in the blood of the saints, but especially at Pentland...&quot;

Two of the nine, Hackston and Andrew Guillan, were eventually captured and executed; a third, William Dingwall, died at the Battle of Drumclog a month later. The other six were never tried; Balfour escaped to Holland with George Fleming, but disappears from the records thereafter.

==Aftermath==

Sharp was buried beneath an imposing black and white marble monument in the Holy Trinity Church, St Andrews. Designed by his son, Sir William, it has two main objectives; commemorating his father as a martyr, rather than a turncoat, and confirming his privileged status as archbishop. When the tomb was opened in 1849, it was empty; the body was allegedly removed in 1725 and has never been found.

On 25 December 1679, five Covenanters captured at Bothwell Bridge, Thomas Brown, James Wood, Andrew Sword, John Weddell and John Clyde, were hanged for refusing to identify the perpetrators. Although not involved themselves, they were executed at Magus Muir; their bodies hung in chains until the flight of James VII in 1688. A gravestone was erected over their burial place in 1728 and enclosed by a surrounding wall in 1877; the same year that a memorial to Sharp was built. Both are situated about south of the spot where the murder occurred.

19th century Scottish histories portrayed Sharp as a despised turncoat; &quot;For well concocted, cold blooded, systematic dissimulation, he stands almost without a match in History.&quot; Even more recent writers suggest his death can be seen as deserved retribution for his actions.

His most recent biographer, Julia Buckroyd, summarised his career as follows; &quot;Sharp, who identified himself as a Scot and Presbytery, and who struggled to extricate Scotland from the Cromwellian union...became identified as an agent of English, episcopal and political interests...an enemy of Scottish Presbyterianism and the rule of law.&quot;

The 1688 Glorious Revolution in Scotland led to the Act of Settlement in 1690, which re-established the kirk on a Presbyterian basis. Episcopacy was immediately abolished since then, leading to the formation of the separate Scottish Episcopal Church in the same 1690.

==Family==
He was married on 6 April 1653 to Helen who was a daughter of William Moncrieff of Randerston. Other relatives were: 
*Sir William of Scotscraig, created a Baronet 1683, died January 1712
*John, baptised February 1665
*Isabella (married, cont. 18 December 1679, John Cunningham of Barns)
*Catherine
*Margaret, born 8 December 1664 (married 11 October 1683, William Fraser, 12th Lord Saltoun), died 1734
*Penelope (married John Dubh Mackinnon of that Ilk)
*Agnes, buried March 1666
*Robert, sheriff-clerk of Banff.

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3161406" start="0" end="11" title="James Sharp (bishop)" label="James Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161406" start="16" end="22" title="James Sharp (bishop)" label="Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="72" end="90" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177706" start="115" end="139" title="Archbishop of St Andrews" label="Archbishop of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="175" end="190" title="Episcopal polity" label="Episcopalianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="284" end="299" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81866530" start="414" end="426" title="Banff Castle" label="Banff Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250245" start="531" end="547" title="property manager" label="property manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277403" start="568" end="585" title="Earl of Findlater" label="Earl of Findlater"/>
<link wikidata="Q336697" start="733" end="751" title="John Maitland, 1st Duke of Lauderdale" label="Duke of Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444326" start="762" end="780" title="Secretary of State (Kingdom of Scotland)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="932" end="944" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="948" end="960" title="Episcopal polity" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="1008" end="1016" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="1190" end="1196" title="Elder (Christianity)" label="Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1236" end="1258" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="1269" end="1287" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1349" end="1358" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1499" end="1516" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315013" start="1605" end="1622" title="National Covenant" label="National Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="1658" end="1668" title="Covenanter" label="Covenanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="1726" end="1752" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="1786" end="1809" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341726" start="1846" end="1854" title="Engagers" label="Engagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2064" end="2073" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2088" end="2098" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="2156" end="2201" title="Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland" label="Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676674" start="2270" end="2283" title="Resolutioners" label="Resolutioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345535" start="2668" end="2681" title="Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery" label="Lord Broghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="3016" end="3045" title="University of Aberdeen" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3236" end="3242" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="3357" end="3381" title="University of St. Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010416" start="3429" end="3434" title="Crail" label="Crail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135340" start="3471" end="3487" title="General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540197" start="3537" end="3556" title="Third English Civil War" label="invasion of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="3577" end="3586" title="Battle of Worcester" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443485" start="3698" end="3708" title="Second Protectorate Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q335106" start="3851" end="3863" title="George Monck" label="George Monck"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="3867" end="3885" title="Stuart Restoration" label="restore Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="4024" end="4029" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314954" start="4217" end="4231" title="Rescissory Act 1661" label="Rescissory Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177706" start="4462" end="4486" title="Archbishop of St Andrews" label="Archbishop of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177706" start="4491" end="4510" title="Primate of Scotland" label="Primate of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="4530" end="4547" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466789" start="4946" end="4957" title="conventicle" label="conventicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246348" start="5038" end="5063" title="Privy Council of Scotland" label="Privy Council of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158810" start="5217" end="5232" title="Lord Chancellor of Scotland" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872215" start="5364" end="5379" title="Battle of Rullion Green" label="Pentland Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081359" start="5610" end="5624" title="James Mitchell (Covenanter)" label="James Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872215" start="5639" end="5652" title="Battle of Rullion Green" label="Rullion Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="5684" end="5693" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q852908" start="5729" end="5739" title="Royal Mile" label="Royal Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239944" start="5794" end="5809" title="Andrew Honeyman" label="Andrew Honeyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q151445" start="5915" end="5924" title="Bass Rock" label="Bass Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346837" start="6205" end="6220" title="Robert Leighton (bishop)" label="Robert Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234592" start="6860" end="6874" title="David Hackston" label="David Hackston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360702" start="6899" end="6922" title="John Balfour of Kinloch" label="John Balfour of Kinloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011990" start="6940" end="6950" title="Magus Muir" label="Magus Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012047" start="6984" end="6989" title="Cupar" label="Cupar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870928" start="7772" end="7790" title="Battle of Drumclog" label="Battle of Drumclog"/>
<link wikidata="Q17570644" start="8022" end="8053" title="Holy Trinity Church, St Andrews" label="Holy Trinity Church, St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888187" start="8395" end="8410" title="Battle of Bothwell Bridge" label="Bothwell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8652" end="8661" title="James II of England" label="James VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571539" start="9539" end="9570" title="Glorious Revolution in Scotland" label="Glorious Revolution in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="9754" end="9779" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898121" start="9966" end="9973" title="Bethune baronets" label="Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009354" start="10167" end="10200" title="William Fraser, 12th Lord Saltoun" label="William Fraser, 12th Lord Saltoun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628922" wikidata="Q19254" url="?curid=628922" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy">
<text>Philip of Rouvres (1346 – 21 November 1361) was the Count of Burgundy (as Philip II) and Count of Artois (as Philip III) from 1347, Duke of Burgundy (as Philip I) from 1349, and Count of Auvergne and Boulogne (as Philip III) from 1360. He was the only son of Philip, heir to the Duchy of Burgundy, and Joan I, heiress of Auvergne and Boulogne.

==Biography==
Philip succeeded his grandmother in the County of Burgundy (Franche-Comté) and Artois when he was only one year old. He succeeded his grandfather when he was only three. His deceased father was the only child of Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy, and of Joan III, Countess of Burgundy and Artois. In 1355, Philip married Margaret, daughter of Louis de Mâle, Count of Flanders.

Philip, in his own right, held the counties of Artois and Burgundy from 1349 (inherited from his grandmother), the Duchy of Burgundy from 1349 (inherited from his grandfather) and the counties of Auvergne and Boulogne from 1360 (inherited from his mother). In 1357, by marrying the future Margaret III, Countess of Flanders, then heiress of Flanders, he was promised the counties of Flanders, Nevers, Rethel, and Antwerp, and the duchies of Brabant, and Limburg. Most of these lands were located in the Low Countries.

His mother Joanna, who became Queen of France after her remarriage to King John II of France, governed Burgundy as Philip&#x27;s guardian until her death in September 1360. Philip was declared of age on 20 October the same year.

==Death and succession==
In 1361 at the age of 15, Philip died, either of the plague or from injuries suffered in a riding accident, before he could consummate his marriage to Margaret. With his death, King John II of France claimed the duchy for the kingdom of France, making his youngest son Philip the Bold royal lieutenant-general by 27 June 1363 and duke of Burgundy by June 1364.

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
==See also==

* Dukes of Burgundy family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="0" end="17" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip of Rouvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q15960093" start="52" end="69" title="Count of Burgundy" label="Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="74" end="83" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q135302" start="89" end="104" title="Count of Artois" label="Count of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="109" end="119" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="132" end="148" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="153" end="161" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293937" start="178" end="195" title="Count of Auvergne" label="Count of Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894615" start="200" end="208" title="Count of Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254" start="213" end="223" title="Philip I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715" start="259" end="265" title="Philip I, Count of Auvergne" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="279" end="296" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235458" start="302" end="308" title="Joan I of Auvergne and Boulogne" label="Joan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="571" end="595" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253821" start="604" end="634" title="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan III, Countess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466252" start="671" end="679" title="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q469648" start="693" end="725" title="Louis II, Count of Flanders" label="Louis de Mâle, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q159987" start="775" end="781" title="Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q16394" start="786" end="794" title="Franche-Comté" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="924" end="932" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894615" start="937" end="945" title="Count of Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q466252" start="1017" end="1051" title="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders" label="Margaret III, Countess of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="1058" end="1077" title="count of Flanders" label="heiress of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="1111" end="1119" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070440" start="1121" end="1127" title="County of Nevers" label="Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209790" start="1129" end="1135" title="Rethel" label="Rethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q772861" start="1141" end="1148" title="Margraviate of Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="1169" end="1176" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q697787" start="1182" end="1189" title="Duchy of Limburg" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1231" end="1244" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="1322" end="1339" title="John II of France" label="John II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="1555" end="1561" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="1684" end="1701" title="John II of France" label="John II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="1771" end="1786" title="Philip the Bold" label="Philip the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1913" end="1942" title="Dukes of Burgundy family tree" label="Dukes of Burgundy family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628923" wikidata="Q6073618" url="?curid=628923" title="Irregularities and exceptions in Interlingua">
<text>The term irregularities or exceptions in Interlingua refers to deviations from the logical rules in a few grammatical constructions in the international auxiliary language Interlingua. These oddities are a part of the standard grammar. These special cases have crept into the language as a result of the effort to keep it naturalistic. Most of these irregularities also exist in Interlingua&#x27;s source languages; English, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and to a lesser extent German and Russian. This feature of the language makes Interlingua more familiar to the speakers of source languages. And at the same time, it makes the language more difficult for others.

The speakers of the source languages do not perceive all deviations as irregular. For instance, Interlingua has three different words for English &quot;am&quot; (&quot;so&quot;), &quot;is&quot; (&quot;es&quot;) and &quot;are&quot; (&quot;son&quot;). While most English speakers will not find any thing abnormal about it, speakers of a few other languages may find the use of three words to express the concept of &#x27;simple present&#x27; as unnecessary.

Interlingua is notable in the sense that unlike most auxiliary languages, that seek to minimise or eliminate any irregular aspects, Interlingua takes a flexible approach. It is mandatory to use certain exceptions in Interlingua while others have been kept optional.

==Mandatory exceptions==

===Pronunciation===
Interlingua does not have a &#x27;one letter one sound&#x27; orthography. As in English, several letters can be pronounced in different ways; depending on where they are in a word. For instance, the letter C can be pronounced as either /k/ (&quot;canto&quot;) or /ts/ (&quot;cento&quot;). Here is a list of other mandatory exceptions in pronunciation:

Besides, there are also unassimilated loan words that retain their original pronunciation and spelling.

Diacritics are permitted when they do not influence the pronunciation of the word borrowed into Interlingua. Common examples of such words are &quot;radios Röntgen&quot; (X rays) and &quot;kümmel&quot;.

===Contractions===

Just as in English, where &quot;I am&quot; is usually contracted to &quot;I&#x27;m&quot; and &quot;he is&quot; to &quot;he&#x27;s&quot;, such contractions are also found in Interlingua and these two are compulsory to observe:

===Plurals===

Plurals can be formed in three different ways depending on the ending of a noun.

There are also irregular plurals that occur in loan words. The common ones are &quot;tests&quot; (from &#x27;test&#x27;), &quot;addenda&quot; (from &#x27;addendum&#x27;) and &quot;lieder&quot; (from &#x27;lied&#x27;).

===Numbers===

===Parts of speech===

* Not all adverbs are derived from adjectives.
* If an adjective ends with -c, an adverb derived from it takes &quot;-amente&quot; (instead of &quot;-mente&quot;).
* &quot;Sia&quot; is the imperative form of &quot;esser&quot; (&#x27;to be&#x27;): &quot;Sia contente!&quot; &#x27;Be content!&#x27;

==Optional==

===Pronunciation===
*if &quot;s&quot; is between vowels, it can be pronounced , like in &quot;these&quot; (instead of the of &quot;stay&quot;)
*if &quot;x&quot; is between vowels, it can be spoken like the in &quot;exact&quot; (instead of like the in &quot;fox&quot;)

===Verbs===

====Optional short forms====
*ha for &quot;habe&quot;, &#x27;has&#x27;, &#x27;have&#x27;
*va for &quot;vade&quot;, &#x27;goes&#x27;, &#x27;go&#x27;
*es for &quot;esse&quot;, &#x27;is&#x27;, &#x27;am&#x27;, &#x27;are&#x27;

====Alternative forms of &quot;esser&quot;====
:&quot;Note. These forms are rarely used.&quot;
*so for &quot;(io) es&quot;
*son for &quot;(nos/vos/illes/-as/-os) es&quot;
*era for &quot;esseva&quot;
*sera for &quot;essera&quot;
*serea for &quot;esserea&quot;

===Comparative and superlative adjectives===
*&quot;(le)&quot; minor instead of &quot;(le) plus parve&quot;
*&quot;(le)&quot; major instead of &quot;(le) plus magne&quot;
*&quot;(le)&quot; melior instead of &quot;(le) plus bon&quot;
*&quot;(le)&quot; pejor instead of &quot;(le) plus mal&quot;
*minime instead of &quot;le plus parve&quot; or &quot;le minor&quot;
*maxime instead of &quot;le plus magne&quot; or &quot;le major&quot;
*optime instead of &quot;le plus bon&quot; or &quot;le melior&quot;
*pessime instead of &quot;le plus mal&quot; or &quot;le pejor&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;a grammar of interlingua&quot; by Alexander Gode &amp; Hugh Blair
*&quot;Grammatica de interlingua&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6073618" start="9" end="52" title="Irregularities and exceptions in Interlingua" label="irregularities or exceptions in Interlingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q838296" start="139" end="171" title="international auxiliary language" label="international auxiliary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35934" start="172" end="183" title="Interlingua" label="Interlingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="416" end="423" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="425" end="431" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="433" end="440" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="442" end="449" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="451" end="461" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="486" end="492" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="497" end="504" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628925" wikidata="Q1374984" url="?curid=628925" title="Eurodollar">
<text>Eurodollars are U.S. dollars held in time deposit accounts in banks outside the United States. The term was originally applied to U.S. dollar accounts held in banks situated in Europe, but it expanded over the years to cover US dollar accounts held anywhere outside the U.S. Thus, a U.S. dollar-denominated deposit in Tokyo or Beijing would likewise be deemed a Eurodollar deposit (sometimes an Asiadollar). More generally, the &quot;euro-&quot; prefix can be used to indicate any currency held in a country where it is not the official currency, broadly termed &quot;eurocurrency&quot;, for example, Euroyen or even Euroeuro.

Eurodollars have different regulatory requirements than dollars held in U.S. banks. Eurodollars can be riskier than assets held in U.S. banks, which include at least partial deposit insurance, and as a result, demand a higher interest rate.

There is no connection with the euro currency of the European Union.

== History ==
After World War II, the quantity of physical U.S. dollar banknotes outside the United States increased significantly, as a result of both the dollar funding of the Marshall Plan and from dollar proceeds of European exports to the U.S., which had become the largest consumer market.

As a result, large amounts of U.S. dollar banknotes were in the custody of foreign banks outside the United States. Some foreign countries, including the Soviet Union, also had deposits in U.S. dollars in American banks, evidenced by certificates of deposit. Various narrations are given of the creation of the first eurodollar account, but most trace back to Communist governments keeping dollar deposits abroad.

In one version, the first eurodollar account was created in France in favour of Communist China, which in 1949 managed to move almost all of its U.S. dollar banknotes to the Soviet-owned Banque Commerciale pour l&#x27;Europe du Nord in Paris before the United States froze its remaining U.S. situated assets during the Korean War.

In another version, the first eurodollar account was created by an English bank in favour of the Soviet Union during the Cold War, following the invasion of Hungary in 1956, as the Soviet Union feared that its deposits in North American banks would be frozen as a sanction. It therefore decided to move some of its U.S. dollars held directly in North American banks to the Moscow Narodny Bank, an English limited liability company registered in London in 1919, whose shares were owned by the Soviet Union. The English bank would then re-deposit the dollars into U.S. banks. Thus although in reality the dollars never left North America, there would be no chance of the U.S. confiscating that money, because now it belonged legally to the British bank and not directly to the Soviets, the beneficial owners. Accordingly, on 28 February 1957, the sum of $800,000 was duly transferred, creating the first eurodollars. Initially dubbed &quot;Eurobank dollars&quot; after the bank&#x27;s telex address, they eventually became known as &quot;eurodollars&quot; as such deposits were at first held mostly by European banks and financial institutions. City of London banks, such as Midland Bank, now part of HSBC, and their offshore holding companies also played a major role in holding the deposits. 

In the mid-1950s, Eurodollar trading and its development into a dominant world currency began when the Soviet Union wanted better interest rates on their Eurodollars and convinced an Italian banking cartel to give them more interest than could have been earned if the dollars were deposited in the U.S. The Italian bankers then had to find customers ready to borrow the Soviet dollars and pay above the U.S. legal interest-rate caps for their use, and were able to do so; thus, Eurodollars began to be used increasingly in global finance.

By the end of 1970, 385 billion eurodollars were held in offshore bank accounts. These deposits were lent on as U.S. dollar loans to businesses in other countries where interest rates on loans were perhaps much higher in the local currency, and where the businesses were exporting to the U.S. and receiving payment in dollars, thereby avoiding foreign exchange risk on their funding arrangements.

Several factors led eurodollars to overtake certificates of deposit (CDs) issued by U.S. banks as the primary private short-term money market instruments by the 1980s, including:
* The successive balance of payments deficits of the United States, causing a net outflow of dollars;
* Regulation Q, the U.S. Federal Reserve&#x27;s ceiling on interest payable on domestic deposits during the high inflation of the 1970s
* Eurodollar deposits were a cheaper source of funds because they were free of reserve requirements and deposit insurance assessments

== Market size ==
In 1997, nearly 90% of all international loans were made this way.

In December 1985, the Eurodollar market was estimated by J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. Guaranty bank to have a net size of 1.668 trillion.

In 2016, the Eurodollar market size was estimated at around 13.833 trillion. Since 2016, the use of Eurodollars has been on a consistent decline.

==Eurodollar futures contracts ==
The Eurodollar futures contract was launched in 1981. It was the first cash-settled futures contract. It traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Eurodollar futures were an instrument used to wager on Federal Reserve policy or to hedge the direction of short-term interest rates. In April 2023, after the Libor scandal, they were eliminated and transitioned to SOFR-based contracts.

== Sweeps ==

In United States banking, Eurodollars are used for what are known as &quot;sweeps&quot;. Until 21 July 2011, banks were not allowed to pay interest on corporate transactional accounts. To accommodate larger businesses, banks may automatically transfer, or sweep, funds from a corporation&#x27;s checking account into an overnight investment option to effectively earn interest on those funds. Banks usually allow these funds to be swept either into money market funds, or alternately they may be used for bank funding by transferring to an offshore branch of a bank. Today, commercial banks continue to offer many forms of sweep services which tend to give a higher rate of return whilst smaller entities may use a sweep account simply out of convenience. 

==See also==
*Eurobond
*Petroeuro
*Swap
*TED spread

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1374984" start="0" end="11" title="Eurodollar" label="Eurodollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="16" end="27" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q640285" start="37" end="49" title="time deposit" label="time deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="62" end="66" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="80" end="93" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374984" start="395" end="405" title="Eurodollar" label="Asiadollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499350" start="568" end="580" title="eurocurrency" label="eurocurrency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374984" start="601" end="608" title="Eurodollar" label="Euroyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374984" start="617" end="625" title="Eurodollar" label="Euroeuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="902" end="906" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="923" end="937" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="960" end="972" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="999" end="1010" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="1011" end="1019" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1033" end="1046" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="1118" end="1131" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1391" end="1403" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q862552" start="1732" end="1747" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Communist China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882905" start="1839" end="1884" title="Banque Commerciale pour l&amp;#x27;Europe du Nord – Eurobank" label="Banque Commerciale pour l&amp;#x27;Europe du Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2105" end="2113" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="2129" end="2156" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="invasion of Hungary in 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044551" start="2357" end="2376" title="Moscow Narodny Bank Limited" label="Moscow Narodny Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585784" start="2772" end="2788" title="beneficial owner" label="beneficial owner"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="2967" end="2972" title="Teleprinter" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3084" end="3090" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q650241" start="3103" end="3124" title="financial institution" label="financial institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3127" end="3141" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q994112" start="3157" end="3169" title="Midland Bank" label="Midland Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q190464" start="3183" end="3187" title="HSBC" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="3208" end="3225" title="holding company" label="holding companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542397" start="4162" end="4183" title="foreign exchange risk" label="foreign exchange risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200995" start="4260" end="4283" title="Certificate of deposit" label="certificates of deposit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4412" end="4440" title="Bretton Woods system#The U.S. balance of payments crisis .281958.E2.80.9368.29" label="balance of payments deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4448" end="4461" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633403" start="4911" end="4932" title="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co." label="J.P. Morgan &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1071967" start="5286" end="5313" title="Chicago Mercantile Exchange" label="Chicago Mercantile Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="5370" end="5385" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443894" start="5474" end="5487" title="Libor scandal" label="Libor scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59529761" start="5530" end="5534" title="SOFR" label="SOFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856361" start="5570" end="5591" title="Banking in the United States" label="United States banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047260" start="5642" end="5648" title="sweep account" label="sweeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q695430" start="5728" end="5749" title="transactional account" label="transactional account"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199349" start="6016" end="6033" title="money market fund" label="money market fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068725" start="6339" end="6347" title="Eurobond (international)" label="Eurobond"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513978" start="6349" end="6358" title="Petroeuro" label="Petroeuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136583" start="6360" end="6364" title="Swap (finance)" label="Swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516844" start="6366" end="6376" title="TED spread" label="TED spread"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628928" wikidata="Q1931096" url="?curid=628928" title="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me">
<text>Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me is the seventh studio album by English rock band the Cure, released on 26 May 1987 by Fiction Records. The album was recorded at Studio Miraval in Correns, France.

The album helped bring the Cure into the American mainstream, becoming the band&#x27;s first album to reach the top 40 of the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart and achieving platinum certification. Like its predecessor, &quot;The Head on the Door&quot;, it was also a great international success, reaching the top 10 in numerous countries.

In 2000, the album was voted number 256 in Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot;.

== Writing, recording, and production ==
Directly after wrapping filming in August 1986 for &quot;The Cure in Orange&quot;, the band embarked on a spontaneous week-long holiday in Le Mourillon before moving on to Jean Costa&#x27;s studio in Draguignan for a two-week pre-production session to refine demos recorded earlier that summer in London. Smith recounted that the demos were the result of soliciting each band member for their own musical ideas and getting &quot;six or seven songs from each one&quot; on a series of cassettes, before winnowing down to a shortlist via full-band vote, marking a shift from Smith&#x27;s previous top-down control over composition. 

After Draguignan, The Cure decamped to the residential setting of Studio Miraval for the three-month album recording session, where according to Smith they emphasized spontaneity, &quot;almost jamming the songs to get the right feel&quot; and recording in one or two takes with minimal rehearsal. The band decided during the course of the session that they had an adequate surplus of strong material to justify releasing a double LP. Smith mixed the album with co-producer David M. Allen and engineer Michel Dierickx during sessions in December 1986 (Compass Point, Bahamas) and January 1987 (ICP Recording Studios, Belgium), respectively. 

==Release==
&quot;Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me&quot; was released on 26 May 1987 by Fiction Records in the UK and by Elektra in the US and Canada. Though a double album in its vinyl issue, it was released as a single CD and single cassette. One track, &quot;Hey You!!!&quot;, was omitted from the original CD release because of the 74:33 Red Book CD time restriction, but was included on all cassette releases. A limited vinyl edition came with a bonus six-track, orange 12&quot; featuring the songs &quot;Sugar Girl&quot;, &quot;Snow in Summer&quot;, &quot;Icing Sugar&quot; (Weird Remix), &quot;A Japanese Dream&quot;, &quot;Breathe&quot; and &quot;A Chain of Flowers.&quot;

The album appeared in August 2006 in both single-disc and deluxe double-disc CD editions as part of a Cure reissue campaign. All editions notably included &quot;Hey You!!!&quot;, marking the first time a complete version of the album was made available on CD. The second disc of the deluxe edition is composed of demos and live versions of album tracks, including a recording of &quot;Why Can&#x27;t I Be You?&quot; from the final show of the Kissing Tour at the Wembley Arena. Robert Smith stated on his website that there was so much material to draw from that he initially compiled a three-disc edition, with the third disc containing alternate studio versions of the album&#x27;s songs. However, after discussing with family and friends, he decided that the two-disc edition was a better choice for release. Smith said that it was possible that his proposed third disc may surface as a leak or in a future release.

== Reception ==
In a contemporary review, Mark Coleman of Rolling Stone praised the album for its developed sound saying &quot;The Cure is trying to deepen and refine an existing sensibility rather than reach outward to expand it&quot;.

Chris Willman of &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; observed, &quot;For all its unevenness, &quot;“Kiss Me”&quot; is a welcome step away from the existential gloom-monster image the Cure has cultivated. The band still sounds like the Velvet Underground meeting Emo Philips in a dimly lit post-punk disco, but with an even wider variety of influences and instrumentation in the mix.&quot;, but was critical of the songs with longer running times, citing &quot;Why Can&#x27;t I Be You?&quot; and &quot;Just Like Heaven&quot; as highlights.

In a retrospective review, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that the record was &quot;more accessible and ambitious&quot;. However, he nuanced :&quot;Even if Kiss Me doesn&#x27;t quite gel, its best moments... are remarkable and help make the album one of the group&#x27;s very best.&quot;

Slant Magazine was mostly positive of the album saying &quot;with &quot;Kiss Me Kiss Me Kiss Me&quot;, the Cure gives the listener the kind of roller-coaster rush that only great pop can provide.&quot;

==Track listing==



==Personnel==
The Cure

*Robert Smith – guitar, keyboards, vocals, recorder on &quot;The Snakepit&quot; and &quot;Like Cockatoos&quot;
*Simon Gallup – bass guitar
*Porl Thompson – guitar, keyboards, saxophone on &quot;Shiver and Shake&quot;
*Lol Tolhurst – keyboards
*Boris Williams – drums, percussion
*Roger O&#x27;Donnell – keyboards on live tracks from the deluxe edition

Guest musician
*Andrew Brennen – saxophone on &quot;Icing Sugar&quot; and &quot;Hey You!!!&quot;

Production
*David M. Allen, Robert Smith – production
*Sean Burrows, Jacques Hermet – assistant production
*Bob Clearmountain – remixing for single version of &quot;Just Like Heaven&quot;

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications and sales==



==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="65" end="69" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="75" end="83" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481499" start="112" end="127" title="Fiction Records" label="Fiction Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501001" start="155" end="169" title="Studio Miraval" label="Studio Miraval"/>
<link wikidata="Q816069" start="173" end="180" title="Correns" label="Correns"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="317" end="342" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931734" start="415" end="435" title="The Head on the Door" label="The Head on the Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="573" end="585" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="599" end="623" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141501" start="730" end="748" title="The Cure in Orange" label="The Cure in Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224826" start="812" end="824" title="Le Mourillon" label="Le Mourillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194141" start="873" end="883" title="Draguignan" label="Draguignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q342868" start="899" end="913" title="pre-production" label="pre-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="978" end="983" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="1727" end="1736" title="Double album" label="double LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236882" start="1777" end="1791" title="David M. Allen" label="David M. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q600140" start="1855" end="1868" title="Compass Point Studios" label="Compass Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481499" start="2027" end="2042" title="Fiction Records" label="Fiction Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="2060" end="2067" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="2119" end="2124" title="Phonograph record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="2160" end="2162" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="2174" end="2182" title="Cassette tape" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q282549" start="2281" end="2289" title="Red Book (CD standard)" label="Red Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q918887" start="2414" end="2422" title="Twelve-inch single" label="12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341283" start="2679" end="2685" title="Special edition" label="deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q107528347" start="2728" end="2735" title="reissue" label="reissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953177" start="3006" end="3030" title="Why Can&amp;#x27;t I Be You?" label="Why Can&amp;#x27;t I Be You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="3084" end="3097" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3599" end="3612" title="Rolling stone magazine" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="3802" end="3819" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="4004" end="4026" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422570" start="4035" end="4046" title="Emo Philips" label="Emo Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953177" start="4233" end="4257" title="Why Can&amp;#x27;t I Be You?" label="Why Can&amp;#x27;t I Be You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q956305" start="4274" end="4290" title="Just like Heaven (The Cure song)" label="Just Like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="4340" end="4363" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="4367" end="4375" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="4613" end="4627" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="4862" end="4874" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q45175" start="4973" end="4985" title="Simon Gallup" label="Simon Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q739650" start="5001" end="5014" title="Porl Thompson" label="Porl Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296195" start="5079" end="5091" title="Lol Tolhurst" label="Lol Tolhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708703" start="5105" end="5119" title="Boris Williams" label="Boris Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738214" start="5141" end="5161" title="Roger O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Roger O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236882" start="5324" end="5338" title="David M. Allen" label="David M. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q370490" start="5420" end="5437" title="Bob Clearmountain" label="Bob Clearmountain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628929" wikidata="Q135443" url="?curid=628929" title="Bushwren">
<text>The bushwren (Xenicus longipes), also known as the in the Māori language, was a very small and almost flightless bird that was endemic to New Zealand. It had three subspecies on each of the major islands of New Zealand, the North Island, South Island, and Stewart Island / Rakiura and nearby smaller islands. The species disappeared gradually after the introduction of invasive mammalian predators, last being seen on the North Island in 1955 and the South Island in 1968. Attempts were made to save the remaining population on small islands off Stewart Island, but they ultimately failed with the death of the last remaining known birds in 1972.

==Taxonomy==
German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin described the bushwren in 1789.

==Description==
It grew to about 9 cm long and 16 g in weight. It fed mostly on invertebrates, which it captured by running along the branches of trees. It nested on or near the ground.

== Behaviour ==
Bushwrens had a hopping or bobbing movement, with a fast running speed on the ground or branches. Their call was a &#x27;subdued trill&#x27; or &#x27;seep&#x27;, sometimes repeated in quick succession. They built spherical nests near the ground with an entrance on the side, and typically laid two eggs in November or December.

==Extinction==
It was widespread throughout the main islands of the country until the late 19th century when mustelids were introduced and joined rats as invasive mammalian predators. The only authenticated reports of the North Island subspecies (&quot;X. l. stokesi&quot;) since 1900 were from the southern Rimutaka Range in 1918 and the Ureweras up to 1955, with probable sightings on June 13, 1949, near Lake Waikareiti, and several times in the first half of the 20th century in the Huiarau Range and from Kapiti Island in 1911. Apparently, the last population lived in the area where Te Urewera National Park was established, just around the time of its extinction.

The last authenticated reports of the South Island subspecies (&quot;X. l. longipes&quot;) were from Arthur&#x27;s Pass in 1966 and Nelson Lakes National Park in 1968. There have been a few unsubstantiated reports since then from Fiordland and Nelson Lakes.

The third subspecies, the Stewart Island bushwren or Stead&#x27;s bushwren (&quot;X. l. variabilis&quot;), was found on Stewart Island / Rakiura and nearby islands. It is known to have survived on Stewart Island until 1951, but was probably exterminated there by feral cats. It lived on Kotiwhenua (Solomon) Island, being reasonably common, until the early 1960s. It survived on predator-free Taukihepa / Big South Cape Island until black rats (&quot;R. rattus&quot;) invaded it in 1964. The New Zealand Wildlife Service attempted to save the species by relocating all the birds they could capture. They caught six birds and transferred them to Kaimohu Island, where they did not survive and they finally died out in 1972.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
*3D view of specimen RMNH 110.000 at Naturalis, Leiden (requires QuickTime browser plugin).
* Paratype specimen of &quot;Xenicus longipes variabilis&quot; in the collection of the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa
*Image of Bush Wren from Te Ara: The Online Encyclopedia of New Zealand
*Photography of Xenicus longipes by William Herbert Guthrie-Smith
*&quot;Bush Wren / Matuhi. Xenicus longipes&quot;. by Paul Martinson. Artwork produced for the book &quot;Extinct Birds of New Zealand&quot;, by Alan Tennyson, Te Papa Press, Wellington, 2006</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q135443" start="4" end="12" title="Bushwren" label="bushwren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="58" end="72" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q865137" start="102" end="117" title="flightless bird" label="flightless bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="138" end="149" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="224" end="236" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="238" end="250" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="256" end="280" title="Stewart Island / Rakiura" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="679" end="702" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Johann Friedrich Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="816" end="828" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="1377" end="1386" title="Mustelidae" label="mustelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="1414" end="1417" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="1422" end="1430" title="invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="1490" end="1502" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q498731" start="1576" end="1590" title="Rimutaka Range" label="Rimutaka Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691001" start="1607" end="1614" title="Te Urewera" label="Urewera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331232" start="1675" end="1690" title="Lake Waikareiti" label="Lake Waikareiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934956" start="1755" end="1768" title="Huiarau Range" label="Huiarau Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471997" start="1778" end="1791" title="Kapiti Island" label="Kapiti Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q87172" start="1857" end="1881" title="Te Urewera National Park" label="Te Urewera National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="1978" end="1990" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q474342" start="2041" end="2059" title="Arthur&amp;#x27;s Pass" label="Arthur&amp;#x27;s Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q934019" start="2072" end="2098" title="Nelson Lakes National Park" label="Nelson Lakes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266713" start="2170" end="2179" title="Fiordland" label="Fiordland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="2319" end="2343" title="Stewart Island / Rakiura" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="2462" end="2467" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="2468" end="2471" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2486" end="2513" title="Kotiwhenua Island" label="Kotiwhenua (Solomon) Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q859289" start="2592" end="2625" title="Taukihepa / Big South Cape Island" label="Taukihepa / Big South Cape Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="2632" end="2641" title="black rat" label="black rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015824" start="2691" end="2719" title="New Zealand Wildlife Service" label="New Zealand Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2844" end="2858" title="Kaimohu Island" label="Kaimohu Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q641676" start="3006" end="3015" title="Naturalis" label="Naturalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243769" start="3034" end="3043" title="QuickTime" label="QuickTime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734267" start="3297" end="3326" title="Herbert Guthrie-Smith" label="William Herbert Guthrie-Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628931" wikidata="Q31439" url="?curid=628931" title="Abraham bar Hiyya">
<text>Abraham bar Ḥiyya ha-Nasi (; 
 – 1136 or 1145), also known as Abraham Savasorda, Abraham Albargeloni, and Abraham Judaeus, was a Catalan Jewish mathematician, astronomer and philosopher who resided in Barcelona, then in the County of Barcelona.

Bar Ḥiyya was active in translating the works of Islamic science into Latin and was likely the earliest to introduce algebra from the Muslim world into Christian Europe. He also wrote several original works on mathematics, astronomy, Jewish philosophy, chronology, and surveying. His most influential work is his &quot;Ḥibbur ha-Meshiḥah ve-ha-Tishboret&quot;, translated in 1145 into Latin as &quot;Liber embadorum&quot;. A Hebrew treatise on practical geometry and algebra, the book contains the first known complete solution of the quadratic equation formula_1, and influenced the work of Fibonacci.

== Biography ==
Abraham bar Ḥiyya was the great-grandson of Hezekiah ben David, the last Gaon of the Talmudic academies in Babylonia. Bar Ḥiyya occupied a high position in the royal court, serving as minister of police, and bore the title of governor (). Scholars assume that Bar Hiyya would have obtained this title in the court of Banu Hud of Zaragoza-Lleida; there is even a record of a Jewish Savasorda there in the beginning of the 12th century. In his travelogues, Benjamin of Tudela mentions bar Ḥiyya living in Barcelona in the 1160s.

According to Adolph Drechsler, bar Ḥiyya was a pupil of Moshe ha-Darshan and teacher of Abraham ibn Ezra. He was held in high consideration by the ruler he served on account of his astronomical knowledge and had disputes with learned Catholic priests, to whom he demonstrated the accuracy of the Jewish calendar. Abraham bar Hiyya is said to have been a great astronomer and wrote some works on astronomy and geography. One talks about the form of the earth, the elements, and the structure of the spheres. Other works included papers on astrology, trigonometry, and music.

Some scholars think that the Magister Abraham who dictated &quot;De Astrolabio&quot; (probably at Toulouse) to Rudolf of Bruges (a work that the latter finished in 1143) was identical with Abraham bar Ḥiyya. Although the title &quot;Sephardi&quot; is always appended to his name, Barcelona was at the time no longer under Muslim rule, and therefore not part of Sepharad. Abraham Albargeloni (i.e., from Barcelona) thus belonged to the community of the Jews of Catalonia.

Catalonia joined Provence in 1112 and Aragon in 1137, and thus the County of Barcelona became the capital of a new Catalan-Aragonese confederation called the Crown of Aragon. The kings of Aragon extended their domains to Occitania in what is now southern France. Abraham Albargeloni spent some time in Narbonne, where he composed some works for the Hachmei Provence, in which he complained about the Provençal community&#x27;s ignorance of mathematics.

==Work==
Abraham bar Ḥiyya was one of the most important figures in the scientific movement which made the Jews of Provence, the Jews of Catalonia, Spain, and Italy the intermediaries between Arabic science and the Christian world, in both his original works and his translations.

Bar Ḥiyya&#x27;s &quot;Yesode ha-Tebunah u-Migdal ha-Emunah&quot; (), usually referred to as the &quot;Encyclopedia&quot;, was the first European attempt to synthesize Greek and Arabic mathematics. Likely written in the first quarter of the 12th century, the book is said to elaborate on the interdependence of number theory, mathematical operations, business arithmetic, geometry, optics, and music. The book draws from a number of Greek sources then available in Arabic, as well as the works of al-Khwarizmi and Al-Karaji. Only a few short fragments of this work have been preserved.

Bar Ḥiyya&#x27;s most notable work is his &quot;Ḥibbur ha-Meshiḥah ve-ha-Tishboret&quot; (), probably intended to be a part of the preceding work. This is the celebrated geometry translated in 1145 by Plato of Tivoli, under the title &quot;Liber embadorum a Savasordo in hebraico compositus&quot;. Fibonacci made the Latin translation of the &quot;Ḥibbūr&quot; the basis of his &quot;Practica Geometriae&quot;, following it even to the sameness of some of the examples.

Bar Ḥiyya also wrote two religious works in the field of Judaism and the Tanach: &quot;Hegyon ha-Nefesh&quot; (&quot;Contemplation of the Soul&quot;) on repentance, and &quot;Megillat ha-Megalleh&quot; (&quot;Scroll of the Revealer&quot;) on the redemption of the Jewish people. The latter was partly translated into Latin in the 14th century under the title &quot;Liber de redemptione Israhel&quot;. Even these religious works contain scientific and philosophical speculation. His &quot;Megillat ha-Megalleh&quot; was also astrological in nature, and drew a horoscope of favourable and unfavourable days. Bar Ḥiyya forecasted that the Messiah would appear in AM 5118 (1358 CE).

Abraham bar Ḥiyya wrote all his works in Hebrew, not in Judaeo-Arabic of the earlier Jewish scientific literature, which made him a pioneer in the use of the Hebrew language for scientific purposes.

===Other notable works===
* &quot;Form of the Earth&quot; (), an astronomical work on the formation of the heavens and the earth, which was to have been followed by a second part on the course of the stars. A portion was translated into Latin by Sebastian Münster and Erasmus Oswald Schreckenfuchs. It appears also that complete translations into Latin and French were made. The Bodleian Library contains a copy with a commentary, apparently by Ḥayyim Lisker.
* &quot;Calculation of the Courses of the Stars&quot; (), the sequel to the preceding work, which is found sometimes in manuscripts with the notes of Abraham ibn Ezra.
* &quot;Tables&quot; or &quot;Tables of the Prince&quot; (, &quot;Luḥot ha-Nasi&quot;), astronomical tables, called also the &quot;Tables of Al-Battani&quot; and the &quot;Jerusalem Tables&quot;. Several manuscripts of this work contain notes by Abraham ibn Ezra.
* &quot;Book of Intercalation&quot; (). This work was published in 1851, in London, by Filipowski. It is the oldest-known Hebrew work treating of the calculation of the Hebrew calendar.
* &quot;Meditation of the Soul&quot; (), an ethical work upon a rationalistic religious basis. It was published in 1860 by Freimann, with a biography of the author (by the editor), a list of his works, and learned introduction by Rapoport.
* &quot;Scroll of the Revealer&quot; (), a controversial work in defense of the theory that the Messiah would appear in the year AM 5118 (AD 1358). Its fifth and last chapter, the largest part of the work, may be read as an independent treatise providing an astrological explanation of Jewish and universal history based on an analysis of the periodical conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter.
* An apologetic epistle addressed to Judah ben Barzilai al-Barzeloni.

==Translations==
Abraham bar Ḥiyya co-operated with a number of scholars in the translation of scientific works from Arabic into Latin, most notably Plato of Tivoli with their translation of Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Tetrabiblos&quot; in 1138 at Barcelona. There remains doubt as to the particulars: a number of Jewish translators named Abraham existed during the 12th century, and it is not always possible to identify the one in question. Known translations of bar Ḥiyya include:
* &quot;De Horarum Electionibus,&quot; the well-known treatise of Ali ben Aḥmad al-Imrani.
* &quot;Capitula Centiloquium,&quot; astrological aphorisms.
* A commentary of Aḥmad ibn Yusuf on the &quot;Centiloquium&quot;, attributed to Ptolemy.
* &quot;De Astrolabio&quot; of Rudolph de Bruges.
* &quot;Liber Augmenti et Diminutionis,&quot; a treatise on mathematics.

In the preface to &quot;Ẓurat ha-Areẓ&quot;, bar Ḥiyya modestly states that, because none of the scientific works such as those which exist in Arabic were accessible to his brethren in France, he felt called upon to compose books which, though containing no research of his own, would help to popularize knowledge among Hebrew readers. His Hebrew terminology, therefore, occasionally lacks the clearness and precision of later writers and translators.

==Philosophy==

Bar Ḥiyya was a pioneer in the field of philosophy: as shown by Guttmann in refutation of David Kaufmann&#x27;s assumption that the &quot;Hegyon ha-Nefesh&quot; was originally written in Arabic, Abraham bar Ḥiyya had to wrestle with the difficulties of a language not yet adapted to philosophic terminology.

Whether composed especially for the Ten Days of Repentance, as Rapoport and Rosin think, or not, the object of the work was a practical, rather than a theoretical, one. It was to be a homily in four chapters on repentance based on the Hafṭarot of the Day of Atonement and Shabbat Shuvah. In it, he exhorts the reader to lead a life of purity and devotion. At the same time he does not hesitate to borrow ideas from non-Jewish philosophers, and he pays homage to the ancient Greek philosophers who, without knowledge of the Torah, arrived at certain fundamental truths regarding the beginning of things, though in an imperfect way, because both the end and the divine source of wisdom remained hidden to them. In his opinion the non-Jew may attain to as high a degree of godliness as the Jew.

===Matter and Form===
Abraham bar Ḥiyya&#x27;s philosophical system is neoplatonic like that of Solomon ibn Gabirol and of the author of &quot;Torot ha-Nefesh&quot; &quot;Reflections on the Soul&quot; as Plotinus stated:
He agrees with Plato that the soul in this world of flesh is imprisoned, while the animal soul craves for worldly pleasures, and experiences pain in foregoing them. Still, only the sensual man requires corrections of the flesh to liberate the soul from its bondage; the truly pious need not, or rather should not, undergo fasting or other forms of asceticism except such as the law has prescribed. But, precisely as man has been set apart among his fellow creatures as God&#x27;s servant, so Israel is separate from the nations, the same three terms (&quot;bara&quot;, &quot;yaṣar&quot;, and &quot;asah&quot;) being used by the prophet for Israel&#x27;s creation as for that of man in Genesis.

===Three Classes of Pious Men===
Like Baḥya ibn Paquda, Abraham bar Ḥiyya distinguishes three classes of pious men:
# such as lead a life altogether apart from worldly pursuits and devoted only to God (&quot;these are but few in number and may in their sovereignty over the world be regarded as one individuality&quot;).
# such as take part in the world&#x27;s affairs, but are, as regards their conduct, ruled only by the divine laws and statutes without concerning themselves with the rest of men (these form the &quot;holy congregation&quot; or the &quot;faithful city&quot;)
# such as lead righteous lives, but take care also that the wrong done outside of their sphere is punished and the good of all the people promoted (these form the &quot;kingdom of justice&quot; or the &quot;righteous nation&quot;).
In accordance with these three classes of servants of God, he finds the laws of the Torah to be divided into three groups:
# The Decalogue, containing the fundamental laws with especial reference to the God-devoted man who, like Moses, lives solely in the service of God (the singular being used because only Moses or the one who emulates him is addressed). The first of the Ten Commandments, which he considers merely as an introductory word, accentuates the divine origin and the eternal goal of the Law; the other nine present the various laws in relation to God, to domestic life, and to society at large. Each of these three classes again refers either to the heart or sentiment, to the speech or to the action of man.
# The group of laws contained in the second, third, and fourth books of Moses, intended for the people of Israel during their wandering in the desert or during the Exile, to render them a holy congregation relying solely upon the special protection of God without resorting to warfare.
# The Deuteronomic legislation intended for the people living in an agricultural state and forming a &quot;kingdom of justice.&quot; However, in the time of the Messianic redemption, when the evil spirit shall have vanished altogether, when the sensual man shall have become a spiritual one, and the passions that created hatred and strife shall have given way to love of man and to faithful obedience to the will of God, no other laws than those given to the God-devoted one in the Decalogue—the law written upon the heart of man—will be necessary. Men, imbued solely with love for their fellows, free from sin, will rise to the standard of the God-devoted man, and, like him, share in the eternal bliss of God.

Guttmann has shown that Naḥmanides read and used the &quot;Hegyon ha-Nefesh&quot;, though occasionally differing from it; but while Saadia Gaon is elsewhere quoted by Abraham bar Ḥiyya, he never refers to him in &quot;Hegyon&quot;. Characteristic of the age is the fact that while Abraham bar Ḥiyya contended against every superstition, against the superstitions of the tequfoth, against prayers for the dead, and similar practises, he was, nevertheless, like Ibn Ezra, a firm believer in astrology. In his &quot;Megillat ha-Megalleh&quot; he calculated from Scripture the exact time for the advent of the Messiah to be the year of the world 5118. He wrote also a work on redemption, from which Isaac Abravanel appropriated many ideas. It is in defense of Judaism against Christian arguments, and also discusses Muhammed &quot;the Insane&quot;, announcing the downfall of Islam, according to astrological calculation, for the year 4946 A.M.

== Mathematics ==

Bar Ḥiyya&#x27;s &quot;Ḥibbur ha-meshīḥah ve-ha-tishboret&quot; contains the first appearance of quadratic equations in the West.

Bar Ḥiyya proved by the method of indivisibles the following equation for any circle: formula_2, where formula_3 is the surface area, formula_4 is the circumference length and formula_5 is radius. The same proof appears in the commentary of the Tosafists (12th century) on the Babylonian Talmud.

==See also==
*Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain

==Notes==
== References ==
*

===Footnotes===
==External links==
* (PDF version)
*
*PDF biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="0" end="25" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham bar Ḥiyya ha-Nasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="62" end="79" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham Savasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="81" end="100" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham Albargeloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q31439" start="106" end="121" title="Abraham bar Hiyya" label="Abraham Judaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66735851" start="129" end="140" title="Jews of Catalonia" label="Catalan Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="144" end="157" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="159" end="169" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="174" end="185" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="201" end="210" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q640868" start="224" end="243" title="Count of Barcelona" label="County of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="295" end="310" title="science in the medieval Islamic world" label="Islamic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="316" end="321" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="363" end="370" title="Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="380" end="392" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="398" end="414" title="Christendom" label="Christian Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="456" end="467" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="469" end="478" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="480" end="497" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="499" end="509" title="Hebrew calendar" label="chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="515" end="524" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="690" end="708" title="applied mathematics" label="practical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="781" end="799" title="quadratic equation" label="quadratic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8763" start="838" end="847" title="Fibonacci" label="Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138729" start="910" end="928" title="Hezekiah ben David" label="Hezekiah ben David"/>
<link wikidata="Q12017972" start="939" end="943" title="Gaon (Hebrew)" label="Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627039" start="951" end="982" title="Talmudic academies in Babylonia" label="Talmudic academies in Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505438" start="1050" end="1068" title="shurta" label="minister of police"/>
<link wikidata="Q33058" start="1183" end="1191" title="Banu Hud" label="Banu Hud"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="1195" end="1203" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090" start="1204" end="1210" title="Lleida" label="Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q318820" start="1321" end="1339" title="Benjamin of Tudela" label="Benjamin of Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776652" start="1450" end="1466" title="Moshe ha-Darshan" label="Moshe ha-Darshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="1482" end="1498" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="1628" end="1643" title="Catholic priest" label="Catholic priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="1690" end="1705" title="Jewish calendar" label="Jewish calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="2067" end="2075" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377368" start="2080" end="2096" title="Rudolf of Bruges" label="Rudolf of Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="2202" end="2210" title="Sephardi" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66735851" start="2421" end="2438" title="Jews of Catalonia" label="Jews of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="2458" end="2466" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="2479" end="2485" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="2599" end="2614" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104285" start="2662" end="2671" title="Occitania" label="Occitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="2687" end="2702" title="southern France" label="southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637099" start="2790" end="2806" title="Hachmei Provence" label="Hachmei Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q702758" start="3002" end="3018" title="Jews of Provence" label="Jews of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q66735851" start="3024" end="3041" title="Jews of Catalonia" label="Jews of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178111" start="3043" end="3048" title="Jews of Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q549576" start="3054" end="3059" title="Jews of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="3087" end="3101" title="Science in the medieval Islamic world" label="Arabic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3110" end="3119" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3488" end="3501" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="3503" end="3526" title="Operation (mathematics)" label="mathematical operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299050" start="3528" end="3547" title="Business mathematics" label="business arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3549" end="3557" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="3559" end="3565" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="3571" end="3576" title="Musicology" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q461062" start="3691" end="3700" title="Al-Karaji" label="Al-Karaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q726787" start="3965" end="3980" title="Plato of Tivoli" label="Plato of Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8763" start="4062" end="4071" title="Fibonacci" label="Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="4292" end="4299" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="4308" end="4314" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Tanach"/>
<link wikidata="Q151618" start="4388" end="4398" title="Repentance in Judaism" label="repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="4759" end="4771" title="Astrology" label="astrological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="4871" end="4878" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q743781" start="4895" end="4897" title="Anno Mundi" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4956" end="4962" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q37733" start="4971" end="4984" title="Judaeo-Arabic" label="Judaeo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5352" end="5357" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61073" start="5361" end="5378" title="Sebastian Münster" label="Sebastian Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q110063" start="5383" end="5412" title="Erasmus Oswald Schreckenfuchs" label="Erasmus Oswald Schreckenfuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5472" end="5478" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="5494" end="5510" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5560" end="5573" title="Ḥayyim Lisker" label="Ḥayyim Lisker"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="5725" end="5741" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="5884" end="5894" title="Battani" label="Al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="5989" end="6005" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6083" end="6089" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q55916607" start="6094" end="6104" title="Herschell Filipowski" label="Filipowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="6176" end="6191" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="6257" end="6270" title="Rationalism" label="rationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="6529" end="6536" title="Jewish Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="6803" end="6809" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="6814" end="6821" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q534312" start="6860" end="6891" title="Judah ben Barzilai al-Barzeloni" label="Judah ben Barzilai al-Barzeloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="7011" end="7017" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7023" end="7028" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q726787" start="7043" end="7058" title="Plato of Tivoli" label="Plato of Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7085" end="7092" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879027" start="7106" end="7117" title="Tetrabiblos" label="Tetrabiblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="7135" end="7144" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198528" start="7541" end="7556" title="Aḥmad ibn Yusuf" label="Aḥmad ibn Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060147" start="7570" end="7582" title="Centiloquium" label="Centiloquium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7604" end="7611" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377368" start="7644" end="7661" title="Rudolph de Bruges" label="Rudolph de Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q21482928" start="8270" end="8278" title="Guttmann" label="Guttmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q351593" start="8296" end="8310" title="David Kaufmann" label="David Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8393" end="8399" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219947" start="8551" end="8573" title="Ten Days of Repentance" label="Ten Days of Repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q929389" start="8750" end="8758" title="Hafṭarot" label="Hafṭarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="8766" end="8782" title="Yom Kippur" label="Day of Atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q112968593" start="8787" end="8801" title="Shabbat Shuvah" label="Shabbat Shuvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="9379" end="9390" title="neoplatonic" label="neoplatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q239355" start="9404" end="9423" title="Solomon ibn Gabirol" label="Solomon ibn Gabirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="9512" end="9520" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="9544" end="9549" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="10021" end="10027" title="Israelites" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="10214" end="10221" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q762229" start="10262" end="10278" title="Bahya ibn Paquda" label="Baḥya ibn Paquda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="11164" end="11173" title="Ten Commandments" label="Decalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="11264" end="11269" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="11410" end="11426" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="11537" end="11540" title="halachah" label="Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="11855" end="11871" title="people of Israel" label="people of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="11923" end="11928" title="Exile" label="Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="12051" end="12063" title="Deuteronomic" label="Deuteronomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411408" start="12206" end="12226" title="Jewish eschatology" label="Messianic redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="12891" end="12902" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13108" end="13137" title="Tekufah#Superstition" label="superstitions of the tequfoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="13219" end="13227" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="13248" end="13257" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q319902" start="13454" end="13469" title="Isaac Abravanel" label="Isaac Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="13571" end="13579" title="Muhammed" label="Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="13631" end="13636" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="13817" end="13836" title="quadratic equations" label="quadratic equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q586686" start="13875" end="13897" title="method of indivisibles" label="method of indivisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066514" start="14096" end="14105" title="Tosafists" label="Tosafists"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="14128" end="14145" title="Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="14162" end="14199" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628936" wikidata="Q1067484" url="?curid=628936" title="The Tortoise and the Hare">
<text>&quot;The Tortoise and the Hare&quot; is one of Aesop&#x27;s Fables and is numbered 226 in the Perry Index. The account of a race between unequal partners has attracted conflicting interpretations. The fable itself is a variant of a common folktale theme in which ingenuity and trickery (rather than doggedness) are employed to overcome a stronger opponent.

==An ambiguous story==
The story concerns a Hare who ridicules a slow-moving Tortoise. Tired of the Hare&#x27;s arrogant behaviour, the Tortoise challenges him to a race. The hare soon leaves the tortoise behind and, confident of winning, takes a nap midway through the race. When the Hare awakes, however, he finds that his competitor, crawling slowly but steadily, has arrived before him. The later version of the story in La Fontaine&#x27;s Fables (VI.10), while more long-winded, differs hardly at all from Aesop&#x27;s.

As in several other fables by Aesop, the lesson it is teaching appears ambiguous. In Classical times, it was not the Tortoise&#x27;s plucky conduct in taking on a bully that was emphasised but the Hare&#x27;s foolish over-confidence. An old Greek source comments that &quot;many people have good natural abilities which are ruined by idleness; on the other hand, sobriety, zeal and perseverance can prevail over indolence&quot;.

When the fable entered the European emblem tradition, the precept to &#x27;hasten slowly&#x27; (&quot;festina lente&quot;) was recommended to lovers by Otto van Veen in his &quot;Emblemata Amorum&quot; (1608), using a relation of the story. There, the infant figure of Eros is shown passing through a landscape and pointing to the tortoise as it overtakes the sleeping hare under the motto &quot;perseverance winneth.&quot; Later interpreters too have asserted that the fable&#x27;s moral is the proverbial &quot;the more haste, the worse speed&quot; (Samuel Croxall) or have applied to it the biblical observation that &quot;the race is not to the swift&quot; (Ecclesiastes 9.11).

In the 19th century, the fable was given satirical interpretations. In the social commentary of Charles H. Bennett&#x27;s &quot;The Fables of Aesop translated into Human Nature&quot; (1857), the hare is changed to a thoughtful craftsman prostrate under the foot of a capitalist entrepreneur. Lord Dunsany brings out another view in his &quot;The True History of the Tortoise and the Hare&quot; (1915). There, the hare realises the stupidity of the challenge and refuses to proceed any further. The obstinate tortoise continues to the finishing line and is proclaimed the swiftest by his backers. But, continues Dunsany,
:the reason that this version of the race is not widely known is that very few of those that witnessed it survived the great forest-fire that happened shortly after. It came up over the weald by night with a great wind. The Hare and the Tortoise and a very few of the beasts saw it far off from a high bare hill that was at the edge of the trees, and they hurriedly called a meeting to decide what messenger they should send to warn the beasts in the forest. They sent the Tortoise.

A century later, Vikram Seth broadened the satire in his verse retelling of the fable in &quot;Beastly Tales&quot; (1991) and had it both ways. There is nothing to recommend in the behaviour of either protagonist by way of a moral. While the Tortoise&#x27;s victory bolsters its joyless self-righteousness, the hare-brained loser is taken up by the media and &quot;pampered rotten/ And the tortoise was forgotten&quot;.

==Applications==
In Classical times, a variation of the story was annexed to a philosophical problem by Zeno of Elea in one of many demonstrations that movement is impossible to define satisfactorily. The second of Zeno&#x27;s paradoxes is that of Achilles and the Tortoise, in which the hero gives the Tortoise a head start in a race. The argument attempts to show that even though Achilles runs faster than the Tortoise, he will never catch up with her because, when Achilles reaches the point at which the Tortoise started, the Tortoise has advanced some distance beyond; when Achilles arrives at that forward point, the Tortoise has again moved forward. Hence Achilles can never catch the Tortoise, no matter how fast he runs, since the Tortoise will always be moving ahead.

The only satisfactory refutation has been mathematical and since then the name of the fable has been applied to the function described in Zeno&#x27;s paradox. In mathematics and computer science, the &quot;tortoise and the hare algorithm&quot; is an alternative name for Floyd&#x27;s cycle-finding algorithm.

==Illustrations of the fable==
There is a Greek version of the fable but no early Latin version. For this reason it did not begin to appear in printed editions of Aesop&#x27;s fables until the 16th century, one of the earliest being Bernard Salomon&#x27;s &quot;Les Fables d&#x27;Esope Phrygien, mises en Ryme Francoise&quot; (1547). Versions followed from the Netherlands (in Dutch, 1567) and Flanders (in French, 1578) but none in English before Francis Barlow&#x27;s edition of 1667.

Among the many illustrations of the fable, that by the French caricaturist Jean Grandville is novel in portraying the tortoise as running upright. This is also how he is shown in the Walt Disney cartoon version of &quot;The Tortoise and the Hare&quot; (1935). Another departure from the ordinary in Grandville&#x27;s etching is the choice of a mole (complete with dark glasses) rather than, as usual, a fox as the judge at the finishing line. Auguste Delierre makes the judge a monkey in the 1883 edition of La Fontaine&#x27;s fables that he illustrated. La Fontaine says in his rhyme that it does not matter who the judge is; his interpreters have taken him at his word.

Outside of book production, there is an early 17th-century oil painting of the fable by the Flemish landscape artist Jan Wildens. The hare enters on the left, racing over an upland road as dawn breaks; the tortoise is nowhere in sight. In the mid-19th century, the French animal painter Philibert Léon Couturier also devoted an oil painting to the fable in which, as in Grandville&#x27;s illustration, the tortoise is shown racing upright. In Edward Bawden&#x27;s composite design of 1970 the hare is depicted racing and lying down at various stages of the race while, in contrast to his sprightly rival, the tortoise keeps going.

There have also been two pieces of popular sculpture aimed at children. Nancy Schön&#x27;s was made to commemorate the centenary of the Boston Marathon in 1996 and is sited in Copley Square, the finishing line for the race. The tortoise is shown determinedly stumping forward while the hare has paused to scratch behind its ear. In the following year a painted steel sculpture by Michael Browne and Stuart Smith was set up near the cross-country finish line at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx. The hare is mounted on the tortoise&#x27;s shell and appears to be trying to leap over him.

===Philately===
The fable has also appeared on stamps from several countries. These include:
* Cyprus, in which cartoon characters are depicted on a set of five €0.34 stamps (2011)
* Dahomey, on a 1972 set commemorating 350 years since La Fontaine&#x27;s birth, in which it figures on the 10 franc stamp
* Dominica, on a 2 cent stamp for Easter 1984, picturing a Disney tortoise carrying Easter eggs as it overtakes the sleeping hare
* France issued surcharged Red Cross stamps in 1978 on which the fable appeared on the 1 franc + 0.25 denomination. It was also included in the 1995 strip of six 2.80 franc stamps commemorating the third centenary of the author&#x27;s death.
* Greece issued a 1987 set illustrating Aesop&#x27;s fables, including the tortoise and the hare on the 130 drachma stamp
* Hungary issued a set in 1980 with the fable on the 4 forint stamp
* The Maldives issued a 1990 set in which Disney characters act out the fables; the tortoise and the hare appear on the 15 laree stamp
* Monaco issued a composite 50 centime stamp on the 350th anniversary of La Fontaine&#x27;s birth in 1971, with this fable included
* Sri Lanka issued a 5 rupee stamp for Child&#x27;s broadcasting day 2007 which shows the contestants at the starting line

==Musical versions==

Many allusions to the fable in musical titles are of limited or no relevance, but two interpretive instrumental versions may be noted. The one by Yellowjackets jazz quartet was recorded on their &quot;Politics&quot; album in 1988. The Anglo-Irish band Flook&#x27;s title is on their &quot;Haven&quot; album (2005).

There have also been several verbal settings of Aesop&#x27;s fable:
* By W. Langton Williams (c. 1832–1896) in his &quot;Aesop&#x27;s Fables, versified &amp; arranged for the piano forte&quot; (London, 1890)
* In &quot;Aesop&#x27;s Fables Interpreted Through Music&quot; for voice and piano (New York, 1920) by Mabel Wood Hill (1870–1954). In this the moral stated is that &quot;Plodding wins the race&quot;.
* Vincent Persichetti included it as the third piece in his &quot;Fables for narrator and orchestra&quot; (Op. 23, 1943)
* A poetic version set for children&#x27;s voices and piano by Edward Hughes in his &quot;Songs from Aesop&#x27;s Fables&quot; (1965)
* The cellist Evalyn Steinbock&#x27;s setting for violin, cello and narrator in 1979
* As the first of Anthony Plog&#x27;s &quot;Aesop&#x27;s Fables&quot; for narrator, piano and horn (1989/93), in which the instruments mimic the pace of the animals
* The first of &quot;Aesop&#x27;s Fables for narrator and band&quot; (1999) by Scott Watson (b. 1964)
* A setting for solo voice by Lucian Cristofor Tugui (2006)
* Vladimir Cosma, as the sixth piece in &quot;Eh bien ! Dansez maintenant&quot; (2006), a light-hearted interpretation for narrator and orchestra of La Fontaine&#x27;s version in the style of a rustic polka
* Movement Three of Julie Giroux&#x27;s &quot;A Symphony of Fables&quot;, composed in 2006
* As one of the five pieces in Bob Chilcott&#x27;s &quot;Aesop&#x27;s Fables&quot; for piano and choir (2008)
* A setting for a cappella choir by Darmon Meader (2009)
* As one of David Edgar Walther&#x27;s &#x27;short operatic dramas&#x27;, composed in 2009
* Among ten on David P Shortland&#x27;s Australian recording, &quot;Aesop Go HipHop&quot; (2012), where the sung chorus after the hip hop narration underlines the fable&#x27;s moral, &quot;Slow and steady wins the race&quot;

==Folk variants==
The many other variants of the story in oral folk tradition appear worldwide and are classed as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 275. In most of these there is a race between unequal partners but most often brain is matched against brawn and the race is won by means of trickery. Broadly this is of two types: either the slower animal jumps on the other&#x27;s back or tail and hops off at the end when the creature turns round to see where his challenger has got to, or else he is deceived by lookalikes substituting themselves along the course.

Tales with a similar theme emphasizing doggedness have been recorded in Native American culture. Hummingbird and Crane agree to race from one ocean to the other. Though Hummingbird flies faster, he stops at night to sleep. Crane, however, flies overnight and is overtaken by Hummingbird later and later during the day, at length coming in first. The ultimate prize differs between versions and includes choice of habitat, the love of a girl, or the right to cut the other down to size.

==See also==
* Achilles and the Tortoise
* Festina lente
* Law of the handicap of a head start
* The Hare and the Hedgehog

==References==
==External links==

* 15th–20th century book illustrations online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1067484" start="6" end="31" title="The Tortoise and the Hare" label="The Tortoise and the Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q865902" start="48" end="67" title="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169810" start="95" end="106" title="Perry Index" label="Perry Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="403" end="407" title="Hare" label="Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="436" end="444" title="Tortoise" label="Tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748292" start="784" end="809" title="La Fontaine&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="La Fontaine&amp;#x27;s Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128336" start="1351" end="1357" title="Emblem book" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244363" start="1417" end="1430" title="festina lente" label="festina lente"/>
<link wikidata="Q785355" start="1467" end="1480" title="Otto van Veen" label="Otto van Veen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="1584" end="1588" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411191" start="1867" end="1881" title="Samuel Croxall" label="Samuel Croxall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078521" start="2094" end="2112" title="Charles H. Bennett (illustrator)" label="Charles H. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q458658" start="2290" end="2302" title="Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany" label="Lord Dunsany"/>
<link wikidata="Q379762" start="3119" end="3130" title="Vikram Seth" label="Vikram Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876879" start="3197" end="3210" title="Beastly Tales" label="Beastly Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132157" start="3627" end="3639" title="Zeno of Elea" label="Zeno of Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33378" start="3738" end="3759" title="Zeno&amp;#x27;s paradoxes" label="Zeno&amp;#x27;s paradoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689472" start="3837" end="3847" title="Head start (positioning)" label="head start"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4574" end="4610" title="Cycle detection#Tortoise and hare" label="Floyd&amp;#x27;s cycle-finding algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081300" start="5061" end="5075" title="Francis Barlow (artist)" label="Francis Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q744442" start="5176" end="5191" title="Jean Ignace Isidore Gérard" label="Jean Grandville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="5284" end="5295" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375268" start="5891" end="5902" title="Jan Wildens" label="Jan Wildens"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6061" end="6085" title=":fr:Philibert Léon Couturier" label="Philibert Léon Couturier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305396" start="6217" end="6230" title="Edward Bawden" label="Edward Bawden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962968" start="6478" end="6489" title="Nancy Schön" label="Nancy Schön"/>
<link wikidata="Q826038" start="6542" end="6557" title="Boston Marathon" label="Boston Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q901479" start="6582" end="6595" title="Copley Square" label="Copley Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915656" start="6867" end="6885" title="Van Cortlandt Park" label="Van Cortlandt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="7088" end="7094" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q468814" start="7176" end="7183" title="Dahomey" label="Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="7299" end="7307" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7429" end="7435" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="7454" end="7463" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="7671" end="7677" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="7793" end="7800" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="7865" end="7873" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="7996" end="8002" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="8128" end="8137" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632876" start="8418" end="8431" title="Yellowjackets (band)" label="Yellowjackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225170" start="8473" end="8481" title="Politics (Yellowjackets album)" label="Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052881" start="8524" end="8529" title="Flook (band)" label="Flook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269450" start="8999" end="9018" title="Vincent Persichetti" label="Vincent Persichetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="9258" end="9265" title="cellist" label="cellist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498692" start="9355" end="9367" title="Anthony Plog" label="Anthony Plog"/>
<link wikidata="Q507940" start="9666" end="9680" title="Vladimir Cosma" label="Vladimir Cosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748292" start="9813" end="9839" title="La Fontaine&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="La Fontaine&amp;#x27;s version"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="9865" end="9870" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308195" start="9891" end="9903" title="Julie Giroux" label="Julie Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q887846" start="9993" end="10005" title="Bob Chilcott" label="Bob Chilcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="10088" end="10098" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="10350" end="10357" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="11077" end="11092" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q33378" start="11507" end="11532" title="Achilles and the Tortoise" label="Achilles and the Tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244363" start="11535" end="11548" title="Festina lente" label="Festina lente"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893451" start="11551" end="11586" title="Law of the handicap of a head start" label="Law of the handicap of a head start"/>
<link wikidata="Q142278" start="11589" end="11614" title="The Hare and the Hedgehog" label="The Hare and the Hedgehog"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628937" wikidata="Q7997752" url="?curid=628937" title="Why Do Birds Sing?">
<text>Why Do Birds Sing? is the fifth studio album by Violent Femmes, released on April 30, 1991. It was the band&#x27;s last album with original drummer Victor DeLorenzo, who left two years later to devote his time to acting, and was produced by Michael Beinhorn, best-known then for his work with Red Hot Chili Peppers on &quot;Mother&#x27;s Milk&quot; and &quot;The Uplift Mofo Party Plan&quot;.

The album featured the single &quot;American Music,&quot; which rose to number 2 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Modern Rock chart during the week of May 18, 1991, and became a staple of the band&#x27;s live shows.

==Track listing==




==Personnel==

===Violent Femmes===
* Gordon Gano – vocals, guitar
* Brian Ritchie – bass, guitar, bouzouki, banjo, ukulele, mouth harp, didgeridoo, xylophone, glockenspiel, vocals
* Victor DeLorenzo – drums, percussion, tranceaphone, vocals

===Additional musicians===
* Michael Beinhorn – Hammond organ on &quot;American Music&quot;, Mellotron on &quot;Do You Really Want To Hurt Me&quot; and &quot;Used To Be&quot;, piano on &quot;Do You Really Want To Hurt Me&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Free&quot;, harmonium on &quot;Used To Be&quot;
* Sid Page, Suzie Katayama, Ilene Novog, Larry Corbett – strings on &quot;Used To Be&quot;
* Tommy Mandel – keyboards on &quot;American Music&quot;

===Production===
* Violent Femmes – Producer
* Eric &quot;ET&quot; Thorngren – Engineer, mixing
* David Vartanian – Mixing
* Susan Rogers – Engineer
* Tom Fritze – Assistant engineer
* Lori Fumar – Assistant engineer
* Mike Kloster – Assistant engineer
* Howie Weinberg – Mastering
* Mary Jones – Photography

==Charts==
==Certifications==


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="48" end="62" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619929" start="148" end="164" title="Victor DeLorenzo" label="Victor DeLorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q703637" start="241" end="257" title="Michael Beinhorn" label="Michael Beinhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="293" end="314" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q638409" start="324" end="342" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Milk (album)" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q183034" start="359" end="385" title="The Uplift Mofo Party Plan" label="The Uplift Mofo Party Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551362" start="665" end="676" title="Gordon Gano" label="Gordon Gano"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="679" end="685" title="singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="687" end="693" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255815" start="696" end="709" title="Brian Ritchie" label="Brian Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="712" end="716" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="718" end="724" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q322675" start="726" end="734" title="bouzouki" label="bouzouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="736" end="741" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="743" end="750" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q185003" start="752" end="762" title="Jew&amp;#x27;s harp" label="mouth harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189388" start="764" end="774" title="didgeridoo" label="didgeridoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="776" end="785" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="787" end="799" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619929" start="810" end="826" title="Victor DeLorenzo" label="Victor DeLorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="829" end="834" title="drum set" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="836" end="846" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q703637" start="899" end="915" title="Michael Beinhorn" label="Michael Beinhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="918" end="931" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="963" end="972" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1046" end="1051" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="1128" end="1137" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507867" start="1166" end="1174" title="Sid Page" label="Sid Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531340" start="1257" end="1269" title="Tommy Mandel" label="Tommy Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="1332" end="1346" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922144" start="1568" end="1582" title="Howie Weinberg" label="Howie Weinberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628938" wikidata="Q298901" url="?curid=628938" title="John the Fearless">
<text>John I (; ; 28 May 1371 – 10 September 1419) was a scion of the French royal family who ruled the Burgundian State from 1404 until his assassination in 1419. He played a key role in French national affairs during the early 15th century, particularly in his struggle to remove the mentally ill King Charles VI and during the Hundred Years&#x27; War against the Kingdom of England. A rash, ruthless and unscrupulous politician, John murdered Charles&#x27;s brother, the Duke of Orléans, in an attempt to gain control of the government, which led to the eruption of the Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War in France and in turn culminated in his own assassination in 1419.

The involvement of Charles, the heir to the French throne, in his assassination prompted John&#x27;s son and successor Philip to seek an alliance with the English, thereby bringing the Hundred Years&#x27; War to its final phase.

John, like his father Philip before him, played an important role in the development of gunpowder artillery in European warfare, making extensive and successful use of it in his military campaigns.

==Early life==
John was born in Dijon on 28 May 1371 to Duke Philip the Bold of Burgundy and Countess Margaret III of Flanders. On the death of his maternal grandfather Count Louis II of Flanders in 1384, he received the County of Nevers.

In 1385, a double wedding for the Burgundian family took place in Cambrai. John married Margaret, daughter of Count Albert I of Holland, while at the same time his sister Margaret married Albert&#x27;s son William in order to consolidate John&#x27;s position in the Low Countries. The marriage took place after John cancelled his engagement to his first cousin, Catherine, a daughter of King Charles V of France, who was only a child at the time.

Before his accession to become the Duke of Burgundy, John was one of the principal leaders of the French forces sent to aid King Sigismund of Hungary in his war against Sultan Bayezid I of the Ottoman Empire. John fought in the Battle of Nicopolis of 25 September 1396 against the Ottomans with such enthusiasm and bravery that he was given the cognomen Fearless (&quot;Sans-Peur&quot;). Despite his personal bravery, his impetuous leadership ended in disaster for the European expedition. He was captured and did not recover his liberty until the next year after an enormous ransom was paid.

==Conflict with Orléans==

John inherited the Duchy of Burgundy in 1404 upon the death of his father and the counties of Burgundy, Flanders and Artois on his mother&#x27;s death in 1405. He almost immediately entered into open conflict with Duke Louis I of Orléans, the younger brother of the increasingly disturbed King Charles VI of France. Both men attempted to fill the power vacuum left by the demented king.

John played a game of marriages by exchanging his daughter Margaret of Burgundy for Michelle of Valois, who would marry his heir, Philip the Good. For her part, Margaret was married to Louis, Duke of Guyenne, the heir to the French throne from 1401 until his death in 1415. For all his concentration on aristocratic politics, John nonetheless did not overlook the importance of the middle class of merchants and tradesmen or the University of Paris.

Louis tried to gain the favour of the wife of Charles VI, Queen Isabeau of France, and may have become her lover. After his son-in-law, the Dauphin Louis, was successively kidnapped and recovered by both parties, the Duke of Burgundy managed to gain appointment by royal decree—during one of the king&#x27;s &quot;absent&quot; periods when mental illness manifested itself—as guardian of the Dauphin and the king&#x27;s children. This did not improve relations between John and the Duke of Orléans. Soon the two rivals descended into making open threats. Their uncle, John, Duke of Berry, secured a vow of solemn reconciliation on 20 November 1407, but only three days later, on 23 November 1407, Louis was brutally assassinated in the streets of Paris. The order, no one doubted, had come from the Duke of Burgundy, who shortly admitted to the deed and declared it to be a justifiable act of &quot;tyrannicide&quot;. According to Thomas Walsingham, Orléans had simply received his just deserts as he had been &quot;taking his pleasure with whores, harlots, incest&quot; and had committed adultery with the wife of an unnamed knight who had taken his revenge by killing him under the protection of the Duke of Burgundy. After an escape from Paris and a few skirmishes against the Orléans party, John managed to recover the king&#x27;s favour. In the treaty of Chartres, signed on 9 March 1409, the king absolved the Duke of Burgundy of the crime, and he and Louis&#x27; son Charles pledged a reconciliation. A later edict renewed John&#x27;s guardianship of the Dauphin.

He moved further closer to securing the Regency for himself when he had Jean de Montagu, Grand Master of France and the king&#x27;s long standing favorite and administrator aligned with the Orleanists, arrested during another one of Charles&#x27; manic episodes, and after an expedited summary trial carried out by the Burgundian-aligned politicians, Montagu was beheaded at the Gibbet of Montfaucon on 17 October 1409.

Even with the Orléans dispute resolved in his favour, John did not lead a tranquil life. Charles, the son and heir of the murdered Duke of Orleans, was only 14 at the time of his father&#x27;s death and was forced to depend heavily on allies to support his claims for the property that had been confiscated from him by the Duke of Burgundy. Chief among these allies was his father-in-law Bernard VII, Count of Armagnac. Because of this alliance, their faction became known as the Armagnacs in opposition to the Burgundians. With peace between the factions solemnly sworn in 1410, John returned to Burgundy and Bernard remained in Paris, where he reportedly shared the Queen&#x27;s bed. The Armagnac party was not content with its level of political power, and after a series of riots and attacks against the citizens, John was recalled to the capital, then sent back to Burgundy in 1413. At this time, King Henry V of England invaded French territory and threatened to attack Paris. During the peace negotiations with the Armagnacs, Henry was also in contact with John, who was keen to wrest control of France away from King Charles VI. Despite this, he continued to be wary of forming an alliance with the English for fear of destroying his immense popularity with the common people of France. When Henry demanded Burgundy&#x27;s support for his claim to be the rightful King of France, John backed away and decided to ally himself with the Armagnacs. Although he talked of helping his sovereign, his troops took no part in the Battle of Agincourt in 1415, although two of his brothers, Antoine, Duke of Brabant, and Philip II, Count of Nevers, died fighting for France during the battle.

==Conflict with the Dauphin==

Two years later, with the rivalry between Burgundians and Armagnacs at an all-time high because of the shattering defeat at Agincourt, John&#x27;s troops set about the task of capturing Paris. On 30 May 1418, he did capture the city, but not before the new Dauphin, the future Charles VII of France, had escaped. John then installed himself in Paris and made himself protector of the king. Although not an open ally of the English, John did nothing to prevent the surrender of Rouen in 1419. With the whole of northern France in English hands and Paris occupied by Burgundy, the Dauphin tried to bring about a reconciliation with John. They met in July and swore peace on the bridge of Pouilly-le-Fort, near Melun. On the grounds that peace was not sufficiently assured by the meeting at Pouilly, a fresh interview was proposed by the Dauphin to take place on 10 September 1419 on the bridge at Montereau. John of Burgundy was present with his escort for what he considered a diplomatic meeting. He was, however, assassinated by the Dauphin&#x27;s companions. He was later buried in Dijon. Following this, his son and successor Philip the Good formed an alliance with the English, which would prolong the Hundred Years&#x27; War for decades and cause incalculable damage to France and its subjects.

==Family==
John and his wife Margaret, who were married in 1385, had the following children:
#Marie (1393–1463, Monterberg bei Kalkar); married Adolph I, Duke of Cleves
#Margaret (1393–1442, Paris); married on 30 August 1404 Louis of Valois the Dauphin (heir of king Charles VI of France); then in 1423 Arthur de Richemont, the future Duke of Brittany
#Philip ΙΙΙ (1396–1467), son and heir
#Catherine (1399–1414, Ghent); promised in 1410 to Louis III of Anjou, son of Louis of Anjou
#Joanna (1399–1406), died young
#Isabelle (1400–1412, Rouvres); married at Arras on 22 July 1406 Olivier de Châtillon-Blois, Count of Penthièvre and Périgord
#Anne (1404–1432, Paris); married John, Duke of Bedford
#Agnes (1407–1476, Château de Moulins); married Charles I, Duke of Bourbon

John and his mistress Agnes de Croy, daughter of Jean I de Croÿ, had the following child:
* John of Burgundy, Bishop of Cambrai

John and his mistress Marguerite de Borsele had the following children:
* Guy of Burgundy, Lord of Kruibeke (killed at the siege of Calais in 1436); married Johanna, illegitimate daughter of Albert I, Duke of Bavaria
* Antoine of Burgundy
* Philipotte of Burgundy, Lady of Joncy; married Antoine of Rochebaron, Baron of Berze-le-Chatel

==Titles==

* 1384–1404: Count of Nevers as &quot;John I&quot;
* 27 April 1404 – 10 September 1419: Duke of Burgundy as &quot;John I&quot;
* 21 March 1405 – 10 September 1419: Count Palatine of Burgundy as &quot;John I&quot;
* 21 March 1405 – 10 September 1419: Count of Artois as &quot;John I&quot;
* 21 March 1405 – 10 September 1419: Count of Flanders as &quot;John I&quot;
* 27 April 1404 – 28 January 1405: Count of Charolais as &quot;John I&quot;

==See also==
*Duke of Burgundy

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*

==External links==

*Jean sans Peur/John the Fearless. Archived.
*Tour Jean-sans-Peur (in French)
*One of John the Fearless&#x27; rings (in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298901" start="0" end="6" title="John the Fearless" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753066" start="51" end="83" title="Prince du sang" label="scion of the French royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882199" start="98" end="114" title="Burgundian State" label="Burgundian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="280" end="292" title="schizophrenic" label="mentally ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="298" end="308" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="324" end="347" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="360" end="378" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q337057" start="468" end="483" title="Louis I, Duke of Orléans" label="Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021160" start="567" end="596" title="Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War" label="Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="600" end="606" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866970" start="633" end="654" title="Assassination of John the Fearless" label="his own assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="684" end="691" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="784" end="790" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778618" start="881" end="892" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War, 1415–1453" label="final phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="917" end="923" title="Philip the Bold" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031722" start="983" end="1002" title="Gunpowder artillery in the Middle Ages" label="gunpowder artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="1126" end="1131" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="1155" end="1170" title="Philip the Bold" label="Philip the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q466252" start="1196" end="1220" title="Margaret III of Flanders" label="Margaret III of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q469648" start="1269" end="1289" title="Louis II of Flanders" label="Louis II of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070440" start="1315" end="1331" title="County of Nevers" label="County of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q181285" start="1400" end="1407" title="Cambrai" label="Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q271914" start="1422" end="1430" title="Margaret of Bavaria" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q77253" start="1450" end="1469" title="Albert I of Holland" label="Albert I of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q492512" start="1505" end="1513" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Duchess of Bavaria" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q77247" start="1540" end="1547" title="William II, Duke of Bavaria" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1600" end="1613" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q957259" start="1696" end="1705" title="Catherine of France, Countess of Montpensier" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="1726" end="1745" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1817" end="1833" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="1906" end="1931" title="King Sigismund of Hungary" label="King Sigismund of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="1951" end="1967" title="Sultan Bayezid I" label="Sultan Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212220" start="2010" end="2029" title="Battle of Nicopolis" label="Battle of Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="2422" end="2439" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="2497" end="2505" title="County of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="2507" end="2515" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q778266" start="2520" end="2526" title="County of Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q337057" start="2622" end="2640" title="Louis I of Orléans" label="Louis I of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="2697" end="2717" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q938624" start="2850" end="2870" title="Margaret of Nevers" label="Margaret of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q269953" start="2875" end="2893" title="Michelle of Valois" label="Michelle of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="2921" end="2936" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347131" start="2976" end="2998" title="Louis, Duke of Guyenne" label="Louis, Duke of Guyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="3189" end="3197" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="3220" end="3239" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q154064" start="3300" end="3313" title="Isabeau of Bavaria" label="Queen Isabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="3382" end="3395" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q346761" start="3810" end="3829" title="John, Duke of Berry" label="John, Duke of Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369583" start="4141" end="4152" title="tyrannicide" label="tyrannicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525652" start="4173" end="4190" title="Thomas Walsingham" label="Thomas Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="4331" end="4339" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="4368" end="4374" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="4602" end="4610" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q310146" start="4716" end="4723" title="Charles, Duke of Orléans" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q937915" start="4886" end="4901" title="Jean de Montagu" label="Jean de Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427773" start="4903" end="4925" title="Grand Master of France" label="Grand Master of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637199" start="5100" end="5113" title="summary trial" label="summary trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q987914" start="5193" end="5213" title="Gibbet of Montfaucon" label="Gibbet of Montfaucon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310146" start="5324" end="5331" title="Charles, Duke of Orléans" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q729206" start="5623" end="5653" title="Bernard VII, Count of Armagnac" label="Bernard VII, Count of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q301905" start="5715" end="5724" title="Armagnacs" label="Armagnacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="6142" end="6160" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188495" start="6764" end="6783" title="Battle of Agincourt" label="Battle of Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q470800" start="6823" end="6847" title="Antoine, Duke of Brabant" label="Antoine, Duke of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371809" start="6853" end="6879" title="Philip II, Count of Nevers" label="Philip II, Count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q151999" start="7214" end="7221" title="Dauphiné" label="Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="7234" end="7255" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="7434" end="7439" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536864" start="7614" end="7625" title="Treaty of Pouilly-le-Fort" label="swore peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41139" start="7665" end="7670" title="Melun" label="Melun"/>
<link wikidata="Q242191" start="7852" end="7861" title="Montereau-Fault-Yonne" label="Montereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="8040" end="8045" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="8085" end="8100" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="8162" end="8185" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847614" start="8351" end="8356" title="Mary of Burgundy, Duchess of Cleves" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q243554" start="8369" end="8390" title="Monterberg bei Kalkar" label="Monterberg bei Kalkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362618" start="8401" end="8425" title="Adolph I, Duke of Cleves" label="Adolph I, Duke of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q938624" start="8427" end="8435" title="Margaret of Nevers" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347131" start="8482" end="8509" title="Louis, Duke of Guyenne" label="Louis of Valois the Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="8524" end="8544" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q454053" start="8560" end="8579" title="Arthur III, Duke of Brittany" label="Arthur de Richemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352465" start="8592" end="8608" title="Duke of Brittany" label="Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="8610" end="8620" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip ΙΙΙ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="8670" end="8675" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q447535" start="8698" end="8716" title="Louis III of Anjou" label="Louis III of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q453529" start="8725" end="8739" title="Louis II of Anjou" label="Louis of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="8815" end="8820" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q434297" start="8837" end="8863" title="Olivier, Count of Penthièvre" label="Olivier de Châtillon-Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q536307" start="8899" end="8903" title="Anne of Burgundy" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q348441" start="8932" end="8953" title="John, Duke of Bedford" label="John, Duke of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q269783" start="8955" end="8960" title="Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Bourbon" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184883" start="8984" end="8991" title="Moulins, Allier" label="Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q692291" start="9002" end="9028" title="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021569" start="9079" end="9093" title="Jean I de Croÿ" label="Jean I de Croÿ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866362" start="9122" end="9157" title="John of Burgundy, Bishop of Cambrai" label="John of Burgundy, Bishop of Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q916980" start="9258" end="9266" title="Kruibeke" label="Kruibeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387677" start="9282" end="9297" title="Siege of Calais (1436)" label="siege of Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q77253" start="9350" end="9375" title="Albert I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Albert I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q777511" start="9521" end="9536" title="Count of Nevers" label="Count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="9596" end="9612" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15960093" start="9672" end="9698" title="Count Palatine of Burgundy" label="Count Palatine of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135302" start="9758" end="9773" title="Count of Artois" label="Count of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="9833" end="9850" title="Count of Flanders" label="Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q707090" start="9908" end="9926" title="Charolais (county)" label="Count of Charolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="9964" end="9980" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628940" wikidata="Q4066983" url="?curid=628940" title="Icons of Evolution">
<text>Icons of Evolution is a book by Jonathan Wells, an advocate of the pseudoscientific intelligent design argument for the existence of God and fellow of the Discovery Institute, in which Wells criticizes the paradigm of evolution by attacking how it is taught. The book includes a 2002 video companion. In 2000, Wells summarized the book&#x27;s contents in an article in the &quot;American Spectator&quot;. Several of the scientists whose work is sourced in the book have written rebuttals to Wells, stating that they were quoted out of context, that their work has been misrepresented, or that it does not imply Wells&#x27;s conclusions.

Representatives of majority views in the scientific community have criticized the book and regard it as pseudoscientific, at the extreme of the struggle against evolutionary science. It was criticised for its claims that schoolchildren are deliberately misled, and its conclusions as to the evidential status of the theory of evolution, which is considered by scientists to be the central unifying paradigm of biology. Kevin Padian and Alan D. Gishlick wrote a review in &quot;Quarterly Review of Biology&quot; which said: &quot;In our view, regardless of Wells&#x27;s religious or philosophical background, his &quot;Icons of Evolution&quot; can scarcely be considered a work of scholarly integrity.&quot;
Gishlick wrote a more detailed critique for the National Center for Science Education in his article &quot;Icon of Evolution? Why much of what Jonathan Wells writes about evolution is wrong.&quot; Nick Matzke reviewed Wells&#x27; work in the talk.origins article &quot;Icon of Obfuscation&quot;, and Wells responded with &quot;A Response to Published Reviews&quot; (2002).

==Reception by the scientific community and criticism==
The members of the scientific community who have reviewed &quot;Icons of Evolution&quot; have rejected his claims and conclusions. Scientists quoted in the work have accused Wells&#x27; of purposely misquoting them and misleading readers. This includes biologist Bruce Grant, who said Wells was &quot;dishonest&quot; with his work and biologist Jerry Coyne who said Wells &quot;misused&quot; and &quot;mischaracterized&quot; his work on peppered moths. Specific rejections stand beside the already broader response of the scientific community in overwhelmingly rejecting intelligent design as a valid scientific theory, instead seeing it as pseudoscience.

Nick Matzke reviewed the work in an article titled &quot;Icon of Obfuscation&quot;, and critiqued the book chapter by chapter. Matzke concluded, &quot;&quot;Icons of Evolution&quot; makes a travesty of the notion of honest scholarship&quot;, and that &quot;&quot;Icons&quot; contains numerous instances of unfair distortions of scientific opinion, generated by the pseudoscientific tactics of selective citation of scientists and evidence, quote-mining, and &#x27;argumentative sleight-of-hand&#x27;, the last meaning Wells&#x27;s tactic of padding his topical discussions with incessant, biased editorializing&quot;.

Jerry Coyne wrote &quot;Icons&quot; &quot;rests entirely on a flawed syllogism: ... textbooks illustrate evolution with examples; these examples are sometimes presented in incorrect or misleading ways; therefore evolution is a fiction.&quot;

Of the Wells&#x27; motive, Alan D. Gishlick wrote: It is clear from Wells&#x27;s treatment of the &quot;icons&quot; and his grading scheme that his interest is not to improve the teaching of evolution, but rather to teach anti-evolutionism. Under Wells&#x27;s scheme, teachers would be hostile to evolution as part of biology instruction. Wells and his allies hope that this would open the door to alternatives to evolution (such as &quot;intelligent design&quot;) without actually having to support them with science...In conclusion, the scholarship of &quot;Icons&quot; is substandard and the conclusions of the book are unsupported. In fact, despite his touted scientific credentials, Wells doesn&#x27;t produce a single piece of original research to support his position. Instead, Wells parasitizes on other scientists&#x27; legitimate work. Likewise Frederick Crews of &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot; wrote: &quot;Wells mines the standard evolutionary textbooks for exaggerated claims and misleading examples, which he counts as marks against evolution itself. His goal, of course, is not to improve the next editions of those books but to get them replaced by ID counterparts.&quot;

In 2002, Massimo Pigliucci devoted part of his &quot;Denying Evolution&quot; to refuting each point presented in &quot;Icons of Evolution&quot;. Amongst the refutations Pigliucci noted several mistakes Wells made and outlined how Wells oversimplified some issues to the detriment of the subject. Pigliucci also wrote an article-length review in BioScience and concludes, &quot;Wells, as much as he desperately tries to debunk what to him is the most crucial component of evolutionary theory, the history of human descent, is backed against the wall by his own knowledge of biology.&quot; In 2005, Pigliucci debated Wells on Uncommon Knowledge on broader issues of evolution and intelligent design.

Barbara Forrest and Paul R. Gross discuss Wells&#x27; book in &quot;Creationism&#x27;s Trojan Horse&quot;. One issue they highlighted was Wells&#x27; accusation that Haeckel forged images of embryos that are allegedly still in biology books. Forrest and Gross noted that Haeckel&#x27;s, &quot;a conservative Christian youth&quot;, work was fudged&#x27;, as biologist Massimo Pigliucci says, not &#x27;faked&#x27;.&quot; However, &quot;we have excellent photographs, to which students can obtain easy access. Many or most colleges students of introductory biology actually see the embryos in the laboratory ...&quot; Moreover, &quot;vertebrate embryos, for most of the longest period of middevelopment, &quot;do&quot; look remarkably alike, pretty much, but not exactly, as Haeckel figured them in some of his drawings&quot;(emphasis in original).&quot;

Richard Weisenberg, biologist at Temple University, wrote an open letter to Wells in &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; noting &quot;Evolution by natural selection and the origin of life are entirely different subjects. ... The validity of any particular theory of biological origins (and there are several) has no relevancy to the well-established validity of evolution by natural selection.&quot; He continued, &quot;I can only conclude that you have failed to master even a fraction of the massive body of evidence supporting the principle of evolution by natural selection.&quot;

The response of the single publisher named by Wells as having revised textbooks on the basis of his work has been condemned by Steven Schafersman, President of Texas Citizens for Science, and PZ Myers.
That Wells&#x27; doctorate in biology at University of California, Berkeley was funded by Sun Myung Moon&#x27;s Unification Church and a statement describing those studies as learning how to &quot;destroy Darwinism&quot; are viewed by the scientific community as evidence that Wells lacks proper scientific objectivity and mischaracterizes evolution by ignoring and misrepresenting the evidence supporting it while pursuing an agenda promoting notions supporting his religious beliefs in its stead. The Discovery Institute has stated in response that &quot;Darwinists have resorted to attacks on Dr. Wells&#x27;s religion.&quot;

In 2009, Patricia Princehouse, Professor at Case Western Reserve University, testified in a Mount Vernon City School District hearing that &quot;Icons&quot; was full of fraudulent representations of material in science textbooks. Christopher Hitchens describes the book as &quot;unlikely even to rate a footnote in the history of piffle&quot;.

==Reception by creationists==
The book has been praised by creationists and fellows of the Discovery Institute Dean Kenyon and Paul Chien.

==Wells&#x27;s icons==
Wells focused on 10 examples that he said were commonly used to teach evolution, which he called &quot;icons&quot;. He evaluated how seven of these icons are treated in ten &quot;widely used&quot; high school and undergraduate textbooks. Although Wells established a grading scale for the textbooks, Alan Gishlick reported that the grading scale was poorly constructed and inconsistently used. Wells contended that the 10 case studies used to illustrate and teach evolution are flawed. Wells&#x27;s ten &quot;icons&quot; were:

The last three &quot;icons&quot; – four-winged fruit flies, horse evolution, and human evolution –- were discussed in the book, but Wells did not evaluate their coverage in textbooks. Although most textbooks cover the first seven &quot;icons&quot;, they are not used as the &quot;best evidence&quot; of evolution in any of the textbooks.

===Miller–Urey experiment===
The Miller–Urey experiment was an experiment that simulated what were believed to be the conditions on the early Earth and tested the Oparin–Haldane model for chemical evolution. In &quot;Icons of Evolution&quot; Wells argued that since the atmospheric composition used in the experiment is now known to be incorrect, it should not be used in textbooks. Wells said that current ideas about the atmospheric composition of the early Earth makes this type of chemical synthesis impossible due to the presence of &quot;significant&quot; amounts of oxygen. Matzke contends that Wells mischaracterises pre-biotic levels of oxygen; although current estimates of the oxygen content are higher than those used in the experiment, they are still far more reducing than Wells suggests. Gishlick discussed fourteen other Miller–Urey type experiments which were able to synthesise amino acids under a variety of conditions, including ones that were done under conditions like those currently believed to have been present in at the time when life is thought to have originated.

Wells gave four textbooks a D grade, and the other six Fs. Gishlick contended that Wells criteria &quot;stack the deck against [the textbooks], ensuring failure. Wells grading criteria give a C or worse to any textbook that has a picture of the Miller–Urey apparatus unless the figure caption explicitly says that the experiment is irrelevant, regardless of whether or not the text being illustrated by the picture states that the atmosphere used in the experiment was incorrect. Gishlick notes that even the intelligent design textbook, &quot;Of Pandas and People&quot;, would only receive a C. The claim that it is irrelevant is incorrect, as the experiment marked a major advance in studies of the origin of life, its results are still valid, and for teaching purposes it shows the methods of good experimental science.

===Darwin&#x27;s tree of life===
Wells discussed the use of phylogenetic trees in biology textbooks, though Charles Darwin himself only included a schematic diagram in his works. Wells stated that textbooks do not adequately address the &quot;Cambrian Explosion&quot; and the emergence of &quot;top-down&quot; patterns of emergence of major phyla. He said that disagreements between morphological and molecular phylogenies disprove common ancestry and that textbooks should treat universal common descent as an unproven theory. Although Wells presented the Cambrian Explosion as happening too quickly for the diversity to have been generated through &quot;Darwinian evolution&quot;, Gishlick pointed out that the Cambrian fauna developed over 60,000,000 years. In addition, the emergence of major phyla does not mean that they originated during that time period, but rather that they developed the characteristic features that allow them to be classified into existing phyla. In addition, since phylogenies summarize data, they are not presented as &quot;evidence of evolution&quot;, but rather as summaries.

Wells gave two textbooks Ds and the other eight Fs. Gishlick pointed out that Wells did not use the grading system consistently, criticising books for failing to discuss the Cambrian Explosion if they do so without calling it an explosion.

===Haeckel&#x27;s embryos===
PZ Myers, reviewing the chapter in which Wells takes on Haeckel&#x27;s embryos, wrote:

In 2003, Holt, Rinehart and Winston said it re-evaluated the use of the peppered moth and Haeckel&#x27;s drawing of embryos from its textbook prior to publication. The publisher said, &quot;. . . in &quot;Holt Biology Texas&quot; of the Miller–Urey experiment carefully indicates the mistakes made in the assumptions about the early atmosphere. Throughout &quot;Holt Biology Texas&quot;, the theory of evolution is described as a true scientific theory that will be refined and improved in the light of new evidence.&quot;

To Wells&#x27; assertion in &quot;Icons&quot; that Haeckel&#x27;s embryos and recapitulation theory appearing in biology textbooks is evidence of flaws in the teaching of evolution, Myers said &quot;I&#x27;d say Jonathan Wells&#x27; claim is pretty much dead. Haeckel&#x27;s work is not one of the pillars upon which evolution is built, and biologists have been saying so for at least 85 years (and more like over a century). Next time one of those clowns tries to haunt modern biology with the ghost of Ernst Haeckel, just look &#x27;em in the eye and tell them they&#x27;re full of crap.&quot;
The documentary &quot;Flock of Dodos&quot; challenges Wells&#x27; assertion, widely repeated by design advocates, that Haeckel&#x27;s embryos are widespread in evolution textbooks.

Science communicator Brian Switek said &quot;If one reads Wells&#x27; criterion for his bogus A–F grading scale for the textbooks in Icons, it quickly becomes apparent that even publishing illustrations that resemble Haeckel&#x27;s to illustrate his folly will garner the book a D, the only difference between a D and an F in Wells&#x27; mind being a &#x27;D&#x27; grade book selecting a few embryos rather than publishing the full swath Haeckel originally doctored.&quot; PZ Myers says of Wells&#x27;s claim about the use of Haeckel drawings in modern textbooks &quot;They repeat the claim that Haeckel&#x27;s embryos and all that silly recapitulation theory are still endemic in biology textbooks. It&#x27;s not true, no matter how much they whine about it. I&#x27;ve gone over a number of these textbooks, and what you typically find at worst is a figure of the Haeckel diagrams for historical interest with an explanation that rejects recapitulation theory; more often what you find are photos or independently redrawn illustrations of the embryos.&quot;

===Darwin&#x27;s finches===
In the chapter on Darwin&#x27;s finches, Wells argues that Darwin&#x27;s finches were merely a &quot;speculative afterthought&quot;. Wells claims that ornithologist David Lack is more to be credited with the popular finches, and that it was Lack who paraded the finches and claimed that they were instrumental in Darwin&#x27;s theories. This claim is contradicted by Alan D. Gishlick and Dave Wisker, who state that Darwin &quot;was&quot; in fact heavily influenced by the finches as early as 1837, with Wisker stating that &quot;Wells seems to be the one doing the speculating&quot;. Wells argues that, rather than evolving, the finch species may be &quot;merging&quot;, combining from multiple species into a single species rather than diverging from a single species into multiple species. Wells argues that, due to interbreeding between many of the finch &quot;species&quot;, the 13 species may actually be less than previously thought. Contradicting this, Gishlick states that the separation &quot;according to which species are separated by behaviors that lead animals to &quot;recognize&quot; potential mates&quot; is &quot;widely accepted&quot;. Wisker states that hybridization among finch species on the Galápagos Islands is, in fact, rare. Both agree that even if hybridization did occur, it would be irrelevant, because evolution does not specifically require divergence.
Wisker concludes:
==Cover picture==
The book&#x27;s title is a reference to the famous picture &quot;March of Progress&quot;. This drawing, by Rudolph Zallinger, was published in the Time-Life book &quot;Early Man&quot; in 1965 and shows a sequence of primates walking from left to right, starting with a non-human ape on the left, progressing through a series of hominids, and finishing with a modern human on the right. A version of the drawing is on the cover of the book, and Wells describes it as the &quot;ultimate icon&quot; of evolution.

==Video==
In 2002, a video titled &quot;Icons Of Evolution&quot; and produced by Coldwater Media. In it, Wells discusses the ideas presented in the book. The video also covers the story of Roger DeHart, one of the Discovery Institute&#x27;s media campaigns claiming discrimination. The &quot;Seattle Weekly&quot; recalled the DeHart issue saying the video did not tell &quot;the whole truth&quot;.

==Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District==
At meetings of the Dover Area School District Board of Education, in Pennsylvania, in June 2004, &quot;six day&quot; creationist board member Bill Buckingham made statements supporting creationism and objected to proposed use of the textbook &quot;Biology&quot; written by Kenneth R. Miller. The story appeared in York County newspapers, and Buckingham was telephoned by Discovery Institute staff attorney Seth Cooper, whose tasks included &quot;communicating with ‘legislators, school board members, teachers, parents and students&quot; to “address the topic of ID in a scientifically and educationally responsible way” in public schools. Following discussions, Cooper sent the book and DVD of &quot;Icons of Evolution&quot; to Buckingham, who required the Dover High School botany teachers to watch the DVD. They did not take up the opportunity to use it in their classes. The school board subsequently introduced a requirement that teachers read a statement to students in the ninth-grade biology class at Dover High School, asserting that Darwin&#x27;s theory of evolution &quot;is still being tested as new evidence is discovered. The theory is not a fact. Gaps in the theory exist for which there is no evidence.&quot; This led to the &quot;Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District&quot; case which found that intelligent design is a form of creationism, and the school board policy was unconstitutional.

==References==
==External links==

=== Supporting &#x27;Icons of Evolution&#x27; ===
* Icons of Evolution – Official website from the Discovery Institute

===Critical of &#x27;Icons of Evolution&#x27;===
* Icons of Evolution FAQs at the TalkOrigins Archive
* A reasonably short guide to Wells&#x27; &quot;icons&quot; of evolution, and why they are not what he claims by Massimo Pigliucci
* No Icons of Evolution: A Review of by evolutionary biologist Massimo Pigliucci
* Fatally Flawed Iconoclasm by Eugenie Scott
* Selection of critical reviews from Don Lindsay</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2633530" start="32" end="46" title="Jonathan Wells (intelligent design advocate)" label="Jonathan Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q172618" start="84" end="102" title="intelligent design" label="intelligent design"/>
<link wikidata="Q197662" start="155" end="174" title="Discovery Institute" label="Discovery Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="206" end="214" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="218" end="227" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713567" start="379" end="397" title="American Spectator" label="American Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="742" end="758" title="Pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="954" end="973" title="theory of evolution" label="theory of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740230" start="1057" end="1069" title="Kevin Padian" label="Kevin Padian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367751" start="1115" end="1142" title="Quarterly Review of Biology" label="Quarterly Review of Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q617660" start="1393" end="1430" title="National Center for Science Education" label="National Center for Science Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947724" start="1542" end="1553" title="Nick Matzke" label="Nick Matzke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125833" start="1587" end="1599" title="talk.origins" label="talk.origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106561" start="1974" end="1989" title="quote mining" label="misquoting them"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403330" start="2038" end="2049" title="Bruce Grant (professor)" label="Bruce Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227192" start="2120" end="2131" title="Jerry Coyne" label="Jerry Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="2212" end="2226" title="peppered moths" label="peppered moths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239681" start="2376" end="2393" title="scientific theory" label="scientific theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="2416" end="2429" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947724" start="2432" end="2443" title="Nick Matzke" label="Nick Matzke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227192" start="3051" end="3062" title="Jerry Coyne" label="Jerry Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="3120" end="3129" title="syllogism" label="syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087101" start="4149" end="4164" title="Frederick Crews" label="Frederick Crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="4174" end="4202" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="4502" end="4519" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4546" end="4563" title="Denying Evolution: Creationism, Scientism, and the Nature of Science" label="Denying Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092250" start="4838" end="4848" title="BioScience" label="BioScience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882871" start="5117" end="5135" title="Uncommon Knowledge" label="Uncommon Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q807426" start="5192" end="5207" title="Barbara Forrest" label="Barbara Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153052" start="5212" end="5225" title="Paul R. Gross" label="Paul R. Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183472" start="5260" end="5291" title="Creationism&amp;#x27;s Trojan Horse" label="Creationism&amp;#x27;s Trojan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q32384" start="5358" end="5390" title="Recapitulation theory" label="Haeckel forged images of embryos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="5559" end="5576" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="6079" end="6096" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="6137" end="6162" title="The Philadelphia Inquirer" label="The Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539937" start="6761" end="6779" title="Steven Schafersman" label="Steven Schafersman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707569" start="6794" end="6820" title="Texas Citizens for Science" label="Texas Citizens for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="6877" end="6911" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="6926" end="6947" title="Sun Myung Moon" label="Sun Myung Moon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="6948" end="6966" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214913" start="7143" end="7154" title="Objectivity (science)" label="objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q197662" start="7339" end="7358" title="Discovery Institute" label="Discovery Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="7510" end="7541" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924360" start="7558" end="7591" title="Mount Vernon City School District (Ohio)" label="Mount Vernon City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="7696" end="7716" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q197662" start="7902" end="7921" title="Discovery Institute" label="Discovery Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246189" start="7922" end="7933" title="Dean Kenyon" label="Dean Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149819" start="7938" end="7948" title="Paul Chien" label="Paul Chien"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="8077" end="8082" title="icons" label="icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q208625" start="8874" end="8896" title="Miller–Urey experiment" label="Miller–Urey experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="8983" end="8988" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44483" start="9004" end="9010" title="Aleksandr Oparin" label="Oparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="9011" end="9018" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="9029" end="9047" title="Abiogenesis" label="chemical evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844550" start="10479" end="10499" title="Of Pandas and People" label="Of Pandas and People"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="10819" end="10836" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="10867" end="10881" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q32919" start="11002" end="11020" title="Cambrian Explosion" label="Cambrian Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="11100" end="11105" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="11142" end="11155" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="11160" end="11181" title="molecular phylogeny" label="molecular phylogenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="11191" end="11206" title="common descent" label="common ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075815" start="11814" end="11835" title="evidence of evolution" label="evidence of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q241802" start="12139" end="12147" title="PZ Myers" label="PZ Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335214" start="12195" end="12217" title="embryo drawing" label="Haeckel&amp;#x27;s embryos"/>
<link wikidata="Q110146983" start="12236" end="12262" title="Holt, Rinehart and Winston" label="Holt, Rinehart and Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="13255" end="13268" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="13351" end="13362" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459959" start="13369" end="13383" title="Flock of Dodos" label="Flock of Dodos"/>
<link wikidata="Q756311" start="14635" end="14656" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="14768" end="14781" title="ornithologist" label="ornithologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q732872" start="14782" end="14792" title="David Lack" label="David Lack"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="15790" end="15803" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="15831" end="15848" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756895" start="16102" end="16119" title="March of Progress" label="March of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377412" start="16144" end="16161" title="Rudolph F. Zallinger" label="Rudolph Zallinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806643" start="16184" end="16193" title="Time-Life" label="Time-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="16253" end="16260" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="16316" end="16319" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="16365" end="16372" title="hominid" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999192" start="16737" end="16749" title="Roger DeHart" label="Roger DeHart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16789" end="16828" title="Discovery Institute intelligent design campaigns#Campaigns claiming discrimination" label="media campaigns claiming discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q861430" start="16840" end="16854" title="Seattle Weekly" label="Seattle Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302468" start="17011" end="17037" title="Dover Area School District" label="Dover Area School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="17038" end="17056" title="Board of Education" label="Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="17061" end="17073" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074821" start="17089" end="17120" title="Young Earth creationism" label="&amp;quot;six day&amp;quot; creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="17177" end="17188" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386157" start="17265" end="17282" title="Kenneth R. Miller" label="Kenneth R. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q490914" start="17306" end="17317" title="York County, Pennsylvania" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q197662" start="17363" end="17382" title="Discovery Institute" label="Discovery Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089030" start="18239" end="18279" title="Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District" label="Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q197662" start="18538" end="18557" title="Discovery Institute" label="Discovery Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626439" start="18641" end="18660" title="TalkOrigins Archive" label="TalkOrigins Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="18774" end="18791" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="18855" end="18872" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q466831" start="18904" end="18917" title="Eugenie Scott" label="Eugenie Scott"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628941" wikidata="Q3570832" url="?curid=628941" title="Xavier de Roux">
<text>Xavier de Roux (; 4 December 1940 – 5 June 2015) was a French politician.

He was a member of the Radical Party and a deputy for the department Charente-Maritime in the National Assembly of France from 1993 until 1997 and from 2002 until 2007. From 1983 until his death in 2015 he was the elected mayor of Chaniers, a small town in Charente-Maritime.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3570832" start="0" end="14" title="Xavier de Roux" label="Xavier de Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542710" start="98" end="111" title="Radical Party (France)" label="Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175034" start="118" end="124" title="Deputy (legislator)" label="deputy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278" start="144" end="161" title="Charente-Maritime" label="Charente-Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="169" end="196" title="National Assembly of France" label="National Assembly of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q382617" start="297" end="302" title="Mayor (France)" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349664" start="306" end="314" title="Chaniers" label="Chaniers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628947" wikidata="Q409442" url="?curid=628947" title="CNR">
<text>CNR may stand for:

==Arts, entertainment and media==
*China National Radio, the national radio station of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
*CNR Music, a Dutch record and video/DVD label
*&quot;CNR&quot;, a song about Charles Nelson Reilly by &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic on the 2009 album &quot;Internet Leaks&quot;
*&quot;Cartoon Network Racing&quot;, a racing video game for the PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS

==Businesses and organisations==
*Canadian National Railway (CN), formerly Canadian National Railways (CNR)
*CNR Group, the China Northern Locomotive &amp; Rolling Stock Industry (Group) Corporation
**China CNR, a Chinese railway equipment manufacturer
*Rausser College of Natural Resources at the University of California, Berkeley
*College of New Rochelle, Catholic college based in New Rochelle, New York, U.S.
*College of Natural Resources (Bhutan)
*Compagnie Nationale du Rhône, a French electricity generating company
*Council of National Representatives, governing body of International Council of Nurses
*Czech National Council, Česká národní rada (ČNR), former legislative body of the Czech Republic 
*National Council of the Resistance, Conseil national de la Résistance, World War II French organisation
*National Council of European Resistance (French: &quot;Conseil National de la Résistance Européenne&quot;), French political organization
*National Research Council (Italy), Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Italian national research council
*Romanian National Committee (Romanian: &quot;Comitetul Național Român&quot;), the name of several organisations

==People==
*Charles Nelson Reilly (1931–2007), American actor, comedian, director 
*C. N. R. Rao (born 1934), solid state scientist

==Science and technology==
*CNR (software), formerly software for Linux
*Carrier-to-noise ratio, the signal-to-noise ratio of a modulated signal
*Chief of Naval Research, in the U.S. Navy
*Cisco Network Registrar, software
*Communications and networking riser, a PC motherboard slot
*Combat-net radio
*Contrast-to-noise ratio, a measure used to determine image quality

==Other uses==
*CNR Yenişehir Exhibition Center, Mersin, Turkey
* codice_1, ISO 639-3 and ISO 639-2 code for Montenegrin language
* Catholic, nationalist, republican community in Northern Ireland

==See also==
*CNR Bridge (disambiguation)
*Cops and Robbers (disambiguation)
*List of colleges of natural resources</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q409442" start="0" end="3" title="CNR" label="CNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072025" start="55" end="75" title="China National Radio" label="China National Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553853" start="144" end="153" title="CNR Music" label="CNR Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065627" start="221" end="242" title="Charles Nelson Reilly" label="Charles Nelson Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284461" start="300" end="314" title="Internet Leaks" label="Internet Leaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940654" start="328" end="350" title="Cartoon Network Racing" label="Cartoon Network Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="451" end="476" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682429" start="526" end="535" title="CNR Group" label="CNR Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849462" start="618" end="627" title="China CNR" label="China CNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895156" start="671" end="707" title="Rausser College of Natural Resources" label="Rausser College of Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146784" start="751" end="774" title="College of New Rochelle" label="College of New Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258671" start="832" end="869" title="College of Natural Resources (Bhutan)" label="College of Natural Resources (Bhutan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121170" start="871" end="899" title="Compagnie Nationale du Rhône" label="Compagnie Nationale du Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666482" start="997" end="1028" title="International Council of Nurses" label="International Council of Nurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529439" start="1030" end="1052" title="Czech National Council" label="Czech National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q553643" start="1128" end="1162" title="National Council of the Resistance" label="National Council of the Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43131096" start="1233" end="1272" title="National Council of European Resistance" label="National Council of European Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q902464" start="1372" end="1405" title="National Research Council (Italy)" label="National Research Council (Italy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724450" start="1478" end="1505" title="Romanian National Committee" label="Romanian National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065627" start="1603" end="1624" title="Charles Nelson Reilly" label="Charles Nelson Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248892" start="1675" end="1687" title="C. N. R. Rao" label="C. N. R. Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742054" start="1752" end="1766" title="CNR (software)" label="CNR (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046339" start="1797" end="1819" title="Carrier-to-noise ratio" label="Carrier-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17481007" start="1870" end="1893" title="Chief of Naval Research" label="Chief of Naval Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308412" start="1913" end="1936" title="Cisco Network Registrar" label="Cisco Network Registrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120481" start="1948" end="1983" title="Communications and networking riser" label="Communications and networking riser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150593" start="2008" end="2024" title="Combat-net radio" label="Combat-net radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165749" start="2026" end="2049" title="Contrast-to-noise ratio" label="Contrast-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206608" start="2110" end="2141" title="CNR Yenişehir Exhibition Center" label="CNR Yenişehir Exhibition Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="2203" end="2223" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2273" end="2289" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43171751" start="2305" end="2332" title="CNR Bridge (disambiguation)" label="CNR Bridge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370200" start="2334" end="2367" title="Cops and Robbers (disambiguation)" label="Cops and Robbers (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769481" start="2369" end="2406" title="List of colleges of natural resources" label="List of colleges of natural resources"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628948" wikidata="Q2972913" url="?curid=628948" title="Signal strength and readability report">
<text>A signal strength and readability report is a standardized format for reporting the strength of the radio signal and the readability (quality) of the radiotelephone (voice) or radiotelegraph (Morse code) signal transmitted by another station as received at the reporting station&#x27;s location and by their radio station equipment. These report formats are usually designed for only one communications mode or the other, although a few are used for both telegraph and voice communications. All but one of these signal report formats involve the transmission of numbers.

== History ==
As the earliest radio communication used Morse code, all radio signal reporting formats until about the 1920s were for radiotelegraph, and the early voice radio signal report formats were based on the telegraph report formats.

=== Timeline of signal report formats ===

* The first signal report format code may have been QJS.
* The U.S. Navy used R and K signals starting in 1929.
* The QSK code was one of the twelve Q Codes listed in the 1912 International Radiotelegraph Convention Regulations, but may have been in use earlier.
* The QSA code was included in the Madrid Convention (Appendix 10, General Regulations) sometime prior to 1936.
* The Amateur radio R-S-T system signal report format currently in use was first developed in 1934.
* As early as 1943, the U.S and UK military published the first guidance that included the modern &quot;Weak but readable&quot;, &quot;Strong but distorted&quot;, and &quot;Loud and clear&quot; phrases.
* By 1951, the CCEB had published ACP 125(A) (a.k.a. SGM-1O82-51), which formalized the 1943 &quot;Loud and clear&quot; format.

== Radiotelegraph report formats ==

=== Q-Code signal report formats ===

The QSA code and QRK code are interrelated and complementary signal reporting codes for use in wireless telegraphy (Morse code). They replaced the earlier QSJ code.

Currently, the QSA and QRK codes are officially defined in the ITU Radio Regulations 1990, Appendix 13: Miscellaneous Abbreviations and Signals to Be Used in Radiotelegraphy Communications Except in the Maritime Mobile Service. They are also described identically in ACP131(F),:
=== R-S-T system ===

Amateur radio users in the U.S. and Canada have used the R-S-T system since 1934. This system was developed by amateur radio operator Arthur W. Braaten, W2BSR. It reports the readability on a scale of 1 to 5, the signal strength on a scale of 1 to 9, and the tone of the Morse code continuous wave signal on a scale of 1 to 9. During amateur radio contests, where the rate of new contacts is paramount, contest participants often give a perfect signal report of 599 even when the signal is lower quality, because always providing the same signal format enables them to send Morse code with less thought and thus increased speed.
=== SINPO code ===

SINPO is an acronym for Signal, Interference, Noise, Propagation, and Overall, which was developed by the CCIR in 1951 (as C.C.I.R. Recommendation No. 251) for use in radiotelegraphy, and the standard is contained in &quot;Recommendation ITU-R Sm.1135, SINPO and SINPFEMO codes&quot;. This format is most notably used by the BBC for receiving signal reports on postcards mailed from listeners, even though that same standard specifies that the SINPFEMO code should be used for radiotelephony transmissions. SINPO is the official radiotelegraph signal reporting codes for international civil aviation and ITU-R.
== Radiotelephony report formats ==
=== R-S-T system ===

Amateur radio operators use the R-S-T system to describe voice transmissions, dropping the last digit (Tone report) because there is no continuous wave tone to report on.
=== SINPEMFO code ===

An extension of SINPO code, for use in radiotelephony (voice over radio) communications, SINPFEMO is an acronym for Signal, Interference, Noise, Propagation, Frequency of Fading, Depth, Modulation, and Overall.
=== Plain-language radio checks ===

The move to plain-language radio communications means that number-based formats are now considered obsolete, and are replaced by plain language radio checks. These avoid the ambiguity of which number stands for which type of report and whether a 1 is considered good or bad. This format originated with the U.S. military in World War II, and is currently defined by ACP 125 (G)., published by the Combined Communications Electronics Board.

The prowords listed below are for use when initiating and answering queries concerning signal strength and readability.

== Use in analog vs. digital radio transmission modes ==
In analog radio systems, as receiving stations move away from a radio transmitting site, the signal strength decreases gradually, causing the relative noise level to increase. The signal becomes increasingly difficult to understand until it can no longer be heard as anything other than static.

These reporting systems are usable for, but perhaps not completely appropriate for, rating digital signal quality. This is because digital signals have fairly consistent quality as the receiver moves away from the transmitter until reaching a threshold distance. At this threshold point, sometimes called the &quot;digital cliff,&quot;the signal quality takes a severe drop and is lost&quot;. This difference in reception reduces attempts to ascertain subjective signal quality to simply asking, &quot;Can you hear me now?&quot; or similar. The only possible response is &quot;yes&quot;; otherwise, there is just dead air. This sudden signal drop was also one of the primary arguments of analog proponents against moving to digital systems. However, the &quot;five bars&quot; displayed on many cell phones does directly correlate to the signal strength rating.

== Informal terminology and slang ==
The phrase &quot;five by five&quot; can be used informally to mean &quot;good signal strength&quot; or &quot;loud and clear&quot;. An early example of this phrase was in 1946, recounting a wartime conversation. The phrase was used in 1954 in the novel &quot;The Blackboard Jungle&quot;. Another example usage of this phrase is from June 1965 by the crew of the Gemini IV spacecraft. This phrase apparently refers to the fact that the format consists of two digits, each ranging from one to five, with five/five being the best signal possible.

Some radio users have inappropriately started using the Circuit Merit telephone line quality measurement. This format is unsuitable for radiotelegraph or radio-telephony use because it focuses on voice-to-noise ratios, for judging whether a particular telephone line is suitable for commercial (paying customer) use, and does not include separate reports for signal strength and voice quality.

== See also ==
* Mean opinion score
* Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ)
* Perceptual Objective Listening Quality Analysis (POLQA)
* Procedure word

==References==
== External links ==
* Ham Radio RST Signal Reporting System for CW Operation, by Charlie Bautsch, W5AM
* itu.int: SM.1135 - Sinpo and sinpfemo codes - ITU</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2972913" start="2" end="40" title="Signal strength and readability report" label="signal strength and readability report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="150" end="164" title="radiotelephone" label="radiotelephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="176" end="190" title="Wireless telegraphy" label="radiotelegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q507696" start="1006" end="1013" title="Q code" label="Q Codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="1855" end="1865" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856269" start="2263" end="2275" title="R-S-T system" label="R-S-T system"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="2867" end="2874" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q376047" start="2961" end="2965" title="ITU-R" label="CCIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4290" end="4302" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150848" start="4363" end="4404" title="Combined Communications Electronics Board" label="Combined Communications Electronics Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="4649" end="4672" title="radio transmitter" label="radio transmitting site"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105794" start="4678" end="4693" title="signal strength" label="signal strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132810" start="5196" end="5209" title="Cliff effect" label="digital cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215931" start="6038" end="6059" title="The Blackboard Jungle" label="The Blackboard Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q747769" start="6141" end="6150" title="Gemini IV" label="Gemini IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072629" start="6380" end="6393" title="Circuit Merit" label="Circuit Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915482" start="6736" end="6754" title="Mean opinion score" label="Mean opinion score"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739975" start="6757" end="6796" title="Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality" label="Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119955" start="6806" end="6853" title="Perceptual Objective Listening Quality Analysis" label="Perceptual Objective Listening Quality Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918312" start="6864" end="6878" title="Procedure word" label="Procedure word"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628950" wikidata="Q423077" url="?curid=628950" title="GTR">
<text>GTR may refer to:

==Transportation==
* Great River Railroad, in Mississippi, US
* Grand Trunk Railway, a defunct North American railway
* Golden Triangle Regional Airport (IATA and FAA LID codes), serving Columbus, Mississippi, US
* Govia Thameslink Railway, a British railway operator
* GTR Euroseries, a short-lived European auto racing series
* Global Technical Regulations, a 1998 multinational agreement regarding vehicle regulations

===Automobiles===
* Gran Turismo (racing), a type of sports car
** BMW M3 GTR
** Holden Torana GTR
** Isuzu Bellett GT-R
** Mazda Familia GT-R
** McLaren F1 GTR
** McLaren P1 GTR
** McLaren Senna GTR
** Mercedes-AMG GT R
** Mercedes-Benz CLK GTR
** Nissan Skyline GT-R
** Nissan GT-R
** Porsche 924 Carrera GTR
** Toyota Celica 2000 GTR
** Ultima GTR
** Ford Mustang GT-R concept car

==Science and medicine==
* General theory of relativity, also known as General relativity, in physics
* Generalised time reversible, in biology
* Guided tissue regeneration, in dentistry

==Video games==
* &quot;GTR – FIA GT Racing Game&quot;, a video game
* &quot;GTR Evolution&quot;, a video game
* GTR Group, owner of the defunct video game company Mad Catz

==Other uses==
* GTR (band), a British rock band
** &quot;GTR&quot; (album), their sole official studio album
* Gateway to Research (Gtr), UK research information portal
* GTR-18 Smokey Sam, an American SAM training rocket
* Green tree reservoir, flooded forest land

==See also==
* GT (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423077" start="0" end="3" title="GTR" label="GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599881" start="40" end="60" title="Great River Railroad" label="Great River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645718" start="83" end="102" title="Grand Trunk Railway" label="Grand Trunk Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275535" start="139" end="171" title="Golden Triangle Regional Airport" label="Golden Triangle Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737011" start="234" end="258" title="Govia Thameslink Railway" label="Govia Thameslink Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948700" start="289" end="303" title="GTR Euroseries" label="GTR Euroseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343899" start="420" end="438" title="vehicle regulation" label="vehicle regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="461" end="482" title="Gran Turismo (racing)" label="Gran Turismo (racing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q796579" start="508" end="518" title="BMW M3 GTR" label="BMW M3 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q739622" start="522" end="539" title="Holden Torana GTR" label="Holden Torana GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q643608" start="543" end="561" title="Isuzu Bellett GT-R" label="Isuzu Bellett GT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914618" start="565" end="578" title="Mazda Familia" label="Mazda Familia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826156" start="587" end="601" title="McLaren F1 GTR" label="McLaren F1 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407533" start="605" end="619" title="McLaren P1 GTR" label="McLaren P1 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q45304944" start="623" end="640" title="McLaren Senna GTR" label="McLaren Senna GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011551" start="644" end="661" title="Mercedes-AMG GT R" label="Mercedes-AMG GT R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754364" start="665" end="686" title="Mercedes-Benz CLK GTR" label="Mercedes-Benz CLK GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709643" start="690" end="709" title="Nissan Skyline GT-R" label="Nissan Skyline GT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q499109" start="713" end="724" title="Nissan GT-R" label="Nissan GT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q615865" start="728" end="751" title="Porsche 924 Carrera GTR" label="Porsche 924 Carrera GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q334040" start="755" end="777" title="Toyota Celica 2000 GTR" label="Toyota Celica 2000 GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003911" start="781" end="791" title="Ultima GTR" label="Ultima GTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467880" start="795" end="812" title="Ford Mustang GT-R" label="Ford Mustang GT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="897" end="915" title="General relativity" label="General relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632136" start="930" end="957" title="Generalised time reversible" label="Generalised time reversible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668581" start="972" end="998" title="Guided tissue regeneration" label="Guided tissue regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423320" start="1038" end="1062" title="GTR – FIA GT Racing Game" label="GTR – FIA GT Racing Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487380" start="1091" end="1104" title="GTR Evolution" label="GTR Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725925" start="1178" end="1186" title="Mad Catz" label="Mad Catz"/>
<link wikidata="Q747084" start="1205" end="1215" title="GTR (band)" label="GTR (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514754" start="1240" end="1263" title="GTR (album)" label="&amp;quot;GTR&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q38609561" start="1300" end="1319" title="Gateway to Research" label="Gateway to Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487366" start="1360" end="1377" title="GTR-18 Smokey Sam" label="GTR-18 Smokey Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603606" start="1413" end="1433" title="Green tree reservoir" label="Green tree reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q218084" start="1471" end="1490" title="GT (disambiguation)" label="GT (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628959" wikidata="Q7458683" url="?curid=628959" title="Sexual Offences Act 2003">
<text>The Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.

It partly replaced the Sexual Offences Act 1956 with more specific and explicit wording. It also created several new offences such as non-consensual voyeurism, assault by penetration, causing a child to watch a sexual act, and penetration of any part of a corpse. It defines and sets legal guidelines for rape in English law. It is also the main legislation dealing with child sexual abuse.

The corresponding legislation in Scotland is the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009 and in Northern Ireland the Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008.

==Major changes==
Part I of the Act makes many changes to the sexual crimes laws in England and Wales (and to some extent Northern Ireland), almost completely replacing the Sexual Offences Act 1956.

===Rape===
Rape has been redefined from the Sexual Offences Act 1956 (amended in 1976 and 1994) to read:

A person (A) commits an offence if—

(a) he intentionally penetrates the vagina, anus or mouth of another person (B) with his penis,

(b) B does not consent to the penetration, and

(c) A does not reasonably believe that B consents.
Rape previously did not include penetration of the mouth. The Act also changes the way in which lack of consent may be proved, and section 75 and 76 of the Act list circumstances in which lack of consent may be presumed.

===Assault by penetration===
Section 2 creates the offence of &quot;Assault by penetration&quot;. This offence is set out separately because rape is defined as requiring penile penetration. Therefore, non-consensual sexual penetration of the vagina or anus with either another part of the body (such as the fingers), or an object, must be prosecuted under this section. Section 2 closely mirrors section 1&#x27;s definition of rape, including the same maximum sentence (life imprisonment), but does not include penetration of the mouth, and carries the additional requirement that &quot;the penetration is sexual&quot;, i.e. performed for the purpose of either the offender&#x27;s sexual gratification or the victim&#x27;s sexual humiliation.

===Consent===
The Act made significant changes to the legal definition of consent.

Sections 64 and 65 relate to sexual relationships within the family. Section 64 prohibits penetrating any other family member, and section 65 prohibits consenting to such sexual activities. Initially the legislation did not include uncles, aunts, nieces and nephews but after some debate these were written into the provision.

Section 74 states that: &quot;For the purposes of this Part, a person consents if he agrees by choice, and has the freedom and capacity to make that choice.&quot;

==== Section 75 ====
Section 75 of the Act introduced a number of evidential presumptions, which prove lack of consent unless the defence can provide sufficient, contrary evidence that the claimant did consent. These presumptions require the relevant act to have taken place at the same time as one of six circumstances existed, about which the defendant was aware.

The circumstances are (summarised):

==== Section 76 ====
Section 76 of the Act introduces two conclusive presumptions. These are:

When either is proven, the law states that it is conclusively presumed that the complainant did not consent to the act, and the defendant was aware of the lack of consent. This cannot be rebutted by any contrary evidence, as is possible with section 75.

=== Dual criminality ===
Section 72 provides differing levels of dual criminality for specified offences according to the UK citizenship status of an offender. For UK nationals, acts outside the UK that would amount to an offence in the UK can be prosecuted as if they had been done in the UK, regardless of whether the acts are lawful where they were done. For UK residents, acts outside the United Kingdom have to constitute an offence in the country where they are committed, in order to be prosecuted in Britain.

=== Other provisions ===

The Act also now includes provisions against sex tourism. People who travel abroad with the intent to commit sexual offences can have their passports revoked or travel restricted. 

Group homosexual sex has been decriminalised, in that Schedule 6 of the 2003 Act caused section 12 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956 to be omitted, removing the offence of homosexual sex &quot;when more than two persons take part or are present&quot;.

Part II of the Act also consolidated the provisions of the Sex Offenders Act 1997 on registration of sex offenders and protective orders. These provisions generally apply throughout the United Kingdom.

Section 45(2) changed the definition of &quot;child&quot; in the Protection of Children Act 1978 (which applies to child pornography) from a person under 16 to a person under 18. Section 45 also inserted section 1A of the 1978 Act, and section 160A of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, which create defences which apply where the photograph showed the child alone or with the defendant (but not if it showed any other person), the defendant proves that the photograph was of the child aged 16 or over and that he and the child were married or lived together as partners in an enduring family relationship, and certain other conditions are met.

The Sexual Offences Act 2003 creates further offences relating to prostitution.
*Sections 47 to 50 prohibit child prostitution.
*Sections 52 and 53 prohibit pimping for financial gain.
*Sections 57 to 59 create offences relating to sex trafficking.
*The Act also inserted a new section 33A into the Sexual Offences Act 1956, which relates to brothels.
A new section 51A was inserted by the Policing and Crime Act 2009, which prohibits soliciting. This came into effect on 1 April 2010.

== Criticisms ==
The Act has faced criticism on several grounds.

===Consent===
The definition of consent has caused some academics to raise concerns about the way consent is interpreted. Bethany Simpson has suggested the terms &quot;freedom&quot; and &quot;choice&quot; used to define consent are too complex for the courts to apply.

===Underage persons===
One of the more controversial parts of the Act involves the criminalising of various common behaviours, such as laws which, on the face of it, outlaw consensual &quot;sexual hugging&quot; in public places or by underage persons, even when both participants are under age, followed by the issue of guidance notes which countermand this, saying they should almost never be prosecuted.

The Home Office stated that legalising consensual sexual activity between children &quot;would damage a fundamental plank in our raft of child protection measures&quot;. A spokesman said, &quot;We are not prepared to do this. We accept that genuinely mutually agreed, non-exploitative sexual activity between teenagers does take place and in many instances no harm comes from it. We are putting safeguards in place to ensure that these cases, which are not in the public interest, are not prosecuted – by amending guidance to the police and Crown Prosecution Service.&quot;

Criticism came from Action on Rights for Children: &quot;Laws should mean what they say. It&#x27;s astonishing that the government could consider legislation with the prior intent of issuing guidance to countermand it. I worry about the message it sends to young people – it seems to say that sometimes the law means what it says and sometimes it doesn&#x27;t.&quot;

Professor Nicola Lacey of the London School of Economics commented: &quot;What the Home Office would say was that they wanted to use the criminal law for symbolic impact, to say that it&#x27;s not a good thing for kids to be having sex. My counter-argument is that the criminal law is too dangerous a tool to be used for symbolic purposes. With this on the statute book, it will give police and prosecutors a lot of discretion. It could be used as a way of controlling kids who perhaps the police want to control for other reasons. Kids who perhaps are a nuisance or who belong to a group who attract the attention of the police in some way.&quot;

===Lack of transitional provisions===

The 2003 Act repealed most sections of the Sexual Offences Act 1956 and several other statutes dealing with sexual offences. Section 141 of the Act gave the Home Secretary the power to make rules by statutory instrument to deal with the transition from the old to the new laws, to cover the situation where a defendant is charged with offences which overlap the commencement date of 1 May 2004. However no such &quot;transitional provisions&quot; were ever made.

This resulted in cases where a defendant was accused of committing a sexual offence but the prosecution could not prove the exact date of the offence, which could have been committed either before or after 1 May 2004. In these cases, the defendant had to be found not guilty, regardless of how strong the evidence against them was because a sexual offence committed before 1 May was an offence under the old law, but an offence committed on or after that date was a different offence under the new law. For example, an assault might either be indecent assault under the 1956 Act, or the new offence of sexual assault under the 2003 Act, depending on when it happened, but it could not be both. If the prosecution could not prove beyond reasonable doubt which offence had been committed, then the defendant could not be convicted of either.

The Court of Appeal first dealt with this problem in December 2005, when the prosecution appealed against the decision of a judge to order a jury to acquit a defendant for precisely that reason. Dismissing the appeal, Lord Justice Rose said: &quot;If a history of criminal legislation ever comes to be written it is unlikely that 2003 will be identified as a year of exemplary skill in the annals of Parliamentary drafting.&quot;

This situation was not resolved until Parliament passed Section 55 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, which came into force in February 2007.

===Gendered definition of rape===
Under the Act&#x27;s definition of rape (penetration of the &quot;mouth, anus or vagina with [the defendant&#x27;s] penis&quot;), only a man can be charged with rape. A woman who forces a man or woman to have sexual intercourse with her against their will could only be charged, under Section 4 of the Act, with sexual assault or &quot;causing a person to engage in sexual activity without consent&quot;. Rape is an indictable offence while Section 4 offences are either way offences.

There have been calls for the Act to be amended to include female-perpetrated rape within the definition of rape. In September 2016, the Government responded to a petition requesting that the legal definition of rape be changed to include female-on-male assaults: “There was a considerable amount of agreement that rape should remain an offence of penile penetration. We therefore have no plans to amend the legal definition of rape.”

==Extent and repeals==
The Act applies to England and Wales only, except for the provisions listed in s.142(2) of the Act which also apply to Northern Ireland and the provisions listed in s.142(3) of the Act which also apply to Scotland. The Act repealed the Sex Offenders Act 1997 in its entirety, and almost all of the Sexual Offences Act 1956, which until then had been the main legislation for sexual offences. It also repealed much of the Sexual Offences Act 1967 which had discriminated heavily against homosexual and bisexual men, leaving it largely gutted of statutory effect.

==Amendments==
The Voyeurism (Offences) Act 2019 amended the Sexual Offences Act 2003 to make upskirting a specific offence in England and Wales.

The Online Safety Act 2023 added two new offences to the Sexual Offences Act: sending images of a person&#x27;s genitals (cyberflashing), or sharing or threatening to share intimate images.

==See also==
*Sexual Offences Act
*Sexual offences in the United Kingdom
*Violent and Sex Offender Register
*Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography
*Operation Cathedral
*Bolton 7

==Notes==
==References==
*Kim Stevenson, Anne Davies, and Michael Gunn, &quot;Blackstone&#x27;s Guide to the Sexual Offences Act 2003&quot; (OUP 2003)
*Guidance on part 2 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003

==External links==
*Sexual Offences Act 2003 at legislation.gov.uk
*&quot;Teenage kissing: The new sex crime?&quot; by Giles Wilson, BBC, 30 April 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7458683" start="4" end="28" title="Sexual Offences Act 2003" label="Sexual Offences Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="43" end="46" title="Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom" label="Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="54" end="86" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458677" start="112" end="136" title="Sexual Offences Act 1956" label="Sexual Offences Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q183548" start="238" end="247" title="voyeurism" label="voyeurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293890" start="394" end="413" title="rape in English law" label="rape in English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="460" end="478" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="514" end="522" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458673" start="530" end="565" title="Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009" label="Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="573" end="589" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968735" start="594" end="639" title="Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008" label="Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458677" start="815" end="839" title="Sexual Offences Act 1956" label="Sexual Offences Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="853" end="857" title="Rape" label="Rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458677" start="886" end="910" title="Sexual Offences Act 1956" label="Sexual Offences Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="1873" end="1890" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q663016" start="4066" end="4077" title="sex tourism" label="sex tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458416" start="4513" end="4535" title="Sex Offenders Act 1997" label="Sex Offenders Act 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="4722" end="4753" title="Protection of Children Act 1978" label="Protection of Children Act 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185560" start="4913" end="4938" title="Criminal Justice Act 1988" label="Criminal Justice Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="5407" end="5425" title="Prostitution of children" label="child prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="5456" end="5463" title="pimping" label="pimping"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="5531" end="5546" title="Human trafficking" label="sex trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458677" start="5598" end="5622" title="Sexual Offences Act 1956" label="Sexual Offences Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209656" start="5689" end="5716" title="Policing and Crime Act 2009" label="Policing and Crime Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785824" start="5734" end="5744" title="soliciting" label="soliciting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162856" start="5884" end="5891" title="consent (criminal law)" label="consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q294440" start="6336" end="6348" title="public place" label="public place"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677414" start="7124" end="7153" title="Action on Rights for Children" label="Action on Rights for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q28800524" start="7482" end="7494" title="Nicola Lacey" label="Nicola Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="7502" end="7528" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458677" start="8203" end="8227" title="Sexual Offences Act 1956" label="Sexual Offences Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q120468569" start="8317" end="8341" title="Powers of the home secretary" label="Home Secretary the power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795484" start="8359" end="8379" title="statutory instrument" label="statutory instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113166" start="9683" end="9700" title="Christopher Rose (judge)" label="Lord Justice Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933162" start="9970" end="10002" title="Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006" label="Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q763407" start="10495" end="10513" title="indictable offence" label="indictable offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150885" start="10543" end="10562" title="Triable either way" label="either way offences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458416" start="11260" end="11282" title="Sex Offenders Act 1997" label="Sex Offenders Act 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458677" start="11322" end="11346" title="Sexual Offences Act 1956" label="Sexual Offences Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458681" start="11445" end="11469" title="Sexual Offences Act 1967" label="Sexual Offences Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075459" start="11606" end="11635" title="Voyeurism (Offences) Act 2019" label="Voyeurism (Offences) Act 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713106" start="11681" end="11691" title="upskirting" label="upskirting"/>
<link wikidata="Q106815750" start="11738" end="11760" title="Online Safety Act 2023" label="Online Safety Act 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608715" start="11856" end="11869" title="cyberflashing" label="cyberflashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458674" start="11939" end="11958" title="Sexual Offences Act" label="Sexual Offences Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458803" start="11960" end="11997" title="Sexual offences in the United Kingdom" label="Sexual offences in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933185" start="11999" end="12032" title="Violent and Sex Offender Register" label="Violent and Sex Offender Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099020" start="12034" end="12162" title="Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography" label="Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096877" start="12164" end="12183" title="Operation Cathedral" label="Operation Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940140" start="12185" end="12193" title="Bolton 7" label="Bolton 7"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628962" wikidata="Q621744" url="?curid=628962" title="Approximation property">
<text>In mathematics, specifically functional analysis, a Banach space is said to have the approximation property (AP), if every compact operator is a limit of finite-rank operators. The converse is always true.

Every Hilbert space has this property. There are, however, Banach spaces which do not; Per Enflo published the first counterexample in a 1973 article. However, much work in this area was done by Grothendieck (1955).

Later many other counterexamples were found. The space formula_1 of bounded operators on an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space formula_2 does not have the approximation property. The spaces formula_3 for formula_4 and formula_5 (see Sequence space) have closed subspaces that do not have the approximation property.

== Definition ==
A locally convex topological vector space &quot;X&quot; is said to have the approximation property, if the identity map can be approximated, uniformly on precompact sets, by continuous linear maps of finite rank. 

For a locally convex space &quot;X&quot;, the following are equivalent:
# &quot;X&quot; has the approximation property;
# the closure of formula_6 in formula_7 contains the identity map formula_8;
# formula_6 is dense in formula_7;
# for every locally convex space &quot;Y&quot;, formula_11 is dense in formula_12;
# for every locally convex space &quot;Y&quot;, formula_13 is dense in formula_14;
where formula_12 denotes the space of continuous linear operators from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot; endowed with the topology of uniform convergence on pre-compact subsets of &quot;X&quot;. 

If &quot;X&quot; is a Banach space this requirement becomes that for every compact set formula_16 and every formula_17, there is an operator formula_18 of finite rank so that formula_19, for every formula_20.

== Related definitions ==
Some other flavours of the AP are studied:

Let formula_21 be a Banach space and let formula_22. We say that &quot;X&quot; has the formula_23&quot;-approximation property&quot; (formula_23-AP), if, for every compact set formula_16 and every formula_17, there is an operator formula_27 of finite rank so that formula_28, for every formula_20, and formula_30.

A Banach space is said to have bounded approximation property (BAP), if it has the formula_23-AP for some formula_23.

A Banach space is said to have metric approximation property (MAP), if it is 1-AP.

A Banach space is said to have compact approximation property (CAP), if in the
definition of AP an operator of finite rank is replaced with a compact operator.

== Examples ==

* Every subspace of an arbitrary product of Hilbert spaces possesses the approximation property. In particular,
** every Hilbert space has the approximation property. 
** every projective limit of Hilbert spaces, as well as any subspace of such a projective limit, possesses the approximation property. 
** every nuclear space possesses the approximation property.
* Every separable Frechet space that contains a Schauder basis possesses the approximation property. 
* Every space with a Schauder basis has the AP (we can use the projections associated to the base as the formula_33&#x27;s in the definition), thus many spaces with the AP can be found. For example, the formula_3 spaces, or the symmetric Tsirelson space.

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* Enflo, P.: A counterexample to the approximation property in Banach spaces. &quot;Acta Math.&quot; 130, 309–317(1973).
* Grothendieck, A.: &quot;Produits tensoriels topologiques et espaces nucleaires&quot;. Memo. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (1955).
* Paul R. Halmos, &quot;Has progress in mathematics slowed down?&quot; &quot;Amer. Math. Monthly&quot; 97 (1990), no. 7, 561—588. 
* William B. Johnson &quot;Complementably universal separable Banach spaces&quot; in Robert G. Bartle (ed.), 1980 &quot;Studies in functional analysis&quot;, Mathematical Association of America.
* Kwapień, S. &quot;On Enflo&#x27;s example of a Banach space without the approximation property&quot;. Séminaire Goulaouic–Schwartz 1972—1973: Équations aux dérivées partielles et analyse fonctionnelle, Exp. No. 8, 9 pp. Centre de Math., École Polytech., Paris, 1973. 
* Lindenstrauss, J.; Tzafriri, L.: Classical Banach Spaces I, Sequence spaces, 1977.
* 
* Karen Saxe, &quot;Beginning Functional Analysis&quot;, Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, 2002 Springer-Verlag, New York.
* Singer, Ivan. &quot;Bases in Banach spaces. II&quot;. Editura Academiei Republicii Socialiste România, Bucharest; Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1981. viii+880 pp. . </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="29" end="48" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="52" end="64" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q621744" start="85" end="112" title="Approximation property" label="approximation property (AP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780743" start="123" end="139" title="compact operator" label="compact operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450385" start="154" end="174" title="finite-rank operator" label="finite-rank operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="213" end="226" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="266" end="278" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q354095" start="294" end="303" title="Per Enflo" label="Per Enflo"/>
<link wikidata="Q77141" start="402" end="414" title="Grothendieck" label="Grothendieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342396" start="492" end="508" title="bounded operator" label="bounded operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="537" end="550" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q289411" start="657" end="671" title="Sequence space" label="Sequence space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="760" end="774" title="locally convex" label="locally convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q610232" start="912" end="926" title="Relatively compact subspace" label="precompact set"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="1587" end="1599" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="1640" end="1651" title="compact set" label="compact set"/>
<link wikidata="Q131030" start="1697" end="1705" title="operator (mathematics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q131030" start="2066" end="2074" title="operator (mathematics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q283804" start="2853" end="2866" title="nuclear space" label="nuclear space"/>
<link wikidata="Q777879" start="3028" end="3042" title="Schauder basis" label="Schauder basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="3210" end="3226" title="lp space" label="formula_3 spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849771" start="3235" end="3260" title="Tsirelson space" label="symmetric Tsirelson space"/>
<link wikidata="Q354095" start="3299" end="3308" title="Per Enflo" label="Enflo, P."/>
<link wikidata="Q77141" start="3420" end="3436" title="Grothendieck, A." label="Grothendieck, A."/>
<link wikidata="Q370085" start="3542" end="3556" title="Paul R. Halmos" label="Paul R. Halmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344595" start="3756" end="3772" title="Robert G. Bartle" label="Robert G. Bartle"/>
<link wikidata="Q432874" start="4138" end="4155" title="Lindenstrauss, J." label="Lindenstrauss, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q47535820" start="4226" end="4236" title="Karen Saxe" label="Karen Saxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883592" start="4281" end="4315" title="Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics" label="Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628965" wikidata="Q1202225" url="?curid=628965" title="Wang Yuanlu">
<text>Wang Yuanlu (; c. 1849 – 1931) was a Taoist priest and abbot of the Mogao Caves at Dunhuang, Gansu during the early 20th century. He is credited with the discovery of the Dunhuang manuscripts and was engaged in the restoration of the site, which he funded with the sale of numerous manuscripts to Western and Japanese explorers.

== Biography ==
Wang Yuanlu was an itinerant Taoist monk, originally from Shanxi Province. He was active from the late 19th to the early 20th centuries.

He was a self-appointed caretaker of the Dunhuang cave complex and a self-styled Taoist priest. The cave complex contained 50,000 manuscripts detailing medieval China, the Silk Roads, and Buddhism.

He died in 1931 at the Mogao Grottoes.

==Involvement with Dunhuang manuscripts==
When engaging in an amateur restoration of statues, murals and paintings in what is now known as Cave 16, Wang noticed a hidden door which opened into another cave, later named Cave 17 or the &quot;Library Cave&quot;. There, he found a yet-undiscovered cache of thousands of ancient manuscripts, many of which relate to early Chinese Buddhism. 
He first spoke of the manuscripts to the local officials in an attempt to gain funding for their conservation. The officials ordered the reseal of the cave, in preparation for transportation, preservation and study. He would also later sell numerous manuscripts to archaeologist Aurel Stein, who took a largely random selection of the works. Later, Paul Pelliot would purchase what is considered the most valuable among them. Because of his involvement in the discovery and sale of the Dunhuang manuscripts to Westerners for a fraction of their value (£220 in 1907), Wang is both &quot;revered and reviled.&quot;

==See also==
*International Dunhuang Project
*Mawangdui

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Heimovics, Dick (1999). &quot;Connecting and Disconnections on the Silk Road&quot;
* Hopkirk, Peter (1980). &quot;Foreign Devils on the Silk Road: The Search for the Lost Cities and Treasures of Chinese Central Asia&quot;. Amherst: The University of Massachusetts Press. .
* Mair, Victor H. (ed.) 2001. &quot;The Columbia History of Chinese Literature&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press. . (Amazon Kindle edition.)

== External links ==
* The Oldest Printed Text in the World - The Diamond Sutra
* The David Middleton Reed Collection of Chinese Studies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1202225" start="0" end="11" title="Wang Yuanlu" label="Wang Yuanlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165430" start="37" end="50" title="Taoist priest" label="Taoist priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="55" end="60" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q43286" start="68" end="79" title="Mogao Caves" label="Mogao Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q319114" start="83" end="91" title="Dunhuang" label="Dunhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q276864" start="171" end="191" title="Dunhuang manuscripts" label="Dunhuang manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="404" end="410" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="963" end="975" title="Mogao Caves#The Library Cave" label="Library Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922985" start="1018" end="1023" title="Treasure trove" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="1091" end="1107" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q313061" start="1389" end="1400" title="Aurel Stein" label="Aurel Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q368821" start="1459" end="1471" title="Paul Pelliot" label="Paul Pelliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="1662" end="1663" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754962" start="1738" end="1768" title="International Dunhuang Project" label="International Dunhuang Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196056" start="1770" end="1779" title="Mawangdui" label="Mawangdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342123" start="1899" end="1913" title="Hopkirk, Peter" label="Hopkirk, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895718" start="2050" end="2083" title="University of Massachusetts Press" label="University of Massachusetts Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925964" start="2089" end="2104" title="Victor H. Mair" label="Mair, Victor H."/>
<link wikidata="Q16829907" start="2123" end="2165" title="The Columbia History of Chinese Literature" label="The Columbia History of Chinese Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q136469" start="2213" end="2226" title="Amazon Kindle" label="Amazon Kindle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628966" wikidata="Q5633052" url="?curid=628966" title="HMS Lagos (D44)">
<text>HMS &quot;Lagos&quot; was a of the Royal Navy. She was named in honour of the Battle of Lagos which happened in 1759 off the coast of Portugal, between the Royal Navy and a French fleet, resulting in a British victory.

==History==
&quot;Lagos&quot; was built by Cammell Laird of Birkenhead. She was one of ten Battle-class destroyers ordered under the 1942 naval estimates. She was launched on 4 August 1944 and commissioned on 2 November 1945. Her pennant number was originally &#x27;R44&#x27;, which was later (post-1948) changed to &#x27;D44&#x27; when the Royal Navy rationalised the numbering system.

==Deployment==
===Post World War II===
In 1946, after the end of hostilities, &quot;Lagos&quot; deployed to the Far East with the 19th Destroyer Flotilla to join the British Pacific Fleet. Her journey included stops at various ports, such as for example, Port Said (March), Colombo, Singapore, Hong Kong (May), Shanghai (June), before finally reaching Japan in July 1946.

After visiting Japan &quot;Lagos&quot;, along with the rest of the Flotilla, began the journey home to the UK, once again visiting many ports on fly-the-flag visits, mainly in Malaya. Upon returning to the UK in early 1947, &quot;Lagos&quot; was placed in Reserve.

In 1957, &quot;Lagos&quot; joined the 1st Destroyer Squadron, seeing service with the Home and Mediterranean Fleets. The following year, &quot;Lagos&quot;, with the rest of the squadron, joined the Far East Fleet. In 1959, following the collision between sister ship and the Indian cruiser , &quot;Lagos&quot; and the destroyer , towed &quot;Hogue&quot; to Singapore.

==Decommissioning==
In 1960, &quot;Lagos&quot; was decommissioned, being scrapped at Bo&#x27;ness in 1967.

==References==
==Publications==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5633052" start="0" end="15" title="HMS Lagos (D44)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="35" end="45" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464226" start="78" end="93" title="Battle of Lagos" label="Battle of Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="134" end="142" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029631" start="263" end="276" title="Cammell Laird" label="Cammell Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q746718" start="280" end="290" title="Birkenhead" label="Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="335" end="342" title="Battle-class destroyer#Orders and construction" label="ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474286" start="450" end="464" title="pennant number" label="pennant number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="514" end="523" title="Pennant number#Post-1948" label="post-1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="720" end="728" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="738" end="761" title="19th Destroyer Flotilla" label="19th Destroyer Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417872" start="774" end="795" title="British Pacific Fleet" label="British Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="863" end="872" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="882" end="889" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="891" end="900" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="902" end="911" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="919" end="927" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1088" end="1090" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1126" end="1138" title=":wikt:show the flag" label="fly-the-flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q976099" start="1157" end="1163" title="Malayan Union" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969978" start="1285" end="1307" title="1st Destroyer Squadron (United Kingdom)" label="1st Destroyer Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="1333" end="1337" title="Home Fleet" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="1342" end="1355" title="British Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q99942378" start="1445" end="1459" title="Far East Fleet" label="Far East Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="1502" end="1513" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1522" end="1527" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="1529" end="1536" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1604" end="1613" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q896424" start="1701" end="1713" title="Bo&amp;#x27;ness" label="Bo&amp;#x27;ness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628969" wikidata="Q3305194" url="?curid=628969" title="Landing zone">
<text>In military terminology a landing zone (LZ) is an area where aircraft can land.

In the United States military, a landing zone is the actual point where aircraft, especially helicopters, land (equivalent to the commonwealth landing point.)

In commonwealth militaries, a landing zone is the cartographic (numeric) zone in which the landing is going to take place (e.g., a valley). The landing area is the area in which the landing is going to take place (e.g., the field where the aircraft are to land). The landing point is the actual point on which aircraft are going to land (e.g., a point of the field). Each aircraft has a different landing point.

==Identifying an LZ from the air==
Landing areas are most commonly marked by colored smoke. The standard procedure is for troops already on the ground at the landing area to &quot;pop smoke&quot; (set off a smoke grenade). The aircraft pilot(s) radio back when the smoke is spotted and what color smoke they see. Troops on the ground then respond with what color the smoke should be. Smoke of a different color can mean that the landing area has been discovered and compromised by the enemy, and the pilot will usually have the authority to cancel any landing.

==Vietnam War==
The United States used LZs to a greater extent in the Vietnam War than in other wars because of the widespread use of helicopters, which provided increased mobility and rapid transportation of forces. LZs could be temporary, being little more than a clearing in the jungle or a clearing made using special munitions, such as commando vault bombs, which cleared everything in a diameter of 150 feet. Other LZs were permanent or semi-permanent built with more deliberate construction. The Battle of Ia Drang in 1965 centered on two LZs.

==Afghanistan==
The Soviet Union and Coalition forces also used LZs extensively because of the rugged terrain and distances traveled during wars in Afghanistan.

==Temporary LZs==
LZs operated by the First Cavalry Division, especially in War Zone C in 1968 and 1969, were often established for specific operations or to draw out the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) units thought to be operating in that area. When a sizable enemy force was located, it could be decisively engaged, forced to move on, or if determined to be elsewhere, the LZ would be abandoned for a new location after a successful mission.

LZ Carolyn was one such LZ; first established as a special forces outpost near Cambodia at Prek Lok in Tay Ninh province, it was abandoned and later occupied by mechanized elements of the 1st Infantry Division. LZ Carolyn was situated in a location especially irritating to the NVA, astride one of the main access routes for the Viet Cong (VC) &amp; NVA to reach Saigon, its presence was a constant problem for them. In April 1969, the US Army&#x27;s 2/8 Cavalry reopened the LZ and began operations in its vicinity, and the hornet&#x27;s nest had been prodded. Incoming rocket and mortar rounds fired by the VC/NVA were a daily and nightly occurrence, and skirmishes near the LZ were common. Then on the night of May 6, 1969, an entire NVA regiment (95C) attacked the LZ, which was defended by 300 US Army troops. As described by Tom Lane:
In the early morning darkness of 6 May, the NVA retaliated with an intensive rocket and mortar barrage, followed by a massive 95th Regiment pincer grand assault against 2 sides of the base an hour later. LZ Carolyn&#x27;s garrison was reduced by the absence of several line companies on patrol, and the withering defensive fires of the battalion&#x27;s COMPANY C and E were unable to prevent the onrushing battalions from storming through the wire and into the LZ from both directions.

Six perimeter bunkers were overrun, one of the medium howitzers was captured, and the enemy threatened to slice through the center of the base.

The Americans counterattacked with all available personnel, the officers involved being killed at the head of their troops. Artillerymen, supply and signal personnel, and engineers fought and died as emergency infantry reserves. The US counterattacks were hurled against both enemy penetrations, but the most violent fighting occurred on the northern side, where a seesaw battle raged for possession of the 155mm howitzer position. During the course of the battle, this weapon exchanged hands 3 times in hand-to-hand fighting deceded at close range with rifles and E-tools (entrenching tools, or shovels).

Overhead, rocket-firing AH1G Cobra helicopters rolled in, ignoring heavy flak, and blasted the NVA with rockets and miniguns. Air Force AC47 SPOOKY and AC119 SHADOW aircraft, supported by fighter-bombers, were employed against the numerous enemy antiaircraft weapons ringing the perimeter.

Controlled and uncontrolled fires were raging everywhere, and it seemed that the LZ was ablaze throughout its entire length. Waves of NVA infantry charging into the southern lines were met by defending troops who took advantage of the aviation gasoline storage area. The Americans shot holes into the fuel drums and ignited the flowing rivers of gas to create a flaming barrier, which effectively blocked further enemy penetration. In the LZ&#x27;s opposite sector, a medium howitzer gun pit received 3 direct hits, which touched off a fire in its powder bunker, yet the crew calmly stood by its weapon and employed it throughout the night.

Both of the 105mm howitzer ammunition points were detonated by enemy fire at around 0330, and shrapnel from more than 600 disintegrating rounds in the 2 dumps sprayed the entire LZ for more than four hours. LZ Carolyn appeared threatened with total destruction as the thundering conflagration tossed detonating artillery projectiles to shower men and equipment with flying rounds and burning shell fragments.

The defending artillerymen and mortar crews fought in desperation, heightened by the loss of communications between most weapons and their fire direction centers (FDC). The initial enemy barrage destroyed communication from the 155mm gun sections to their FDC, forcing crews to individually engage targets on their own volition by leveling tubes full of BEE HIVE or HE charges. When telephone lines from the mortar tubes to their FDC were severed, the direction personnel switched to a bullhorn to relay fire commands across the deafening noise of the battlefield. The battalion mortar platoon&#x27;s four tubes fired 1500 rounds, ranging from critical illumination to searing WP. In all cases, effective fire support was maintained.

Ammunition shortages quickly developed, and as on-hand mortar ammunition beside the weapons was exhausted, volunteers dashed through fire-swept open areas to retrieve more rounds from storage bunkers. The destruction of the 105mm ammunition points caused an immediate crisis in the light howitzer pits. The cannon cockers (artillerymen) were forced to redistribute ammo by crawling from one gun section to another under a hail of enemy direct fire and spinning shrapnel from the exploding dump. The crews continued rendering direct fire, even though they were often embroiled in defending their own weapons. One light howitzer section was caught in an enemy crossfire between a heavy machine gun and rifles, until the artillerymen managed to turn their lowered muzzle and pump BEE HIVE flechettes into the enemy. All enemy automatic weapon fire against the howitzer was instantly silenced. Cavalry counterattacks reestablished the perimeter, and the enemy force began withdrawing, breaking contact at 0600.
The 1st Cav troopers suffered 9 dead and 160 wounded. The NVA&#x27;s 95C regiment suffered hundreds of dead, many more wounded, and six were captured alive. The LZ was abandoned two weeks later.

== Tactical landing zones ==
Tactical landing zones (abbreviated to TLZ) are landing zones selected on the battlefield for the insertion of troops or supplies. A TLZ can be used for the landing of an aircraft (in terms of the Royal Air Force, this could be a Hercules carrying supplies or troops or any of their other helicopters, such as the Merlin, Puma or the Chinook). A TLZ would be situated in an area safer or easier to defend than the open battlefield, and troops are carefully trained in the insertion process and defensive circles are common.

==See also==
*Drop zone

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3305194" start="26" end="38" title="Landing zone" label="landing zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305194" start="40" end="42" title="Landing zone" label="LZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="61" end="69" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="88" end="110" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="174" end="184" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305194" start="224" end="237" title="Landing zone" label="landing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="244" end="256" title="commonwealth of Nations" label="commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067247" start="861" end="874" title="smoke grenade" label="smoke grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1286" end="1297" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q714749" start="1719" end="1737" title="Battle of Ia Drang" label="Battle of Ia Drang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114355" start="2006" end="2016" title="War Zone C" label="War Zone C"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="2451" end="2459" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2808" end="2815" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q357500" start="8301" end="8310" title="Drop zone" label="Drop zone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628970" wikidata="Q7377479" url="?curid=628970" title="Rudolph of Burgundy">
<text>Rudolph of Burgundy may refer to:

*Rudolph, Duke of Burgundy (French, &quot;Raoul&quot;; also referred to as &quot;Ralph&quot;), Duke of Burgundy from 921 and King of West Francia from 923 to 936
*Rudolph I, King of Burgundy, elected in 888 after the death of Charles the Fat. He died in 912
*Rudolph II, King of Burgundy, son of Rudolph I, and ruled (Upper) Burgundy from 912 to 937; also king of Provence and Italy
*Rudolph III, King of Burgundy, grandson of Rudolph II, ruled 993 - 1032</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273273" start="36" end="61" title="Rudolph, Duke of Burgundy" label="Rudolph, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q437435" start="198" end="225" title="Rudolph I, King of Burgundy" label="Rudolph I, King of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q442257" start="294" end="322" title="Rudolph II, King of Burgundy" label="Rudolph II, King of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504792" start="419" end="448" title="Rudolph III, King of Burgundy" label="Rudolph III, King of Burgundy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628979" wikidata="Q980383" url="?curid=628979" title="Surbahar">
<text>Surbahar (; ) sometimes known as bass sitar, is a plucked string instrument used in the Hindustani classical music of the Indian subcontinent. It is closely related to the sitar, but has a lower pitch. Depending on the instrument&#x27;s size, it is usually pitched two to five whole steps below the standard sitar.

==Overview==
The surbahar is over 130 cm (51 inches). It uses a dried gourd as a resonator, and has a neck with very wide frets, which allow a glissando or &quot;meend&quot; of as much as an octave on the same fret through the method of pulling. The neck is made out of &quot;toona&quot;, or mahogany wood. It has 3-4 rhythm strings (&quot;chikari&quot;), four playing strings (the broadest 1 mm), and 10 to 11 sympathetic strings. There are two bridges; the playable strings pass over the greater bridge, which is connected to the tabli with small legs, which are glued in place. The sympathetic strings pass over the smaller bridge which is directly glued on the tabli. The bridges have a slightly curved upper surface parallel to the string that the strings touch when vibrating, which results in a buzzing sound known as jawari. The body of the instrument is similar to that of a sitar, in that it is made of a large dried gourd with a carved wood face on one side and joined to the neck by a carved wooden yoke or &quot;gulu&quot;. It differs in that most surbahars have a gourd that is larger and tilted 90º so that the bottom of the gourd is to the back of the instrument, creating a shallower and rounder body for an enhanced bass response.

The instrumentalist plays the strings using a plectrum of bent steel wire, the &quot;mizrab&quot;, which is fixed on the index finger of the player&#x27;s right hand. Three plectrums are used on the first three fingers to play the &quot;dhrupad&quot; style of &quot;alap&quot;, &quot;jor&quot;, and &quot;jhala&quot; on surbahar. In the &quot;dhrupad&quot; style, instead of performing the &quot;sitarkhani&quot; and &quot;masitkhani&quot; gats, the instrumentalist plays the slow &quot;dhrupad&quot; composition in accompaniment with &quot;pakhawaj&quot;.

Some researchers believe that surbahar was invented around 1825. At the time, the veena, which is considered a holy instrument associated with the goddess Saraswati, was only taught to descendants of veena players. The development of the surbahar was due in part to the desire to play in a lower range similar to that of the veena.

Surbahar was invented by Omrao Khan Beenkar and Ghulam Mohammad was his disciple. Omrao Khan Beenkar was the grandfather of Wazir Khan of Rampur. The invention is also attributed to Ustad Sahebdad Khan. Recent research shows that Lucknow-based sitarist Ustad Ghulam Mohammed may also have been the inventor. A similar kind of instrument , known as the &quot;Mahakachhapi Vina&quot;, is also known to exist during that period.

==Notable performers==
*Annapurna Devi (1927 - 2018)
*Imdad Khan (1848 - 1920)
*Wahid Khan 
*Enayat Khan (1894 - 1938)
*Imrat Khan (1935 - 2018)
*Mushtaq Ali Khan (1911 - 1989)
*Pushparaj Koshti (born 1950) 
*Ashwin M. Dalvi (born 1977)
*Irshad Khan
*Budhaditya Mukherjee (born 1955)
*Manilal Nag (born 1939)
*Kushal Das (born 1959)
*Rajeev Janardan (born 1967)
*Suvir Misra
*Deobrat Mishra (born 1976)
*Babu Khan
*Rameshwar Pathak (1938 - 2010)
==See also==
* Hindustani classical music
* Annapurna Devi
* Sitar

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q980383" start="33" end="43" title="Surbahar" label="bass sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q230262" start="50" end="75" title="plucked string instrument" label="plucked string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="88" end="114" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindustani classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="122" end="141" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="172" end="177" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339237" start="386" end="391" title="gourd" label="gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="459" end="468" title="glissando" label="glissando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697430" start="592" end="597" title="toona" label="toona"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="608" end="616" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q920063" start="727" end="746" title="sympathetic strings" label="sympathetic strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q181890" start="1612" end="1620" title="plectrum" label="plectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317343" start="1651" end="1657" title="Mezrab (plectrum)" label="mizrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q59158" start="1803" end="1810" title="dhrupad" label="dhrupad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224750" start="1832" end="1836" title="alap" label="alap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045168" start="1850" end="1853" title="jor (music)" label="jor"/>
<link wikidata="Q686237" start="1871" end="1876" title="jhala" label="jhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046658" start="2107" end="2115" title="pakhavaj" label="pakhawaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q959769" start="2206" end="2211" title="veena" label="veena"/>
<link wikidata="Q58838" start="2279" end="2288" title="Saraswati" label="Saraswati"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639318" start="2482" end="2492" title="Omrao Khan" label="Omrao Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899294" start="2581" end="2601" title="Wazir Khan (Rampur)" label="Wazir Khan of Rampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="2687" end="2694" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440940" start="2908" end="2922" title="Annapurna Devi" label="Annapurna Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q762696" start="2938" end="2948" title="Imdad Khan" label="Imdad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959785" start="2964" end="2974" title="Wahid Khan" label="Wahid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375263" start="2977" end="2988" title="Enayat Khan" label="Enayat Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149565" start="3004" end="3014" title="Imrat Khan" label="Imrat Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941350" start="3030" end="3046" title="Mushtaq Ali Khan" label="Mushtaq Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955781" start="3062" end="3078" title="Pushparaj Koshti" label="Pushparaj Koshti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3093" end="3108" title="Ashwin M. Dalvi" label="Ashwin M. Dalvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730793" start="3122" end="3133" title="Irshad Khan" label="Irshad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985058" start="3135" end="3155" title="Budhaditya Mukherjee" label="Budhaditya Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386437" start="3169" end="3180" title="Manilal Nag" label="Manilal Nag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150089" start="3194" end="3204" title="Kushal Das" label="Kushal Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285941" start="3218" end="3233" title="Rajeev Janardan" label="Rajeev Janardan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150705" start="3247" end="3258" title="Suvir Misra" label="Suvir Misra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977911" start="3260" end="3274" title="Deobrat Mishra" label="Deobrat Mishra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999545" start="3288" end="3297" title="Babu Khan" label="Babu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289461" start="3299" end="3315" title="Rameshwar Pathak" label="Rameshwar Pathak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="3345" end="3371" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindustani classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440940" start="3374" end="3388" title="Annapurna Devi" label="Annapurna Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="3391" end="3396" title="Sitar" label="Sitar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628986" wikidata="Q16869295" url="?curid=628986" title="Naushon">
<text>Naushon may refer to:

* Naushon Island, one of the Elizabeth Islands in Gosnold, Massachusetts
* USS &quot;Naushon&quot; (SP-517), a United States Navy patrol vessel in commission from 1918 to 1919

* , a United States Coast Guard Island-class patrol boat
* , a car ferry operating in Massachusetts from 1957 to 1987</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3337172" start="25" end="39" title="Naushon Island" label="Naushon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707522" start="98" end="130" title="USS Naushon (SP-517)" label="USS &amp;quot;Naushon&amp;quot; (SP-517)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082954" start="232" end="256" title="Island-class patrol boat" label="Island-class patrol boat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628991" wikidata="Q505646" url="?curid=628991" title="Adriaan van Roomen">
<text>Adriaan van Roomen (29 September 1561 – 4 May 1615), also known as Adrianus Romanus, was a mathematician, professor of medicine and medical astrologer from the Duchy of Brabant in the Habsburg Netherlands who was active throughout Central Europe in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. As a mathematician he worked in algebra, trigonometry and geometry; and on the decimal expansion of pi. He solved the Problem of Apollonius using a new method that involved intersecting hyperbolas. He also wrote on the Gregorian calendar reform.

==Life==
Van Roomen was born in Leuven, the son of Adriaan Van Roomen and Maria Van Den Daele. He was educated partly in Leuven and partly After studying at the Jesuit College in Cologne, also attending the University of Cologne where he began his study of medicine. He also briefly studied medicine at Leuven University. Roomen was professor of mathematics and medicine at Louvain from 1586 to 1592. He met Kepler, and discussed with François Viète two questions about equations and tangencies. He then spent some time in Italy, particularly with Clavius in Rome in 1585. His publication of 1595, &quot;Parvum theatrum urbium&quot;, contained Latin verse on the cities of Italy (possibly written by Thomas Edwards).

In June 1593 Van Roomen became the inaugural professor of medicine at the newly refounded University of Würzburg. He was also appointed physician in ordinary to the court of Rudolf II. From around 1595 to 1603 he produced calendars, almanacs and prognostications published under the patronage of Julius Echter, prince-bishop of Würzburg. At the same time, he served as mathematician of the king of Poland and become famous for the computation of the value of pi to sixteen decimals, surpassing François Viète who had arrived at ten digits. After being widowed he was ordained to the priesthood in 1604 and on 8 October 1608 was installed as a canon of the collegiate church of St John the Evangelist in Würzburg.

His &quot;Mathesis Polemica&quot;, published in Frankfurt in 1605, explained the military applications of mathematics. In June 1610 he was in Prague, after which he travelled to Poland at the invitation of Jan Zamoyski to give public lectures on mathematics at Zamość in Red Ruthenia. He made the return journey via Hungary, arriving back in Würzburg at the end of 1611.

Struggling with health problems, Van Roomen undertook a journey to Spa to take the waters but died en route at Mainz in the arms of his son, who was travelling with him.

==See also==
*The Adriaan van Roomen affair
*Zamojski Academy

==Works==
* &quot;Ouranographia sive caeli descriptio&quot; (Leuven, Joannes Masius, 1591)
* &quot;Ideae mathematicae pars prima, sive methodus polygonorum&quot; (Antwerp, Jan van Keerbergen, 1593)
* &quot;Canon triangulorum rectangulorum, tam sphaericorum quam rectilineorum, methodo brevissima&quot; ([Leuven], 1593)
* &quot;Supputatio Ecclesiastica Secundum novam et antiquam Calendarii rationem&quot; (Würzburg, 1595)
* &quot;Parvum Theatrum Urbium&quot; (Frankfurt, Nicolaus Bassalus, 1595).
* &quot;Almanack Wurztburger Bisthumbs, awff das Jar nach Christi unsers Seligmacher Geburt 1596&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1596)
* &quot;In Archimedis circuli dimensionem expositio et analysis&quot; (Würzburg, 1597)
* &quot;Newer und Alter Schreib Calender auf das M.D.XCVIII Jar&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1598)
* &quot;Newer und Alter Screib Calender Auff das MDXCIX Jar&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1599)
* &quot;Almanach Würtzburger Bisthumbs auff das Jar nach der heilsamen Geburt Jesu Christi MDC&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1600)
* &quot;Prognosticon Astrologicum oder Teutsche Practica auff das Jar nach der allein selichmachenden Geburt Unsers Heylands Jesu Christi M.DC.&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1600)
* &quot;Newer und Alter Schreib Calender auff das M.DCI. Jar&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1601)
* &quot;Prognosticon Astrologicum oder Teutsche Practica auff das Jar nach der Glorwürdigen Geburt Jesu Christi M.DCI.&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1601)
* &quot;Almanach Wurtzburger Bisthumbs auff dass Jar nach der heilsamen Geburt Jesu Christi M.DC.II.&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1602)
* &quot;Newer und Alter Schreib Calender auff das M.DC.II. Jar&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1602)
* &quot;Prognosticum astrologicum oder Teutsche Practica auff das M.DC.II. Jar&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1602)
* &quot;Universae mathesis idea&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1602)
* &quot;Chordarum arcubus circuli primariis&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1602)
* &quot;Newer und Alter Schreib Calender auff das M.DC.III. Jar&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1603)
* &quot;Prognosticon Astrologicum oder Teutsche Practica auff das Jar ... M.DC.III.&quot; (Würzburg, Georgius Fleischmann, 1603)
* &quot;Arithmetica quatuor instrumenta nova Methodo ac forma patente exhibita&quot; (Würzburg, 1603)
* &quot;Mathesis Polemica&quot; (Frankfurt, 1605)
* &quot;Speculum Astronomicum sive Organum Forma Mappae Expressum&quot; (Leuven, Joannes Masius, 1606)
* &quot;Canon triangulorum sphaericorum&quot; (Mainz, Joannis Albini, 1609)
* &quot;Pyrotechnia, hoc est, de ignibus festivis, jocosis artificialibus et seriis, variisque eorum structuris libri duo&quot; (Frankfurt, Palthenius, 1611)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505646" start="0" end="18" title="Adriaan van Roomen" label="Adriaan van Roomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q505646" start="67" end="83" title="Adriaan van Roomen" label="Adrianus Romanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806473" start="132" end="150" title="medical astrology" label="medical astrologer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="160" end="176" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="184" end="204" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Habsburg Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376876" start="368" end="385" title="decimal expansion" label="decimal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="389" end="391" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q619449" start="407" end="428" title="Problem of Apollonius" label="Problem of Apollonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="508" end="533" title="Gregorian calendar reform" label="Gregorian calendar reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="568" end="574" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="715" end="722" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="743" end="764" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q693380" start="839" end="856" title="Old University of Leuven" label="Leuven University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="944" end="950" title="Kepler" label="Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q188623" start="971" end="985" title="François Viète" label="François Viète"/>
<link wikidata="Q76728" start="1084" end="1091" title="Clavius" label="Clavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1095" end="1099" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789293" start="1236" end="1250" title="Thomas Edwards (poet)" label="Thomas Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q161976" start="1344" end="1366" title="University of Würzburg" label="University of Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="1428" end="1437" title="Rudolf II" label="Rudolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q450861" start="1550" end="1563" title="Julius Echter von Mespelbrunn" label="Julius Echter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427044" start="1565" end="1590" title="prince-bishop of Würzburg" label="prince-bishop of Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="1713" end="1715" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188623" start="1748" end="1762" title="François Viète" label="François Viète"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="1910" end="1927" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q382439" start="2174" end="2186" title="Jan Zamoyski" label="Jan Zamoyski"/>
<link wikidata="Q145972" start="2229" end="2235" title="Zamość" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q616206" start="2239" end="2251" title="Red Ruthenia" label="Red Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39865" start="2407" end="2410" title="Spa, Belgium" label="Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="2451" end="2456" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2525" end="2554" title="François Viète#The Adriaan van Roomen problem" label="The Adriaan van Roomen affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q797934" start="2556" end="2572" title="Zamojski Academy" label="Zamojski Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55194251" start="2643" end="2657" title="Joannes Masius" label="Joannes Masius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628997" wikidata="Q433773" url="?curid=628997" title="Bernard Lyot">
<text>Bernard Ferdinand Lyot (2 7 February 1897 in Paris – 2 April 1952 in Cairo) was a French astronomer.

==Biography==
An avid reader of the works of Camille Flammarion, he became a member of the Société Astronomique de France in 1915 and made his first observations using the society&#x27;s telescope on rue Serpente in Paris. He soon acquired a telescope and soon upgraded to a . From graduation in 1918 until 1929, he worked as a demonstrator at the École Polytechnique and studied engineering, physics, and chemistry at the University of Paris.

From 1920 until his death he worked for the Meudon Observatory, where in 1930 he earned the title of &quot;Joint Astronomer of the Observatory&quot;. After gaining the title, he earned a reputation of being an expert of polarized and monochromatic light. Throughout the 1930s, he labored to perfect the coronagraph, which he invented to observe the corona without having to wait for a solar eclipse. Most of this work implied painstaking long observations at the Pic du Midi Observatory. It was an exceptionally good site, free of both air pollution and light pollution but it came with a disadvantage: In the interwar period access to the peak implied mountaineering skills and physical fitness, especially in winter when access was only gained with a long and tiresome ski touring trek on sealskin-fitted skis, a technique mastered by Lyot, a keen sportsman and mountaineer. Accommodation on site can only be described as spartan, before a powerline, a bigger refuge and a cablecar were built in the early 1950s. In 1938, he showed a movie of the corona in action to the International Astronomical Union. In 1939, he was elected to the French Academy of Sciences. He became Chief Astronomer at the Meudon Observatory in 1943 and received the Bruce Medal in 1947.

Lyot was the President of the Société astronomique de France, the French astronomical society, from 1945-1947.

He suffered a heart attack while returning from an eclipse expedition in Sudan and died on 2 April 1952, at the age of 55.

==Observations and Achievements on Pic du Midi==
*Lunar soil behaves like volcanic dust.
*Mars has sandstorms.
*Improved his coronagraph.
*Made motion pictures of solar prominences and the corona.
*Found spectral lines in the corona.

==Inventions==

* Coronagraph
* Lyot filter
* Lyot stop
* Lyot depolarizer

==Awards and honors==
Awards
* Lalande Prize from the French Academy of Sciences
* Janssen Medal from the French Academy of Sciences (1930)
* Prix Jules Janssen, the highest award of the Société astronomique de France(1932)
* Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1939)
* Howard N. Potts Medal (1942)
* Bruce Medal (1947)
* Henry Draper Medal of the National Academy of Sciences (1951)

Named for him
* Lyot (lunar crater).
* Lyot (Martian crater).
* Minor planet 2452 Lyot.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q433773" start="0" end="22" title="Bernard Lyot" label="Bernard Ferdinand Lyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="45" end="50" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="69" end="74" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="89" end="99" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q295524" start="147" end="165" title="Camille Flammarion" label="Camille Flammarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919053" start="193" end="223" title="Société Astronomique de France" label="Société Astronomique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="450" end="469" title="École Polytechnique" label="École Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="482" end="493" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="495" end="502" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="508" end="517" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="525" end="544" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q461340" start="591" end="609" title="Meudon Observatory" label="Meudon Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="850" end="861" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="896" end="902" title="solar corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139060" start="1010" end="1021" title="Pic du Midi de Bigorre" label="Pic du Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="1101" end="1116" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446589" start="1318" end="1329" title="ski touring" label="ski touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="1620" end="1652" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="1685" end="1711" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q330957" start="1791" end="1802" title="Bruce Medal" label="Bruce Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919053" start="1843" end="1873" title="Société astronomique de France" label="Société astronomique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="2139" end="2143" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="2174" end="2185" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="2193" end="2208" title="motion pictures" label="motion pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q221699" start="2212" end="2228" title="solar prominence" label="solar prominence"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="2238" end="2244" title="solar corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="2253" end="2267" title="spectral lines" label="spectral lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="2302" end="2313" title="Coronagraph" label="Coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q121434" start="2316" end="2327" title="Lyot filter" label="Lyot filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709828" start="2330" end="2339" title="Lyot stop" label="Lyot stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260688" start="2342" end="2358" title="Lyot depolarizer" label="Lyot depolarizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q627147" start="2391" end="2404" title="Lalande Prize" label="Lalande Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="2414" end="2440" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660030" start="2443" end="2456" title="Janssen Medal (French Academy of Sciences)" label="Janssen Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="2466" end="2492" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711648" start="2502" end="2520" title="Prix Jules Janssen" label="Prix Jules Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919053" start="2547" end="2577" title="Société astronomique de France" label="Société astronomique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q753072" start="2586" end="2630" title="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631883" start="2640" end="2661" title="Howard N. Potts Medal" label="Howard N. Potts Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q330957" start="2671" end="2682" title="Bruce Medal" label="Bruce Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q746633" start="2692" end="2710" title="Henry Draper Medal" label="Henry Draper Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="2718" end="2746" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281058" start="2771" end="2790" title="Lyot (lunar crater)" label="Lyot (lunar crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497008" start="2794" end="2815" title="Lyot (Martian crater)" label="Lyot (Martian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="2819" end="2831" title="Minor planet" label="Minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110360" start="2832" end="2841" title="2452 Lyot" label="2452 Lyot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="628999" wikidata="Q1071661" url="?curid=628999" title="Europe, the Middle East and Africa">
<text>Europe, the Middle East and Africa, commonly known by its acronym EMEA among the North American business spheres, is a geographical region used by institutions, governments and global spheres of marketing, media and business when referring to this region. The acronym EMEA is a shorthand way of referencing the two continents (Africa and Europe) and the Middle Eastern sub-continent all at once.

As the name suggests, the region includes all of the countries found on the continents of Africa and Europe, as well as the countries that make up the Middle East. The region is generally accepted to include all European nations and all African nations, and extends east to Iran, including part of Russia. Typically, the acronym does not include overseas territories of mainland countries in the region, such as French Guiana. However, the term is not completely clear, and while it usually refers to Europe, the Middle East and Africa, it is not uncommon for businesses and other institutions to slightly tweak the countries they include under this umbrella term.

One of the reasons why the term is commonly used is because it is useful for business purposes, as most of the region falls within four time zones, which facilitates communication and travel.

==Historical influence==
The historical influence and interdependence of Europe on the Middle East and Africa in relation to trade routes contributed to the development of the term EMEA. The establishment of the Suez Canal in 1869 impacted international commerce. It directly linked Europe to the Indian Ocean and East Asian trade routes. The direct channel between Britain and India enabled Britain to gradually gain authority over Egypt. This authority was reinforced via the development and maintenance of the &quot;Pax Britannica&quot; which gave Britain naval power and control over the world&#x27;s maritime trade routes during the late nineteenth century period of peace.

==Related regions==
*Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa (EEMEA). Some companies separate their Eastern European business from the rest of Europe, and refer to the EEMEA region separately from the Western/Central European (EU/EFTA) region
*Southern Europe, Middle East and Africa (SEMEA)
*Southeastern Europe, Middle East and Africa (SEEMEA)
*Central and Eastern Europe (CEE)
*Central Europe, Middle East and Africa (CEMEA)
*The Middle East and Africa (MEA)
*The Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
*The Middle East, Turkey and Africa (META)
*The Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan and Pakistan (MENAP)
*Europe and the Middle East (EME)
*Europe, the Middle East and North Africa (EUMENA or EMENA)
*Europe, the Middle East, India and Africa (EMEIA or EMIA)
*Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Russia (EMEAR)
*Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Commonwealth of Independent States (EMEACIS)
*Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Caribbean (EMEAC)
*The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), around the Black Sea and Caspian Sea
*North Atlantic and Central Europe (NACE)
*Central and Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa (CEMA)
*Europe, Latin America, Africa, Arab world

==Component areas==
The EMEA region generally includes:

===Europe===
==== Central and Eastern Europe ====
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==== Northern Europe ====
*
*
*
*

==== Southern Europe ====
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==== Western Europe ====
*
*
*
*

=== Middle East, North Africa (MENA)===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

===Sub-Saharan Africa===
==== Eastern Africa ====
*
*
*
*
*

==== Central Africa ====
*
*
*
*

==== Southern Africa ====
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==== Western Africa ====
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

== Economic overview ==
The World Bank&#x27;s April 2024 update indicates that the growth rate for the Europe, Middle-East and African region, is expected to slightly increase to 4.6% in 2024, up from 4.4% in 2023. This underscores a diverse economic resilience against global pressures. Meanwhile, global trade growth, which was minimal at 0.2% in 2023, is projected to improve to 2.3% in 2024, crucial for the region&#x27;s export-oriented economies. However, private investment remains below pre-pandemic levels due to higher debt levels and rising interest rates, signaling a cautious investment climate. The region faces significant challenges from both external factors, such as high core inflation and modest global trade recovery, and domestic issues like increased debt and political uncertainties, potentially hindering economic growth. Additionally, a hypothetical 1% decline in GDP growth in the US or China could reduce GDP growth in other developing Europe, Middle-East and African economies by approximately 0.5% and 0.3%, respectively. The increase in trade-distorting measures, which have tripled since 2019 among G-20 countries, reflects a trend towards protective industrial policies, although other European, Middle-Eastern, and African countries, except for the Big Four, South Africa, Russia, Turkey and Saudi Arabia, have been less involved in these measures.

==See also==
*Americas
*Asia–Pacific
*MENA
*List of country groupings

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1071661" start="0" end="34" title="Europe, the Middle East and Africa" label="Europe, the Middle East and Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="58" end="65" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071661" start="66" end="70" title="Europe, the Middle East and Africa" label="EMEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="81" end="94" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="119" end="131" title="geography" label="geographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="132" end="138" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="327" end="333" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="338" end="344" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="354" end="368" title="Middle Eastern" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="565" end="571" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="671" end="675" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="695" end="701" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="743" end="763" title="overseas territories" label="overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="809" end="822" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="1199" end="1208" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="1468" end="1478" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1553" end="1565" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1570" end="1579" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1622" end="1629" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1634" end="1639" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1689" end="1694" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q545701" start="1775" end="1789" title="Pax Britannica" label="Pax Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1861" end="1875" title="Trade route#Maritime trade" label="maritime trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1957" end="1971" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="2136" end="2143" title="Western Europe" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2144" end="2158" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2162" end="2164" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2165" end="2169" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="2179" end="2194" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="2228" end="2247" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2282" end="2289" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="2418" end="2430" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="2432" end="2436" title="MENA" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="2788" end="2822" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="2870" end="2879" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="2893" end="2927" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="3109" end="3119" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3181" end="3187" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="3196" end="3222" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="3252" end="3267" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="3287" end="3302" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="3328" end="3342" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="3388" end="3392" title="MENA" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="3419" end="3437" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="3446" end="3460" title="Eastern Africa" label="Eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="3482" end="3496" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="3516" end="3531" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="3557" end="3571" title="Western Africa" label="Western Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="3893" end="3905" title="International trade" label="global trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4089" end="4101" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="pre-pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="4484" end="4487" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="4725" end="4729" title="G20" label="G-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076426" start="4873" end="4885" title="Big Four (Western Europe)" label="the Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4887" end="4899" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4901" end="4907" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="4909" end="4915" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="4920" end="4932" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="4992" end="5000" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="5002" end="5014" title="Asia–Pacific" label="Asia–Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="5016" end="5020" title="MENA" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324543" start="5022" end="5047" title="List of country groupings" label="List of country groupings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629000" wikidata="Q1047444" url="?curid=629000" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A">
<text>Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) denotes the first stage of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic, in early Levantine and Anatolian Neolithic culture, dating to years ago, that is, 10,000–8800 BCE. Archaeological remains are located in the Levantine and Upper Mesopotamian region of the Fertile Crescent.

The time period is characterized by tiny circular mud-brick dwellings, the cultivation of crops, the hunting of wild game, and unique burial customs in which bodies were buried below the floors of dwellings.

The Pre-Pottery Neolithic A and the following Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) were originally defined by Kathleen Kenyon in the type site of Jericho, State of Palestine. During this time, pottery was not yet in use. They precede the ceramic Neolithic Yarmukian culture. PPNA succeeds the Natufian culture of the Epipalaeolithic Near East.

==Settlements==

PPNA archaeological sites are much larger than those of the preceding Natufian hunter-gatherer culture, and contain traces of communal structures, such as the famous Tower of Jericho. PPNA settlements are characterized by round, semi-subterranean houses with stone foundations and terrazzo-floors. The upper walls were constructed of unbaked clay mudbricks with plano-convex cross-sections. The hearths were small and covered with cobbles. Heated rocks were used in cooking, which led to an accumulation of fire-cracked rock in the buildings, and almost every settlement contained storage bins made of either stones or mud-brick.

As of 2013, Gesher, modern Israel, became the earliest known of all known Neolithic sites (PPNA), with a calibrated Carbon 14 date of 10,459 BCE ± 348 years, analysis suggesting that it may have been the starting point of a Neolithic Revolution. A contemporary site is Mureybet in modern Syria.

One of the most notable PPNA settlements is Jericho, thought to be the world&#x27;s first town ( BCE). The PPNA town contained a population of up to 2–3000 people and was protected by a massive stone wall and tower. There is much debate over the function of the wall, for there is no evidence of any serious warfare at this time. One possibility is the wall was built to protect the salt resources of Jericho. It has also been proposed that the tower caught the shadow of the largest nearby mountain on summer solstice in order to create a sense of power in support of whatever hierarchy ruled the town&#x27;s inhabitants.

==Burial practices==

PPNA cultures are unique for their burial practices, and Kenyon (who excavated the PPNA level of Jericho) characterized them as &quot;living with their dead&quot;. Kenyon found no fewer than 279 burials, below floors, under household foundations, and in between walls. In the PPNB period, skulls were often dug up and reburied, or mottled with clay and (presumably) displayed.

==Lithics==
The lithic industry is based on blades struck from regular cores. Sickle-blades and arrowheads continue traditions from the late Natufian culture, transverse-blow axes and polished adzes appear for the first time.

==Crop cultivation and granaries==

Sedentism of this time allowed for the cultivation of local grains, such as barley and wild oats, and for storage in granaries. Sites such as Dhra′ and Jericho retained a hunting lifestyle until the PPNB period, but granaries allowed for year-round occupation.

This period of cultivation is considered &quot;pre-domestication&quot;, but may have begun to develop plant species into the domesticated forms they are today. Deliberate, extended-period storage was made possible by the use of &quot;suspended floors for air circulation and protection from rodents&quot;. This practice &quot;precedes the emergence of domestication and large-scale sedentary communities by at least 1,000 years&quot;.

Granaries are positioned in places between other buildings early on BP, however, beginning around 10,500 BP, they were moved inside houses, and by 9,500 BP, storage occurred in special rooms. This change might reflect changing systems of ownership and property as granaries shifted from communal use and ownership to become under the control of households or individuals.

It has been observed of these granaries that their &quot;sophisticated storage systems with subfloor ventilation are a precocious development that precedes the emergence of almost all of the other elements of the Near Eastern Neolithic package—domestication, large scale sedentary communities, and the entrenchment of some degree of social differentiation&quot;. Moreover, &quot;building granaries may [...] have been the most important feature in increasing sedentism that required active community participation in new life-ways&quot;.

==Regional variants==
With more sites becoming known, archaeologists have defined a number of regional variants of Pre-Pottery Neolithic A:
* (Aswadian) in the Damascus Basin, defined by finds from Tell Aswad IA; typical: bipolar cores, big sickle blades, Aswad points. The &#x27;Aswadian&#x27; variant recently was abolished by the work of Danielle Stordeur in her initial report from further investigations in 2001–2006. The PPNB horizon was moved back at this site, to around 10,700 BP.
* Mureybetian in the Northern Levant, defined by the finds from Mureybet IIIA, IIIB, typical: Helwan points, sickle-blades with base amenagée or short stem and terminal retouch. Other sites include Sheyk Hasan and Jerf el Ahmar.
* Sites in &quot;Upper Mesopotamia&quot; include Çayönü and Göbekli Tepe, with the latter possibly being the oldest ritual complex yet discovered.
* Sites in central Anatolia that include the &#x27;mother city&#x27; Çatalhöyük and the smaller, but older site, rivaling even Jericho in age, Aşıklı Höyük.
* Sultanian in the Jordan River valley and southern Levant, with the type site of Jericho. Other sites include Netiv HaGdud, El-Khiam, Hatoula, and Nahal Oren.

==Relative chronology==
==See also==
*History of pottery in the Southern Levant
*Meltwater pulse 1B

==References==
==Further reading==
* J. Cauvin, Naissance des divinités, Naissance de l’agriculture. La révolution des symboles au Néolithique (CNRS 1994). Translation (T. Watkins) The birth of the gods and the origins of agriculture (Cambridge 2000).
* O. Bar-Yosef, The PPNA in the Levant – an overview. Paléorient 15/1, 1989, 57–63.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1047444" start="0" end="23" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047444" start="25" end="29" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic A" label="PPNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190360" start="62" end="83" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="94" end="100" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="108" end="116" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="118" end="127" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="226" end="232" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="240" end="257" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="273" end="289" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q897323" start="547" end="570" title="Pre-Pottery Neolithic B" label="Pre-Pottery Neolithic B"/>
<link wikidata="Q238890" start="605" end="620" title="Kathleen Kenyon" label="Kathleen Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247173" start="628" end="637" title="type site" label="type site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="641" end="648" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="650" end="668" title="State of Palestine" label="State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="688" end="695" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915635" start="751" end="768" title="Yarmukian culture" label="Yarmukian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="788" end="804" title="Natufian culture" label="Natufian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q99463725" start="812" end="837" title="Epipalaeolithic Near East" label="Epipalaeolithic Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q60305" start="1023" end="1039" title="Tower of Jericho" label="Tower of Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334655" start="1138" end="1146" title="terrazzo" label="terrazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="1204" end="1212" title="mudbrick" label="mudbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="1252" end="1258" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4221865" start="1500" end="1506" title="Gesher (archaeological site)" label="Gesher"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="1604" end="1613" title="Carbon 14" label="Carbon 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="1712" end="1732" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427189" start="1757" end="1765" title="Mureybet" label="Mureybet"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1776" end="1781" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="1828" end="1835" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="2287" end="2302" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="2824" end="2839" title="Lithic reduction" label="lithic industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045036" start="2852" end="2858" title="blade (archaeology)" label="blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="2879" end="2884" title="Lithic core" label="cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q42233" start="2886" end="2892" title="Sickle" label="Sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643900" start="2904" end="2913" title="arrowhead" label="arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="2949" end="2965" title="Natufian culture" label="Natufian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="2983" end="2986" title="axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517447" start="3001" end="3005" title="adze" label="adze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141745" start="3071" end="3080" title="Sedentism" label="Sedentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="3110" end="3121" title="Horticulture" label="cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="3147" end="3153" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q146760" start="3158" end="3167" title="Avena" label="wild oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="3188" end="3197" title="Granary" label="granaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q797529" start="3213" end="3218" title="Dhra′" label="Dhra′"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="3223" end="3230" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="3384" end="3397" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q826532" start="4879" end="4889" title="Tell Aswad" label="Tell Aswad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4937" end="4948" title="Aswad point" label="Aswad point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219453" start="5022" end="5039" title="Danielle Stordeur" label="Danielle Stordeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427189" start="5235" end="5243" title="Mureybet" label="Mureybet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5265" end="5277" title="Helwan point" label="Helwan point"/>
<link wikidata="Q928706" start="5385" end="5398" title="Jerf el Ahmar" label="Jerf el Ahmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="5417" end="5434" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272720" start="5449" end="5455" title="Çayönü" label="Çayönü"/>
<link wikidata="Q214944" start="5460" end="5472" title="Göbekli Tepe" label="Göbekli Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155526" start="5558" end="5574" title="central Anatolia" label="central Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192522" start="5616" end="5626" title="Çatalhöyük" label="Çatalhöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q794830" start="5690" end="5702" title="Aşıklı Höyük" label="Aşıklı Höyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="5723" end="5735" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890336" start="5815" end="5827" title="Netiv HaGdud" label="Netiv HaGdud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498963" start="5829" end="5837" title="Khiamian" label="El-Khiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025912" start="5852" end="5862" title="Nahal Oren, archeological site" label="Nahal Oren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5903" end="5944" title="Syro-Palestinian archaeology#Ceramics analysis" label="History of pottery in the Southern Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581841" start="5946" end="5964" title="Meltwater pulse 1B" label="Meltwater pulse 1B"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629004" wikidata="Q1641195" url="?curid=629004" title="Massacre at Huế">
<text>The Huế massacre (, or , lit. translation: &quot;Tết Offensive massacre in Huế&quot;) was the summary executions and mass murder perpetrated by the Viet Cong and People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam (PAVN) during their capture, military occupation and later withdrawal from the city of Huế during the Tet Offensive, considered one of the longest and bloodiest battles of the Vietnam War.

The Battle of Huế began on 31 January 1968, and lasted a total of 26 days. During the months and years that followed, dozens of mass graves were discovered in and around Huế. The estimated death toll was between 2,800 and 6,000 civilians and prisoners of war, or 5–10% of the total population of Huế. The Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam) released a list of 4,062 victims identified as having been either murdered or abducted. Victims were found bound, tortured, and sometimes buried alive. Many victims were also clubbed to death.

A number of U.S. and South Vietnamese authorities as well as a number of journalists who investigated the events took the discoveries, along with other evidence, as proof that a large-scale had been carried out in and around Huế during its four-week occupation. The killings were perceived as part of a large-scale purge of a whole social stratum, including anyone friendly to American forces in the region. The massacre at Huế came under increasing press scrutiny later, when press reports alleged that South Vietnamese &quot;revenge squads&quot; had also been at work in the aftermath of the battle, searching out and executing citizens that had supported the communist occupation. In 2017, Ben Kiernan described the massacre as &quot;possibly the largest atrocity of the war.&quot;

==Executions==
The Vietcong set up provisional authorities shortly after it had captured Huế in the early hours of 31 January 1968. They were charged with removing the existing government administration from power in the city and replacing it with a &quot;revolutionary administration&quot;. Working from lists of &quot;cruel tyrants and reactionary elements&quot; previously developed by Vietcong intelligence officers, many people were to be rounded up following the initial hours of the attack. These included Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) soldiers, civil servants, political party members, local religious leaders, schoolteachers, American civilians, and other international people. Cadres called out the names on their lists over loudspeakers, ordering them to report to a local school. Those who did not report voluntarily were hunted down.

===Communist preliminary occupation plans and orders===

The communists&#x27; actions were based on a series of orders issued by the High Command and the PRG. In a 3500-page document issued on 26 January 1968, by the Trị-Thiên-Huế Political Directorate, the political cadres were given specific instructions: &quot;Operating in close support of the regular military and guerrilla elements, the political cadre were to: destroy and disorganize the Republic of Viet Nam&#x27;s (RVN&#x27;s) administrative machinery &#x27;from province and district levels to the city wards, streets, and wharves;&#x27; motivate the people of Huế to take up arms, pursue the enemy, seize power, and establish a revolutionary government; motivate (recruit) local citizens for military and &#x27;security&#x27; forces... transportation and supply activities, and to serve wounded soldiers...;&quot; &quot;pursue to the end (and) punish spies, reactionaries, and &#x27;tyrants&#x27; and &#x27;maintain order and security in the city.&#x27;&quot;

Another section, dealing with Target Area 1 (&quot;the Phu Ninh ward&quot;) read: &quot;Annihilate all spies, reactionaries, and foreign teachers (such as Americans and Germans) in the area. Break open prisons. Investigate cadre, soldiers and receptive civilians imprisoned by the enemy. Search for tyrants and reactionaries who are receiving treatment in hospitals.&quot; The orders for Target Area 2 (&quot;the Phu Vinh ward&quot;) were similar: &quot;Annihilate the enemy in the area... Rally the Buddhist force to advance the isolation of reactionaries who exploit the Catholics of Phu Cam.&quot; The orders for Target Area 3 (&quot;the wharves along the An Cuu River and from Truong Sung to the Kho Ren Bridge&quot;) followed the same pattern: &quot;Search for and pursue spies, tyrants and reactionaries hiding near the wharf... Motivate the people in the areas along the River to annihilate the enemy.&quot; For Target Area 4 (the district including Phu Cam and the Binh Anh, Truong Giang, Truong Cuu and An Lang sections) the orders were &quot;Search for and pursue spies and reactionaries in the area... Destroy the power and influence of reactionary leaders...&quot; For Area 1, Cell 3 was assigned the job of &quot;Annihilation of tyrants and the elimination of traitors&quot;.

In June 1968, the American 1st Cavalry troops captured PAVN documents that included a directive written two days before the battle began. It included these instructions: &quot;For the purpose of a lengthy occupation of Huế, we should immediately liberate the rural areas and annihilate the wicked GVN administrative personnel.

Specific Mission... We must attack the enemy key agencies, economic installations, and lines of communications. We must also annihilate the enemy mobile troops, reactionary elements and tyrants.&quot;

On 1 February, the provincial administration, having taken control of Huế, issued a directive that ordered the troops, in part, &quot;To wipe out all puppet administrative organs of the puppet Thiệu-Kỳ (President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu, Vice President Nguyễn Cao Kỳ) clique at all levels in the province, city and town down to every single hamlet.&quot;

On the same day, the Liberation Front radio announced, &quot;We tell our compatriots that we are determined to topple the regime of the traitorous Thiệu-Kỳ clique and to punish and annihilate those who have been massacring and oppressing our compatriots... we ask our compatriots to... help us arrest all the U.S.-puppet cruel henchmen.&quot;

===Occupation===
Foreign Service Officer Douglas Pike wrote that according to Vietcong documents captured during and after the siege, members of the provincial administration were to be taken out of the city, held, and punished for their &quot;crimes against the Vietnamese people&quot;. The disposition of those who were previously in control of the city was carefully laid out, and the lists were detailed and extensive. Those in the Saigon-based-state police apparatus at all levels were to be rounded up and held outside the city. High civilian and military officials were also removed from the city to await the study of their individual cases.

Ordinary civil servants who worked for &quot;the Saigon enemy&quot; out of necessity but did not oppose the communists were destined for reeducation and later employment. Low-level civil servants who had at some point been involved in paramilitary activities were to be held for reeducation but not employed. There are documented cases of individuals who were executed by the Vietcong when they tried to hide or otherwise resisted during the early stages of Huế&#x27;s occupation.

Within days of the capture, US Marine Corps (USMC), US Army, and ARVN units were dispatched to counterattack and recapture the city after weeks of fierce fighting during which the city and its outlying areas were exposed to repeated shelling and bombing. It was reported that during the attack by USMC and ARVN, North Vietnam&#x27;s forces had rounded up the individuals whose names it had previously collected and had them executed or sent North for &quot;reeducation.&quot;

Many people had taken sanctuary from the battle in a local church. Several hundred of them were ordered out to undergo indoctrination in the &quot;liberated area&quot; and told that they would be allowed to return home. After marching the group south 9 km, 20 of the people were separated, tried in a kangaroo court, found guilty, executed and buried. The others were taken across the river and turned over to a local communist unit in an exchange that even included written receipts. Douglas Pike noted &quot;It is probable that the Commissar intended that their prisoners should be reeducated and returned, but with the turnover, matters passed from his control.&quot; Sometime in the following several weeks, the communists decided to kill the individuals under their control.

===Eyewitness accounts===

Nguyễn Công Minh, the daughter of the Deputy Mayor of Huế, reported that her father, who was of old age, was arrested at his home in the beginning of the communist occupation three days after he ordered his children (including herself) and his wife to flee via the back of their house when communist troops first came knocking at their home. Upon telling the troops that he was Deputy Mayor of Huế and was set to retire in one year (1969), he was ordered to report to a camp for reeducation and to pack clothing and food sufficient for 10 days. He was never seen again, and his remains were never recovered. She recalled that in the search of her father&#x27;s remains, she witnessed that many of the bodies she came across in the mass graves were found to be in a fetal position, with their hands tied behind their backs, and the back of the heads/skulls were smashed, indicating that they knelt on the ground prior to their deaths and they died due to blunt-force trauma to their heads.

In 1971, the journalist Don Oberdorfer&#x27;s book, &quot;Tet!,&quot; documented some eyewitness accounts of what happened in Huế during the occupation. Pham Van Tuong, a part-time janitor for the Huế government information office who made it on the Vietcong list of &quot;reactionaries&quot; for working there, was hiding with his family as it hunted for him. When he was found with his 3-year-old daughter, 5-year-old son and two nephews, the Vietcong immediately gunned them all down, leaving their bodies on the street for the rest of the family to see.

Don Oberdorfer spent five days in late 1969 with Paul Vogle, an American professor of English at Huế University, to go through Huế to interview witnesses of the occupation. Oberdorfer classified all the killings into two categories: the planned execution of government officials and their families, political and civil servants, and collaborators with Americans, and those civilians not connected to the government who ran from questioning, who spoke harshly about the occupation, or who the occupiers believed &quot;displayed a bad attitude&quot; towards the occupiers.

Oberdorfer reported that on the fifth day of the Viet Cong occupation in the Catholic district of Huế, Phủ Cam, all able-bodied males over 15, approximately 400 boys and men, who took refuge in Phủ Cam Cathedral were taken away and killed. Some had been on the Vietcong&#x27;s blacklist, some were of military age and some just looked prosperous. Oberdorfer interviewed Ho Ty, a Vietcong commander who took part in the advanced planning of a general uprising. He reported that Ty recounted that the Communist party &quot;was particularly anxious to get those people at Phủ Cam... The Catholics were considered particular enemies of ours.&quot; It was apparently that group whose remains were later found in the Da Mai Creek bed. The murders of 500 people at Da Mai were authorized by PRG command &quot;on grounds that the victims had been traitors to the revolution.&quot;

Three professors, Professor Horst-Günther Krainick, Dr. Alois Alteköster, and Dr. Raimund Discher, who taught at the Huế University&#x27;s Faculty of Medicine and were members of the West German Cultural Mission, along with Mrs. Elisabeth Krainick, were arrested and executed by North Vietnamese troops during their invasion of Huế in February 1968. On 5 April 1968, the bodies of the executed professors along with many Vietnamese civilians also executed, were discovered in mass graves near Huế.

Philip W. Manhard, a U.S. senior advisor in Huế province, was taken to a prisoner-of-war camp by the PAVN and held until 1973. Manhard recounted that during the PAVN&#x27;s withdrawal from Huế, they summarily executed anyone in their custody who resisted being taken out of the city or who was too old, young, or frail to make the journey to the camp.

Two French priests, Fathers Urbain and Guy, were seen being led away and suffered a similar fate. Urbain&#x27;s body was found buried alive, bound hand and foot. Guy, who was 48, was stripped of his cassock and forced to kneel down on the ground, where he was shot in the back of the head. He was in the same grave with Father Urbain and 18 others.

Captured in the home of Vietnamese friends, Stephen Miller of the U.S. Information Service was bound and shot in a field behind a Catholic seminary. Courtney Niles, an American civilian working for NBC International, was killed during an attack by communist forces while in the presence of U.S. soldiers.

Alje Vennema, a Dutch-Canadian doctor who lived in Huế and witnessed the battle and the massacre, wrote &quot;The Viet Cong Massacre at Huế&quot; in 1976. He recounts numerous stories of murders. A 48-year-old street vendor, Mrs. Nguyen Thi Lao, was &quot;arrested on the main street. Her body was found at the school. Her arms had been bound and a rag stuffed into her mouth; there were no wounds to the body. She was probably buried alive.&quot; A 44-year-old bricklayer, Mr. Nguyen Ty, was &quot;seized on February 2, 1968... His body was found on March 1st; his hands were tied, and he had a bullet wound through his neck which had come out through the mouth.&quot; At Ap Dong Gi Tay &quot;110 bodies were uncovered; again most had their hands tied and rags stuffed in their mouth. All of them were men, among them fifteen students, several military men, and civil servants, young and old.&quot; &quot;Sometimes a whole family was eliminated, as was the case with the merchant, Mr. Nam Long, who together with his wife and five children was shot at home.&quot; &quot;Mr. Phan Van Tuong, a laborer at the province headquarters, suffered a similar fate by being shot outside his house with four of his children.&quot;

Vennema listed 27 graves with a total of 2,397 bodies, most of which had been executed. He cited numerous eyewitness accounts of executions and described the condition of bodies found in the graves. Many had their hands tied behind their backs. Some were shot in the head. Some had rags stuffed in their mouths and had no evidence of wounds, apparently having been buried alive. Some had evidence of having been beaten. A few were identified as PAVN or VC troops killed during the battle.

Some graves were found purely by accident. A farmer working in his field tripped on a wire sticking out of the ground. He pulled on it to remove it and a skeletal hand popped out of the ground. Other graves were found when people noticed suspiciously green grass in sandy areas. The Da Mai Creek massacre was discovered after three Vietcong defected and told authorities about the murders. An ARVN soldier on patrol south of Huế noticed a wire sticking out of the ground. Thinking it was a booby trap, he very carefully worked to uncover it. He discovered the body of an old man, his hands tied together with the wire. Two days later, 130 bodies had been uncovered.

In another case,

...a squad with a death order entered the home of a prominent community leader and shot him, his wife, his married son and daughter-in-law, his young unmarried daughter, a male and female servant and their baby. The family cat was strangled; the family dog was clubbed to death; the goldfish scooped out of the fishbowl and tossed on the floor. When the Communists left, no life remained in the house.

An eyewitness, Nguyen Tan Chau, recounted how he was captured by communist troops and marched south with 29 other prisoners bound together, in three groups of ten. Chau managed to escape and hide in the darkness just before the others were executed. From there, he witnessed what happened next. The larger prisoners were separated into pairs, tied together back to back, and shot. The others were shot singly. All were dumped into two shallow graves, including those who had been wounded but were not dead.

===Documents confirming the massacre===
Captured Vietcong documents boasted that they &quot;eliminated&quot; thousands of enemy and &quot;annihilated members of various reactionary political parties, henchmen, and wicked tyrants&quot; in Huế. One regiment alone reported that it killed 1,000 people. Another report mentioned 2,867 killed. Yet another document boasted of over 3,000 killed. A further document listed 2,748 executions. A captured Vietcong enemy document, which numerous writers cited, including Guenter Lewy in his 1980 book &quot;America in Vietnam&quot;, and Peter Macdonald&#x27;s 1993 book &quot;Giap&quot;, recorded that the communists had &quot;eliminated 1,892 administrative personnel, 38 policemen, 790 tyrants&quot;, 2720 politically persecuted persons in all, during the communist occupation of the city.

The translation of an official Vietnamese campaign study of the Tet Offensive in Thừa Thiên–Huế Province released by the communists recognized that Vietcong cadres &quot;hunted down and captured tyrants and Republic of Vietnam military and government personnel&quot; and that &quot;many nests of reactionaries [...] were killed.&quot; Hundreds of others &quot;who owed blood debts were executed.&quot; Another official history from the communist side, &quot;The Trị-Thiên-Huế Battlefield During the Victorious Resistance War Against the Americans to Save the Nation,&quot; recognized the widespread killings but claimed they were done by civilians who armed themselves and &quot;rose up in a flood-tide, killing enemy thugs, eliminating traitors, and hunting down the enemy... The people captured and punished many reactionaries, enemy thugs, and enemy secret agents.&quot; However, the word &quot;eliminate&quot; may be a mistranslation of the word &quot;diệt,&quot; or &quot;loại khỏi vòng chiến đấu,&quot; and instead actually mean &quot;destroy&quot; or &quot;neutralize,&quot; as in neutralizing their administrative function and eliminating of their political influence by detention, as opposed to physical liquidation.

When Trương Như Tảng was appointed as Vietcong justice minister soon after Huế, he understood it to be a critical position because the massacre had &quot;left us with a special need to address fears among the Southern people that a revolutionary victory would bring with it a bloodbath or reign of terror.&quot; That was because &quot;large numbers of people had been executed&quot; including &quot;captured American soldiers and several other international people who were not combatants.&quot; According to Trạng, &quot;discipline in Huế was seriously inadequate&quot; and &quot;fanatic young soldiers had indiscriminately shot people, and angry local citizens who supported the revolution had on various occasions taken justice into their own hands...&quot; The massacre was &quot;one of those terrible spontaneous tragedies that inevitably accompany war.&quot;

On 4 February, Radio Hanoi announced, &quot;After one hour&#x27;s fighting the Revolutionary Armed Forces occupied the residence of the puppet provincial Governor (in Huế), the prison and the offices of the puppet administration... The Revolutionary Armed Forces punished most cruel agents of the enemy and seized control of the streets... rounded up and punished dozens of cruel agents and caused the enemy organs of control and oppression to crumble.&quot; On 14 February, the Thừa Thiên-Huế People&#x27;s Revolutionary Committee issued a statement that read in part,

Concerned over the country&#x27;s survival and their own fate, on 31 January 1968, the Thừa Thiên-Huế people rose up holding weapons in their hands, smashed the puppet ruling apparatus from the provincial to the village and hamlet levels, and completely liberated the rural areas and the city of Huế. The enemy has suffered disastrous defeats. A number of ringleaders of the puppet administration have surrendered to the people or have been arrested and have been detained by the revolutionary forces. Except for some localities and scattered guard posts which have not yet been liquidated, the Thừa Thiên-Huế puppet administration has basically disintegrated.

An entry in a captured communist document dated 22 February stated, &quot;Troop proselyting by the VC/PAVN forces was not successful because the troops had to devote themselves to combat missions. Moreover, they were afraid of being discovered by the enemy. It was very difficult for them to handle POWs so they executed the policy of &#x27;catch and kill.&#x27;&quot; A 25 February captured communist document detailed some of the successes of the Special Action Company of the PAVN 6th Regiment. &quot;We captured and exterminated thousands of people of the revolutionary network. From province to village we broke the enemy&#x27;s administrative grip for the people to rise.&quot;

A report written immediately after the battle by a political officer of the People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party listed 2,826 &quot;administrative personnel, nationalist political party members, &#x27;tyrants&#x27; and policemen that were killed by their troops.&quot;

Another document, undated, written by a senior political officer and marked &quot;ABSOLUTE SECRET&quot;, was entitled &quot;Information On the Victory of Our Armed Forces in Huế from 31 January to 23 March 1968;&quot; it was captured by the US 1st Cavalry Division on 25 April 1968 and reported on the results of the political operation.

We also killed one member of the Dai Viet Party Committee, one Senator of South Viet-Nam, 50 Quoc Dan Dang party members, six Dai Viet Party members, thirteen Can Lao Nhan Vi Party members, three captains, four 1st lieutenants, and liberated 35 hamlets with 32,000 people... We eliminated 1,892 administrative personnel, 38 policemen, 790 tyrants, six captains, two first lieutenants, 20 second lieutenants, and many NCOs.

The same document contained a passage that read:

The people joined our soldiers in their search for tyrants, reactionaries and spies. For instance, Mrs. Xuan followed our soldiers to show the houses of the tyrants she knew, although she had only six days before given birth to a child.

In March 1968, in the official Hanoi press, the North reported:

Actively combining their efforts with those of the People&#x27;s Liberation Armed Forces and population, other self-defense and armed units of the city of Huế arrested and called to surrender the surviving functionaries of the puppet administration and officers and men of the puppet army who were skulking. Die-hard cruel agents were punished.

A 6 March document written by a Vietcong sapper unit commander recounted that his unit &quot;participated in the killing of tyrants and the digging of trenches&quot; A 13 March 1968 entry in captured documents reviewed the successes of the attack on Huế. &quot;Enormous victory: We annihilated more than 3,000 tyrannical puppet army and government administrative personnel, including the Deputy Province Chief of Thừa Thiên.&quot; A report written by the commander of the 6th Regiment on 30 March stated that they had captured thousands of &quot;local administrative personnel, puppet troops, and cruel tyrants&quot; and successfully &quot;annihilated members of various reactionary political parties, henchmen, and wicked tyrants.&quot; It also stated that they had &quot;killed 1,000 local administrative personnel, spies and cruel tyrants.&quot;

On 26 April 1968, Hanoi, reacting to the discovery of graves in Huế, announced that the people murdered by their troops were &quot;hooligan lackeys who had incurred blood debts of the Huế compatriots and who were annihilated by the Front&#x27;s Armed Forces in the early spring of 1968.&quot; On 27 April 1969, Radio Hanoi criticized authorities in Huế and South Vietnam:

In order to cover up their cruel acts, the puppet administration in Huế recently played the farce of setting up a so-called committee for the search for burial sites of the hooligan lackeys who had owed blood debts to the Tri-Thien-Huế compatriots and who were annihilated by the Southern Armed Forces and people in early Mau Than spring.

A cadre diary captured by 1st Cavalry Division troops contained an entry that read:

The entire puppet administrative system from hamlet to province was destroyed or disintegrated. More than 3,000 persons were killed. The enemy could never reorganize or make up for his failure. Although he could immediately use inexperienced elements as replacements, they were good for nothing.

In December 1968, the Huế City People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party Central Committee released a summary of the party&#x27;s accomplishments during Tet. The summary included the following statement: &quot;Thousands of tyrants were killed. Many reactionary factions and organizations were exterminated.&quot;

The same month, Don Oberdorfer reported:

Ho Ty was arrested by the government police on Sept. 4 this year. At the time of his arrest, he was party secretary for a section of Huế city...Ho Ty reported that the part of the plan from higher headquarters was to destroy the government machinery of Huế and the people who made it work... He said the killings were planned and executed by a separate group in charge of security.

In 1987, at a Hanoi conference to discuss the history of the Tet offensive, Colonel General Tran Van Quang, one of the commanders of the Huế operation, assessed the strengths and weaknesses of his forces and cited as one of their strengths:

We resolutely carried out the orders and fulfilled the requirements set out for us by the High Command. We motivated our cadre, soldiers, and the civilian population through the use of the slogans, &#x27;Tri-Thien fights for Tri-Thien and for the entire nation,&#x27; and &#x27;Heroically and resolutely conduct attacks and uprisings.&#x27;

In February 1988, Vietnamese communist leaders admitted &quot;mistakes&quot; were made in Huế. Col Nguyen Quoc Khanh, commander of part of the forces that took over Huế stated, &quot;There was no case of killing civilians purposefully... Those civilians who were killed were killed accidentally, in cross fire.&quot; However, he admitted &quot;some rank and file soldiers may have committed individual mistakes.&quot; However, in an internal document discussing the 1968 Tet offensive in Hue, General (Tổng) Hồ Trung wrote, referring to the Giá Hơi section: &quot;These forces hunted down and killed enemy thugs, reactionaries, and puppet policemen&quot; and that they &quot;cleaned out... nests of Catholic reactionaries.&quot;

==Discovery==


A first summary was published for the U.S. Mission in Vietnam by Douglas Pike, then working as a Foreign Service Officer for the U.S. Information Agency in 1970. Pike identified three distinct phases for the executions in Huế. In a report published in 1970, &quot;The Viet Cong Strategy of Terror&quot;, Pike wrote that at least half of the bodies unearthed in Huế revealed clear evidence of &quot;atrocity killings: to include hands wired behind backs, rags stuffed in mouths, bodies contorted but without wounds (indicating burial alive).&quot; Pike concluded that the killings were done by local Vietcong cadres and were the result of &quot;a decision rational and justifiable in the Communist mind.&quot; The three phases are as follows:

* Phase one was a series of kangaroo court trials of local ARVN officials. The highly publicized trials lasted anywhere from 5 to 10 minutes and the accused were always found guilty of &quot;crimes against the people.&quot;
* Phase two was implemented when the communists thought that they could hold the city long-term and was a campaign of &quot;social reconstruction&quot; along Maoist dogmatic lines. Those who the communists believed to be counter-revolutionaries were singled out. Catholics, intellectuals, prominent businessmen, and other &quot;imperialist lackeys&quot; were targeted in order to &quot;build a new social order.&quot;
* The last phase began when it became evident that the communists could not hold the city, and it was designed to &quot;leave no witnesses.&quot; Anyone who could identify individual Vietcong members who participated in the occupation was to be killed and their bodies hidden.

After the Battle of Huế, between 1968 and 1969 a total of almost 2,800 bodies were recovered from mass graves, with 4 major mass grave finds.
* A few months after the battle, about 1,200 civilian bodies were found in 18 hastily concealed mass graves.
* A second major group of graves were discovered in the first 7 months of 1969. In February 1968, a list of 428 names of people identified from the recovered bones was released by local authorities.
* In September 1969, three communist defectors confessed to the 101st Airborne Division intelligence officers that they had witnessed several hundred people being killed in a 100-yard area at Da Mai Creek bed (about 10 miles south of Huế).
* In November 1969, another major mass grave was found at Phu Thu Salt Flats, near the fishing village of Lương Viện, Vinh Hưng commune, Phú Lộc provincial district, 10 miles east of Huế and halfway between the cities of Huế and Đà Nẵng.

==Disputes, revisionism and denials==
In Bùi Tín&#x27;s 2002 memoir, &quot;From Enemy to Friend: a North Vietnamese perspective on the war&quot;, the former PAVN Colonel acknowledged that executions of civilians had occurred in Huế. However, he added that under the intensity of the American bombardment, discipline of the troops disintegrated. The &quot;units from the north&quot; had been &quot;told that Huế was the stronghold of feudalism, a bed of reactionaries, the breeding ground of Cần Lao Party loyalists who remained true to the memory of former South Vietnamese president Ngô Đình Diệm and of Nguyễn Văn Thiệu&#x27;s Democracy Party.&quot; Tin explained that over 10,000 prisoners were taken at Huế, with the most important of them sent to North Vietnam for imprisonment. When U.S. Marines launched their counterattack to retake the city, communist troops were instructed to move the prisoners with the retreating troops. According to Tín, in the &quot;panic of retreat,&quot; the company and battalion commanders shot their prisoners &quot;to ensure the safety of the retreat.&quot;

Marilyn B. Young disputes the &quot;official figures&quot; of executions at Huế. While acknowledging that there were executions, she cites freelance journalist Len Ackland, who was at Huế and estimated the number to be somewhere between 300 and 400.

Ngo Vinh Long claims that 710 people were killed by the communists. In an interview he stated, &quot;Yeah, there was a total of 710 persons killed in the Huế area, from my research, not as many as five thousand, six thousand, or whatever the Americans claimed at that time, and not as few as four hundred as people like some of the people in the peace movement here claim...&quot;

The Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci reported, &quot;In the last few days the Vietcong lost their heads and did nothing but make reprisals, kill, punish&quot;. However, citing a French priest to whom she spoke in Huế, she also claimed that the death toll of up to 8,000 included deaths by American bombardment, and at least 200 people, and perhaps as many as 1,100, who were killed following the liberation of Huế by the US and ARVN forces. Stanley Karnow wrote that the bodies of those executed by South Vietnamese teams were thrown into common graves. Some reports alleged that South Vietnamese &quot;revenge squads&quot; had also been at work in the aftermath of the battle to search out and execute citizens supporting the communist occupation.

The historian David Hunt posited that Douglas Pike&#x27;s study for the U.S. Mission was &quot;by any definition, a work of propaganda.&quot; In 1988, Pike said that he had earlier been engaged in a conscious &quot;effort to discredit the Vietcong.&quot;

In a letter to the editor of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the historian Gareth Porter, who is also known for his Cambodian genocide denial, stated that there was little evidence that the communists carried out more than &quot;several hundred&quot; political executions and revenge killings in Huế, while the U.S. official estimate maintains that over 2,800 bodies were &quot;victims of Communist executions.&quot; He alleged that the site of one set of mass graves was also the site of a major battle in which some 250 communist troops were reported killed in U.S air strikes and that Saigon&#x27;s minister of health, after visiting burial sites, said the bodies could have been communist soldiers killed in battle. He dismissed Pike&#x27;s claim that there were communist blacklists of students and intellectuals to be killed as unsupported by interviews and captured communist documents.

The historian James Willbanks concluded, &quot;We may never know what really happened at Huế, but it is clear that mass executions did occur.&quot; According to Stanley Karnow, &quot;Balanced accounts have made it clear, however, that the Communist butchery at Huế did take place—perhaps on an even larger scale than reported during the war.&quot; Ben Kiernan&#x27;s 2017 history of Vietnam states that &quot;thousands&quot; were killed at Huế in &quot;possibly the largest atrocity of the war.&quot;

== Legacy ==
Reports of the massacre had a profound impact on the South Vietnamese for many years after the Tet Offensive, with an anticipation of a bloodbath following any North Vietnamese takeover, like the one in Huế. Novelist James Jones, in a &quot;New York Times&quot; article wrote, &quot;Whatever else they accomplished, the Huế massacres effectively turned the bulk of the South Vietnamese against the Northern Communists. In South Vietnam, wherever one went, from Can Tho in the delta to Tay Ninh to Kontum in the north, and of course in Huế, the 1968 Tet massacres were still being talked about in 1973.&quot; For their part, left-leaning scholars have since commented that the massacre was a rare propaganda coup during the unpopular war in Vietnam, especially as it allowed Richard Nixon&#x27;s government to counteract the public outrage derived from the American-perpetrated Mỹ Lai massacre that would take place a few weeks later during that same year.

Anticipation of a bloodbath was a major factor in the widespread panic and chaos across South Vietnam when North Vietnam executed their 1975 Spring Offensive, and the panic culminated in the disintegration and defeat of South Vietnamese military forces, and the fall of the Republic of Vietnam on 30 April 1975. Today, the massacre remains unrecognized and entirely ignored in the Vietnamese communist government&#x27;s War Remnants Museum in Ho Chi Minh City.

==See also==

*List of massacres in Vietnam
*Viet Cong and People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam use of terror in the Vietnam War
*Bửu Đồng
*Red Terror

==References==
==Further reading==
* Arnold, James R., &quot;Tet Offensive 1968: Turning Point in Vietnam&quot;, London: Osprey, 1990. 
* Bullington, James R. &quot;And Here, See Huế,&quot; Foreign Service Journal, November 1968. 
* Christmas, G. R. &quot;A Company Commander Reflects on Operation Huế City,&quot; Marine Corps Gazette, April 1971.
* Davidson, Phillip B. &quot;Vietnam at War: The History, 1946–1975&quot;. Oxford University Press, 1991. 
* Hammel, Eric. &quot;Fire in the Streets: The Battle for Huế, Tet 1968&quot;. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1991. 
* Harkanson, John, and Charles McMahon. &quot;USMC &amp; Tet &#x27;68: There&#x27;s a Little Trouble in Huế ...,&quot; Vietnam Combat, Winter 1985.
* Krohn, Charles A., &quot;The Lost Battalion: Controversy and Casualties in the Battle of Huế&quot;, Praeger Publishers, 1993. 
* Larson, Mike, &quot;Heroes: A Year in Vietnam With The First Air Cavalry Division&quot;, Barnes &amp; Noble, 2008. 
* Nolan, Keith William. &quot;Battle for Huế: Tet 1968&quot;. Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1983. 
* Oberdorfer, Don. &quot;Tet!: The Turning Point in the Vietnam War&quot;. New York: Doubleday &amp; Company, 1971. Reissued in 1984 by Da Capo Press. 
* Palmer, Dave Richard. &quot;Summons of the Trumpet: U.S.-Vietnam in Perspective&quot;. Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1978. 
* Phan Van Son. &quot;The Viet Cong Tet Offensive (1968)&quot;. Saigon: Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, 1969.
* Pike, Douglas. &quot;PAVN: People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam&quot;. Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1986. 
* &quot;Secrets of the Vietnam War&quot;. Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1990. 
* Smith, Captain George W., US. &quot;The Battle of Huế,&quot; Infantry, July–August 1968.
* Stanton, Shelby L. &quot;Anatomy of a Division: 1st Cav in Vietnam&quot;. Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1987. 
* Tolson, Major General John J., 3rd. &quot;Airmobility: 1961–1971&quot;. Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, 1973.
* Truong Sinh. &quot;The Fight to Liberate the City of Huế During Mau Than Tet (1969),&quot; Hoc Tap, December 1974.
* Tucker, Spencer, &quot;Vietnam&quot;. London: UCL Press, 1999
* Vietnam Order of Battle. New York: U.S. News &amp; World Report, Inc., 1981.
* Young, Marilyn B., &quot;The Vietnam Wars, 1945–1990&quot; (New York: Harper Perennial, 1991)
* Vennama, Alje, &quot;The Viet Cong Massacre at Huế&quot;. New York, Vantage Press, 1976. 

==External links==
*Complete text of Douglas Pike&#x27;s &quot;Vietcong Strategy of Terror&quot; (PDF)
*Viet Quoc article
*Misreporting that Doomed Millions, Setting the Record Straight 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1641195" start="4" end="16" title="Massacre at Huế" label="Huế massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="49" end="62" title="Tet Offensive" label="Tết Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="94" end="111" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="117" end="128" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="148" end="157" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="162" end="191" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="221" end="240" title="military occupation" label="military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="279" end="282" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="368" end="379" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q697053" start="386" end="399" title="Battle of Huế" label="Battle of Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q734271" start="510" end="520" title="mass grave" label="mass grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="610" end="618" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="624" end="640" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="708" end="721" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q861534" start="861" end="873" title="premature burial" label="buried alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262732" start="1232" end="1237" title="purge" label="purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895498" start="1610" end="1621" title="Ben Kiernan" label="Ben Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="1880" end="1905" title="Republic of Vietnam" label="government administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="1959" end="1969" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="2029" end="2036" title="tyrants" label="tyrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="2041" end="2052" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="2101" end="2122" title="espionage" label="intelligence officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="2216" end="2247" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="2265" end="2278" title="civil servant" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="2281" end="2296" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="2312" end="2321" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="2347" end="2355" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072362" start="2714" end="2717" title="Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam" label="PRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q36579" start="2777" end="2780" title="Quảng Trị Province" label="Trị"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="2781" end="2786" title="Thừa Thiên–Huế Province" label="Thiên"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="2787" end="2790" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3036" end="3039" title="South Vietnam" label="RVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q687188" start="3125" end="3130" title="Ward (Vietnam)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="3145" end="3152" title="wharves" label="wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="5617" end="5633" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="5650" end="5663" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="5738" end="5744" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q247297" start="6080" end="6088" title="henchmen" label="henchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468328" start="6114" end="6137" title="Foreign Service Officer" label="Foreign Service Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301893" start="6138" end="6150" title="Douglas Pike" label="Douglas Pike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6885" end="6896" title=":wikt:reeducation" label="reeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="6983" end="6995" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="7258" end="7273" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="7282" end="7289" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q375159" start="7826" end="7840" title="indoctrination" label="indoctrination"/>
<link wikidata="Q375727" start="8008" end="8022" title="kangaroo court" label="kangaroo court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229607" start="8241" end="8250" title="Commissar" label="Commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449238" start="9280" end="9294" title="fetal position" label="fetal position"/>
<link wikidata="Q770709" start="9469" end="9487" title="blunt-force trauma" label="blunt-force trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q484308" start="10064" end="10078" title="Don Oberdorfer" label="Don Oberdorfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310048" start="10161" end="10175" title="Huế University" label="Huế University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10713" end="10721" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28197251" start="10830" end="10847" title="Phủ Cam Cathedral" label="Phủ Cam Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11588" end="11607" title=":de:Raimund Discher" label="Dr. Raimund Discher"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="11693" end="11704" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q85943861" start="12009" end="12026" title="Philip W. Manhard" label="Philip W. Manhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070290" start="12082" end="12102" title="prisoner-of-war camp" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754777" start="12778" end="12802" title="U.S. Information Service" label="U.S. Information Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="12851" end="12859" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12910" end="12913" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745072" start="13018" end="13030" title="Alje Vennema" label="Alje Vennema"/>
<link wikidata="Q327321" start="13480" end="13490" title="bricklayer" label="bricklayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097176" start="15070" end="15078" title="Chieu Hoi" label="defected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568202" start="15219" end="15229" title="booby trap" label="booby trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q71413" start="16835" end="16847" title="Guenter Lewy" label="Guenter Lewy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848001" start="18389" end="18404" title="Trương Như Tảng" label="Trương Như Tảng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="18660" end="18669" title="Massacre" label="bloodbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="18673" end="18688" title="reign of terror" label="reign of terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979793" start="21807" end="21821" title="Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam" label="Dai Viet Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365892" start="21867" end="21886" title="Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng" label="Quoc Dan Dang party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="21933" end="21948" title="Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party" label="Can Lao Nhan Vi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10829617" start="25665" end="25679" title="Trần Văn Quang" label="Tran Van Quang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609307" start="26252" end="26273" title="List of central officeholders in the Communist Party of Vietnam" label="Col Nguyen Quoc Khanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754777" start="27032" end="27055" title="United States Information Agency" label="U.S. Information Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="28028" end="28034" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="28091" end="28114" title="counter-revolutionaries" label="counter-revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="28198" end="28209" title="imperialist" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="29485" end="29492" title="Đà Nẵng" label="Đà Nẵng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375353" start="29536" end="29543" title="Bùi Tín" label="Bùi Tín"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919971" start="29986" end="29999" title="Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party" label="Cần Lao Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="30079" end="30092" title="Ngô Đình Diệm" label="Ngô Đình Diệm"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="30100" end="30116" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407933" start="30124" end="30139" title="National Social Democratic Front" label="Democracy Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763494" start="30592" end="30608" title="Marilyn B. Young" label="Marilyn B. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521645" start="30752" end="30763" title="Len Ackland" label="Len Ackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10800423" start="30843" end="30856" title="Ngo Vinh Long" label="Ngo Vinh Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q153700" start="31248" end="31262" title="Oriana Fallaci" label="Oriana Fallaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="31667" end="31681" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301893" start="32014" end="32026" title="Douglas Pike" label="Douglas Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="32100" end="32110" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="32267" end="32285" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595401" start="32307" end="32320" title="Gareth Porter" label="Gareth Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199748" start="32348" end="32373" title="Cambodian genocide denial" label="Cambodian genocide denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q108531725" start="33141" end="33156" title="James Willbanks" label="James Willbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543703" start="33288" end="33302" title="Stanley Karnow" label="Stanley Karnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895498" start="33475" end="33486" title="Ben Kiernan" label="Ben Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183421" start="34519" end="34534" title="Mỹ Lai massacre" label="Mỹ Lai massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="34735" end="34756" title="1975 Spring Offensive" label="1975 Spring Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="34861" end="34892" title="Fall of Saigon" label="fall of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q703871" start="35019" end="35038" title="War Remnants Museum" label="War Remnants Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="35042" end="35058" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Ho Chi Minh City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627298" start="35076" end="35104" title="List of massacres in Vietnam" label="List of massacres in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026058" start="35106" end="35182" title="Viet Cong and People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam use of terror in the Vietnam War" label="Viet Cong and People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam use of terror in the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003207" start="35184" end="35192" title="Bửu Đồng" label="Bửu Đồng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171767" start="35194" end="35204" title="Red Terror (disambiguation)" label="Red Terror"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629005" wikidata="Q4837092" url="?curid=629005" title="Ba space">
<text>In mathematics, the ba space formula_1 of an algebra of sets formula_2 is the Banach space consisting of all bounded and finitely additive signed measures on formula_2. The norm is defined as the variation, that is formula_4

If Σ is a sigma-algebra, then the space formula_5 is defined as the subset of formula_1 consisting of countably additive measures. The notation &quot;ba&quot; is a mnemonic for &quot;bounded additive&quot; and &quot;ca&quot; is short for &quot;countably additive&quot;.

If &quot;X&quot; is a topological space, and Σ is the sigma-algebra of Borel sets in &quot;X&quot;, then formula_7 is the subspace of formula_5 consisting of all regular Borel measures on &quot;X&quot;.

== Properties ==
All three spaces are complete (they are Banach spaces) with respect to the same norm defined by the total variation, and thus formula_5 is a closed subset of formula_1, and formula_7 is a closed set of formula_5 for Σ the algebra of Borel sets on &quot;X&quot;. The space of simple functions on formula_2 is dense in formula_1.

The ba space of the power set of the natural numbers, &quot;ba&quot;(2N), is often denoted as simply formula_15 and is isomorphic to the dual space of the ℓ∞ space.

=== Dual of B(Σ) ===
Let B(Σ) be the space of bounded Σ-measurable functions, equipped with the uniform norm. Then &quot;ba&quot;(Σ) = B(Σ)* is the continuous dual space of B(Σ). This is due to Hildebrandt and Fichtenholtz &amp; Kantorovich. This is a kind of Riesz representation theorem which allows for a measure to be represented as a linear functional on measurable functions. In particular, this isomorphism allows one to &quot;define&quot; the integral with respect to a finitely additive measure (note that the usual Lebesgue integral requires &quot;countable&quot; additivity). This is due to Dunford &amp; Schwartz, and is often used to define the integral with respect to vector measures, and especially vector-valued Radon measures.

The topological duality &quot;ba&quot;(Σ) = B(Σ)* is easy to see. There is an obvious &quot;algebraic&quot; duality between the vector space of &quot;all&quot; finitely additive measures σ on Σ and the vector space of simple functions (formula_16). It is easy to check that the linear form induced by σ is continuous in the sup-norm if σ is bounded, and the result follows since a linear form on the dense subspace of simple functions extends to an element of B(Σ)* if it is continuous in the sup-norm.

=== Dual of &quot;L&quot;∞(&quot;μ&quot;) ===

If Σ is a sigma-algebra and &quot;μ&quot; is a sigma-additive positive measure on Σ then the Lp space &quot;L&quot;∞(&quot;μ&quot;) endowed with the essential supremum norm is by definition the quotient space of B(Σ) by the closed subspace of bounded &quot;μ&quot;-null functions:
:formula_17
The dual Banach space &quot;L&quot;∞(&quot;μ&quot;)* is thus isomorphic to
:formula_18
i.e. the space of finitely additive signed measures on &quot;Σ&quot; that are absolutely continuous with respect to &quot;μ&quot; (&quot;μ&quot;-a.c. for short).

When the measure space is furthermore sigma-finite then &quot;L&quot;∞(&quot;μ&quot;) is in turn dual to &quot;L&quot;1(&quot;μ&quot;), which by the Radon–Nikodym theorem is identified with the set of all countably additive &quot;μ&quot;-a.c. measures.
In other words, the inclusion in the bidual
:formula_19
is isomorphic to the inclusion of the space of countably additive &quot;μ&quot;-a.c. bounded measures inside the space of all finitely additive &quot;μ&quot;-a.c. bounded measures.

== See also ==
* List of Banach spaces

== References ==

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837092" start="20" end="28" title="Ba space" label="ba space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45" end="60" title=" field of sets" label="algebra of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="78" end="90" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="109" end="116" title="bounded measure" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764371" start="139" end="153" title="signed measure" label="signed measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936288" start="196" end="205" title="measure variation" label="variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217357" start="236" end="249" title="sigma-algebra" label="sigma-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="328" end="355" title="sigma-additive" label="countably additive measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="390" end="398" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="519" end="536" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086747" start="568" end="577" title="Borel set" label="Borel set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428110" start="659" end="666" title="regular measure" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q892585" start="667" end="680" title="Borel measure" label="Borel measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="758" end="770" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q913022" start="993" end="1008" title="simple function" label="simple function"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="1026" end="1031" title="Dense set" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="1067" end="1076" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1084" end="1098" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="1166" end="1176" title="isomorphic" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="1184" end="1194" title="dual space" label="dual space"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="1202" end="1210" title="lp space" label="ℓ∞ space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="1309" end="1321" title="uniform norm" label="uniform norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="1361" end="1382" title="continuous dual space" label="continuous dual space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357684" start="1473" end="1501" title="Riesz representation theorem" label="Riesz representation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="1664" end="1672" title="integral" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q219308" start="1896" end="1910" title="vector measure" label="vector measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126650" start="1942" end="1955" title="Radon measure" label="Radon measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q913022" start="2177" end="2192" title="simple function" label="simple function"/>
<link wikidata="Q217357" start="2520" end="2533" title="sigma-algebra" label="sigma-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="2557" end="2571" title="sigma-additive" label="sigma-additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="2603" end="2611" title="Lp space" label="Lp space"/>
<link wikidata="Q104804789" start="2659" end="2677" title="essential supremum" label="essential supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="2704" end="2718" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="2908" end="2925" title="finitely additive" label="finitely additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q332504" start="2968" end="2989" title="absolutely continuous" label="absolutely continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q291430" start="3091" end="3103" title="sigma-finite" label="sigma-finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191319" start="3202" end="3223" title="Radon–Nikodym theorem" label="Radon–Nikodym theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="3258" end="3276" title="countably additive" label="countably additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563343" start="3561" end="3582" title="List of Banach spaces" label="List of Banach spaces"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629006" wikidata="Q804353" url="?curid=629006" title="Baker Hughes">
<text>Baker Hughes Company is an American global energy technology company co-headquartered in Houston, Texas and London, UK. As one of the world&#x27;s largest oil field services, industrial and energy technology companies, it provides products and services to the oil and gas industry for exploration and production, as well as other energy and industrial applications.  It operates in over 120 countries, with facilities in Australia, Brazil, Singapore, Malaysia, India, Dubai, Saudi Arabia, Italy, Germany, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States. 

Baker Hughes manufactures equipment which can also be used for industrial applications such as hydrogen production, geothermal energy resources and carbon capture utilization and storage, as part of the energy transition. 

==Divisions==
The company divides its organization into the following segments:

* Oilfield Services and Equipment – The company provides drilling, evaluation, completion, production, and intervention, subsea production systems, flexible pipes, and related services to the petroleum and geothermal energy industry.
* Industrial and Energy Technology –The company provides equipment and related services for mechanical-drive, compression and power-generation applications as well as measurement and software products and services, across the petroleum industry and industrial segments. The unit encompasses climate change related businesses such as carbon capture, hydrogen and emissions management.
The company has acquired many legacy brands and businesses over the years, including Druck, Panametrics, Reuter-Stokes, Bently Nevada, and Nuovo Pignone in Italy. All of these entities now fall within the Baker Hughes portfolio.

==History==
Baker Hughes traces its roots to the 1987 merger of Hughes Tool Company and Baker Oil Tool Company and the company has subsequently grown via acquisitions.

===Hughes Tool Company===
The Hughes Tool Company was founded in 1908 by business partners Walter Benona Sharp and Howard R. Hughes, Sr., father of Howard Hughes, Jr. That year, Hughes, Sr. and Sharp developed the first two-cone drill bit, designed to enable rotary drilling in harder, deeper formations than was possible with earlier fishtail bits. They conducted two secret tests on a drilling rig in Goose Creek, Texas. Each time, Hughes asked the drilling crew to leave the rig floor, pulled the bit from a locked wooden box, and then his associates ran the bit into the hole. The drill pipe twisted off on the first test, but the second was extremely successful. Following these successful drill bit tests, the partners founded the Sharp-Hughes Tool Company in 1909. The first shop to manufacture the bit occupied a 20-foot by 40-foot rented space. On August 10, 1909, the United States Patent and Trademark Office granted a patent to Hughes.

After Walter Sharp died in 1912, Hughes purchased Sharp&#x27;s half of the business. The company was renamed Hughes Tool Company in 1915, and Hughes, Jr. inherited it after his father&#x27;s death in 1924. In 1933, the company introduced the Tricone drill bit. Through the 1950s and 1960s, Hughes Tool Company remained a private enterprise, owned by Hughes. While Hughes was engaged in his Hollywood and aviation enterprises, managers in Houston, such as Fred W. Ayers and Maynard Ellsworth Montrose, kept the tool company growing through technical innovation and international expansion. In 1958, the Engineering and Research Laboratory was enlarged to accommodate six laboratory sections that housed specialized instruments, such as a direct reading spectrometer and x-ray diffractometer. In 1959, Hughes introduced self-lubricating, sealed bearing rock bits. After collecting data from thousands of bit runs, Hughes introduced the first comprehensive guides to efficient drilling practices in 1960; in 1964, X-Line rock bits were introduced, combining new cutting structure designs and hydraulic jets.

Hughes Tool Company acquired Brown Oil Tools in 1978. Brown Oil Tools was founded by Cicero C. Brown in 1929 in Houston and patented the first liner hanger in 1937. Liner hangers enable drillers to lengthen their casing strings without having the liner pipe extend all the way to the surface. This saves capital cost and reduces weight borne by offshore platforms.

Oil Base Inc. (OBI), founded by George Miller in 1942, was acquired by Hughes Tool Company in 1979, and renamed Hughes Drilling Fluids in 1982. In 1949, OBI introduced Black Magic SFT, a drilling fluid additive to free stuck pipe that is still sold today.

===Baker Oil Tool Company===
Reuben C. Baker (1872–1957) was a farm boy who never advanced in school beyond the third grade. He followed his brother Aaron Alphonso Baker into the oil business. In 1895, he got a job in a California oilfield driving a horse team to haul oil for drillers. One year later, he became a drilling contractor. In July 1907, he was granted a U.S. patent for a casing shoe that enabled drillers to efficiently run casing and cement it in oil wells. The casing shoe revolutionized cable tool drilling by ensuring the uninterrupted flow of oil through the bottom of the casing in the well. In 1913, he founded Baker Casing Shoe Company. In the 1920s, it expanded into national and international markets. In 1928, Baker Casing Shoe Company changed its name to Baker Oil Tools, Inc. to reflect its product line of completion, cementing, and fishing equipment. Baker Oil Tools expanded to Houston in the 1920s.

In 1942, driven in part by the shortage of steel during World War II, the company introduced the Model D Packer, which enabled multiple completions in the same well. In 1943, the company earned the Army-Navy E Flag for its wartime manufacturing contributions.

In early 1956, during one of the most successful periods in the company&#x27;s history, Baker retired as President of Baker Oil Tools and was succeeded by his long-time associate Ted Sutter. Baker died only a few weeks later after a brief illness at the age of 85. Although he only had three years of formal education, Baker received more than 150 patents in his lifetime. In 1962, it acquired Pressure Services. In 1963, it acquired Kobe, one of the largest manufacturers of hydraulic systems for oil well pumping.

In 1964, Sutter was succeeded by E.H. &quot;Hubie&quot; Clark, who became the first Baker Hughes chairman of the board in 1987. During its 80-year history prior to its merger with Baker Hughes, Baker Oil Tools had only three chief executive officers.

In 1970, Baker Oil Tools acquired Lynes, Inc., which produced liner hangers and other completion equipment. In 1978, Baker Oil Tools introduced the Bakerline casing liner hanger. In 1985, the FlexLock Liner Hanger was introduced, extending the performance range and functionality of liner hanger systems. In 1987, the Brown liner hanger technology was merged into Baker Oil Tools. In 1992, Baker Oil Tools introduced the ZXP Liner Top Packer, with expandable metal seals, which set the stage for development of expandable screens, casing systems and liner hangers. In 1994, Baker Oil Tools introduced multilateral completion systems, which enabled operators to install completion tools and perform selective intervention work in multiple horizontal sections from a common main borehole.

In 1971, the company acquired Milchem, a provider of drilling fluids, for approximately $20 million in stock. In 1931, Max B. Miller devised a drilling mud using a white clay as a weighting material. To market the new mud, he formed The Milwhite Company in Texas. In the mid-1930s, the company mined barites in conjunction with the Magnet Cove Barium Corporation (later called Magcobar). After a hiatus during World War II, the company resumed grinding operations using barite from a mine in Missouri and conducted mud sales through independent distributors. After 1956, Milwhite Mud Sales Company built its own sales network. In 1963, the company acquired Aquaness, and in 1964 the combination became Milchem.

In 1972, the company acquired Exploration Logging Company (EXLOG), a leader in mud logging. EXLOG was founded in 1952 in Sacramento, California by Vern C. Jones, and had 800 employees.

In November 1975, the company acquired Reed Tool Company of Houston in a $120 million stock transaction.

In 1976, it became Baker International Corporation with almost all of its operations headquartered in Houston.

In 1985, Baker International acquired the drilling fluids division of Newpark Resources and merged it with Milchem&#x27;s mud division to form Milpark.

===Merger to form Baker Hughes (1987)===
As a result of the 1980s oil glut, in 1987, Baker International merged with Hughes Tool Company in a $728 million stock transaction to form Baker Hughes Incorporated. The merger required Baker to enter into a consent decree to divest Reed Tool Company, Reed&#x27;s facility in Singapore, and its Baker Lift division. Hughes attempted to terminate the agreement after Baker entered into the consent decree; however, Baker sued Hughes for $1 billion and Hughes shareholders voted overwhelmingly to complete the transaction.

===Violation of Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (2001–2003)===
In April 2007, the company pleaded guilty in U.S. federal court to violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) and agreed to pay $44.1 million in fines and penalties for making $4.1 million in &quot;commission&quot; payments between 2001 and 2003 that allegedly resulted in an oil-services contract in the Karachaganak Field in Kazakhstan.

===Largest vessel in Gulf of Mexico (2001)===
In 2001, the company introduced the largest fracking proppants vessel for deepwater work in the Gulf of Mexico. It was named after founder Howard R. Hughes Sr.

===Threat of strike action (2012)===
On June 11, 2012, during the annual period of negotiations between trade unions, including SAFE, the Norwegian union for energy workers, and their employer counterparts in Norway, 114 Baker Hughes employees were called to a strike action, which would have affected over a dozen installations. On June 18, 2012, the strike was called off after the parties agreed to a new collective agreement.

===Emissions===
In January 2019, Baker Hughes pledged to reduce carbon dioxide equivalent emissions by 50% by 2030, and 100% by 2050 from a 2012 baseline.

In June 2021, Baker Hughes signed a memorandum of understanding with Borg CO2 to develop carbon capture, liquefaction, and transportation technologies on a waste-to-energy plant in Sarpsborg.

===Acquisitions, divestures, and joint ventures===
====1989–1990 acquisitions and divestitures====
In 1989, the company acquired Bird Machine Company for $47.5 million, Vetco Services for $37 million, and EDECO Petroleum Services for $12.1 million. In 1990, the company acquired Eastman Christensen, a leader in directional drilling systems and diamond bit technology, for $600 million. It also acquired the instrumentation units of Tracor Holdings for $93.7 million in cash and Chemlink for $136 million in cash. In 1990, the company also sold Totco division of its Exlog subsidiary to NOV Inc. for $41 million in cash and stock.

====Eastman Christensen (1990)====
In 1929, H. John Eastman introduced &quot;controlled directional drilling&quot; in Huntington Beach, California, using whipstocks and magnetic survey instruments to deflect the drill pipe from shore-based rigs to reach oil deposits offshore. In 1934, Eastman Whipstock Inc. was founded by Eastman and Roman W. Hines, the same year the company drilled the world&#x27;s first relief well to control a blowout in Conroe, Texas, that had been on fire for more than a year.

In 1957, Frank Christensen&#x27;s Christensen Diamond Products opened a manufacturing plant in Celle, Germany. The facility built diamond core heads and drilling bits and soon began producing stabilizers, drilling jars and other equipment. In 1977, the Celle engineering and manufacturing team introduced the Navi-Drill line of downhole drilling motors, which has led the drilling industry in performance and reliability for three decades. Other innovations developed in Celle include the industry&#x27;s first steerable motor system, and the AutoTrak Rotary Closed Loop System, a pioneering directional drilling tool. In 1978, Christensen Diamond Products was acquired by Norton Co. and changed its name to Norton Christensen. In 1986, Eastman Whipstock merged with Norton Christensen to form Eastman Christensen.

In 1990, Baker Hughes acquired Eastman Christensen from Norton Abrasives for $550 million. To receive approval from the United States Department of Justice, the company sold its Hughes Tool diamond bit business. Baker Hughes combined Eastman Christensen and the remainder of Hughes Tools to form Hughes Christensen.

In 1993, Hughes Christensen introduced the AR-Series PDC bits, anti-whirl bits with increased penetration rates up to 100% in some applications and extended bit life as much as four-fold, compared to previous bit designs. By 1995, Hughes Christensen&#x27;s Gold Series PDC line increased drilling efficiency by reducing the frictional forces that can accumulate in front of the cutting edge, reducing the energy required to remove the rock. In 1996, patented ChipMaster PDCs, known for their efficiency and durability, were built on the success of the Eggbeater product line. Hughes Christensen next introduced the Genesis HCM bits for steerable motors with patented EZSteer depth-of-cut control technology. This same technology was adapted to Genesis HCR bits for rotary steerable systems, such as the Baker Hughes AutoTrak rotary closed loop system. Genesis ZX PDCs followed with new Zenith cutters.

====Teleco Oilfield Services (1992)====
In April 1992, Baker Hughes acquired Teleco Oilfield Services, a provider of directional measurement-while-drilling technology, from Sonat for $200 million cash, preferred stock and royalty from future sales of Teleco&#x27;s &quot;triple combo&quot; sensors. Teleco Oilfield Services was founded in 1972 and introduced the world&#x27;s first MWD tool in 1978. Teleco had approximately 1,300 employees, including 430 in Meriden, Connecticut. In 1993, Baker Hughes INTEQ was formed by combining five of the company&#x27;s oilfield divisions.

====Petrolite (1997)====
Petrolite was formed in 1930 from the merger of William Barnickel&#x27;s Tret-O-Lite with Petroleum Rectifying Company of California (PETRECO). In 1997, Baker Hughes acquired Petrolite for $693 million in stock. At that time, Wm. S. Barnickel &amp; Co. owned 47% of Petrolite.

In 2003, the division acquired Cornerstone Pipeline Inspection Group.

====Drilex (1997)====
In 1997, the company acquired Drilex, a provider of drilling products and services, for $109 million in stock.

====Western Rock Bit Company (1998)====
In 1998, the company acquired Western Rock Bit Company, a Canadian bit distributor, for $30.8 million.

====Western Atlas (1998)====
Western Atlas, which specialized in finding oil by mapping geological formations with sound waves and using wires to manipulate tools and gauges in oil and natural-gas wells, was divested from Litton Industries in 1994. In 1995, Western Atlas acquired 50% of PetroAlliance Services Company, Ltd., which offered seismic, well-logging, and integrated project services in the Post-Soviet states. In May 1997, Western Atlas acquired Sungroup Energy Services, a Canadian well logging, production testing, and completion services provider. During the fourth quarter of 1997, Western Atlas acquired Geosignal, a seismic data processing company; Seismic Resources, a provider of nonexclusive seismic surveys; and ParaMagnetic Logging, a well-logging research company. In the fourth quarter of 1997, the company acquired Heartland Kingfisher, a Canadian well-logging company.

On August 10, 1998, Baker Hughes acquired Western Atlas for $5.5 billion in stock plus the assumption of $700 million in debt. The acquisition was made in part to prevent an acquisition of Western Atlas by Halliburton. The acquisition added strong seismic-data operations as well as downhole wireline and testing services.

====Joint venture with Schlumberger (2000–2006)====
In 1999, the only new seismic technology that was being introduced was the 4-dimensional seismic survey monitoring.

In 2000, during a downturn in the petroleum industry, the company merged its Western Geophysical division with Schlumberger&#x27;s Geco (Geophysical Company of Norway) to form WesternGeco.

In 2006, Baker Hughes sold its 30% share of WesternGeco to Schlumberger for $2.4 billion in cash.

====OCRE (2001)====
In 2001, Baker Hughes acquired OCRE (Scotland) Ltd. from Maritime Well Service, a division of Aker ASA.

====Nova Technology Corporation (2006)====
In February 2006, Baker Hughes acquired Nova Technology Corporation, a supplier of permanent monitoring, chemical injection systems, and multiline services for deepwater and subsea oil and gas well applications, for $70 million in cash and assumed debt.

====JOA Oil and Gas BV (2010)====
In October 2010, Baker Hughes acquired JOA Oil &amp; Gas BV. JOA developed JewelSuite, a reservoir modelling software.

====BJ Services Company (2010–2017)====
In 1990, the company sold a 71% stake in BJ Services via an initial public offering. On April 28, 2010, Baker Hughes re-acquired BJ Services. In 2017, after the division suffered market share losses, the company sold a majority interest in BJ Services to private equity firms to obtain approval for the merger with GE Oil and Gas.

====Proposed acquisition by Halliburton (2016)====
In November 2014, the company agreed to a merger with Halliburton valued at $34.6 billion. If consummated, it would have been the largest merger in the history of the petroleum industry. The merger was approved by both companies&#x27; stockholders; however, on April 6, 2016, the United States Department of Justice sued to block the transaction due to concerns that the merger would affect competition and prices in the oilfield service industry. On May 1, 2016, the companies terminated the merger agreement due to the regulatory opposition.

====Merger with GE Oil and Gas (2017)====
In July 2017, the company merged with GE Oil and Gas. As part of the transaction, the company sold a 53.3% percent stake in the hydraulic fracturing and cementing business to CSL Capital Management and Goldman Sachs’ West Street Energy Partners for $325 million. General Electric announced plans to divest its stake by 2023; by year-end 2021, its remaining ownership was approximately 11.4%.

====Sale of Reciprocating Compression division (2019)====
In 2019, the company sold its Reciprocating Compression division to Arcline Investment Management, a private equity firm.

====Sale of chemical manufacturing facility to Sterling Auxiliaries (2020)====
In September 2020, Sterling Auxiliaries &amp; Artek Surfin Chemicals acquired Baker Hughes&#x27; Sand Springs chemical manufacturing facility.

====Compact Carbon Capture (2020)====
In November 2020, Baker Hughes acquired Compact Carbon Capture, a company developing solvent-based carbon capture patents.

====Joint venture with Aramco (2020)====
In December 2020, Baker Hughes set up a joint venture with Aramco to create a non-metallic materials company called Novel Non-Metallic Solutions Manufacturing. Novel&#x27;s facility is being developed at King Salman Energy Park.

====ARMS Reliability (2021)====
In 2021, Baker Hughes acquired ARMS Reliability, a company providing advisory services and software to several industries.

====SRI International (2021)====
In March 2021, Baker Hughes acquired a license for the use of mixed-salt process technology for flue gas carbon capture from SRI International.

====Joint venture with Akastor (2021)====
In March 2021, Baker Hughes announced the creation of a joint venture for drilling services with Akastor ASA&#x27;s subsidiary, MHWirth AS.

====Altus Intervention (2022)====
in March 2022, Baker Hughes acquired Altus Intervention, an oilwell specialist company headquartered in Norway.

====Sale of operations in Russia (2022)====
In August 2022, after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the company agreed to sell its operations in Russia to local management.

====Quest Integrity (2022)====
In November 2022, the company acquired Quest Integrity from Team, Inc. for $279 million.

==See also==

* List of oilfield service companies

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="0" end="20" title="Baker Hughes" label="Baker Hughes Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="89" end="96" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369609" start="155" end="173" title="List of oilfield service companies" label="oil field services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990590" start="941" end="951" title="Completion (oil and gas wells)" label="completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890512" start="1600" end="1613" title="Bently Nevada" label="Bently Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q444411" start="1774" end="1793" title="Hughes Tool Company" label="Hughes Tool Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q444411" start="1909" end="1928" title="Hughes Tool Company" label="Hughes Tool Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964289" start="1970" end="1989" title="Walter Benona Sharp" label="Walter Benona Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q164075" start="1994" end="2015" title="Howard R. Hughes, Sr." label="Howard R. Hughes, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="2027" end="2040" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12085805" start="2099" end="2117" title="Roller cone bit" label="two-cone drill bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q58964" start="2138" end="2153" title="rotary drilling" label="rotary drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q812646" start="2282" end="2300" title="Goose Creek, Texas" label="Goose Creek, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="2757" end="2798" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317420" start="4586" end="4601" title="Reuben C. Baker" label="Reuben C. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048829" start="4942" end="4953" title="casing shoe" label="casing shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5544" end="5556" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="7295" end="7303" title="borehole" label="borehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850866" start="7336" end="7343" title="Milchem" label="Milchem"/>
<link wikidata="Q890914" start="7359" end="7373" title="drilling fluid" label="drilling fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850866" start="8008" end="8015" title="Milchem" label="Milchem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131733" start="8097" end="8108" title="mud logging" label="mud logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="8139" end="8161" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17114287" start="8492" end="8509" title="Newpark Resources" label="Newpark Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q615231" start="8635" end="8649" title="1980s oil glut" label="1980s oil glut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162854" start="8825" end="8839" title="consent decree" label="consent decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q471295" start="9285" end="9314" title="Foreign Corrupt Practices Act" label="Foreign Corrupt Practices Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509347" start="9410" end="9420" title="Commission (remuneration)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523920" start="9517" end="9535" title="Karachaganak Field" label="Karachaganak Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="9539" end="9549" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826784" start="9642" end="9660" title="fracking proppants" label="fracking proppants"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="9694" end="9708" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q164075" start="9737" end="9757" title="Howard R. Hughes Sr." label="Howard R. Hughes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="10020" end="10033" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10254" end="10279" title="Global warming potential#Carbon dioxide equivalent" label="carbon dioxide equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="10382" end="10409" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q108025" start="10527" end="10536" title="Sarpsborg" label="Sarpsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915881" start="10668" end="10688" title="Bird Machine Company" label="Bird Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090580" start="11018" end="11026" title="Chemlink" label="Chemlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817417" start="11126" end="11134" title="NOV Inc." label="NOV Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="11259" end="11279" title="directional drilling" label="directional drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311101" start="11580" end="11591" title="relief well" label="relief well"/>
<link wikidata="Q260282" start="11616" end="11629" title="Conroe, Texas" label="Conroe, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485814" start="11685" end="11702" title="Frank Christensen" label="Frank Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933" start="11771" end="11776" title="Celle" label="Celle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="12268" end="12288" title="directional drilling" label="directional drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060582" start="12548" end="12564" title="Norton Abrasives" label="Norton Abrasives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="12612" end="12647" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560819" start="13885" end="13890" title="Sonat" label="Sonat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54220" start="14171" end="14191" title="Meriden, Connecticut" label="Meriden, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793013" start="14318" end="14327" title="Petrolite" label="Petrolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987481" start="14974" end="14987" title="Western Atlas" label="Western Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058311" start="15167" end="15184" title="Litton Industries" label="Litton Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987481" start="15203" end="15216" title="Western Atlas" label="Western Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="15347" end="15365" title="Post-Soviet states" label="Post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383566" start="15440" end="15452" title="well logging" label="well logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987481" start="15884" end="15897" title="Western Atlas" label="Western Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q656165" start="16048" end="16059" title="Halliburton" label="Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="16369" end="16387" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425316" start="16446" end="16458" title="Schlumberger" label="Schlumberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529617" start="16466" end="16502" title="Geco (Geophysical Company of Norway)" label="Geco (Geophysical Company of Norway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441416" start="16511" end="16522" title="WesternGeco" label="WesternGeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q417391" start="16738" end="16746" title="Aker ASA" label="Aker ASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835785" start="17282" end="17293" title="BJ Services" label="BJ Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="17301" end="17324" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835785" start="17370" end="17381" title="BJ Services" label="BJ Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q828814" start="17420" end="17432" title="market share" label="market share"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418962" start="17496" end="17515" title="private equity firm" label="private equity firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558233" start="17556" end="17570" title="GE Oil and Gas" label="GE Oil and Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q656165" start="17678" end="17689" title="Halliburton" label="Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="17791" end="17809" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="17904" end="17939" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558233" start="18249" end="18263" title="GE Oil and Gas" label="GE Oil and Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="18413" end="18426" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="18474" end="18490" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418962" start="18763" end="18782" title="private equity firm" label="private equity firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q679322" start="19270" end="19276" title="Aramco" label="Aramco"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761840" start="19415" end="19438" title="King Salman Energy Park" label="King Salman Energy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556360" start="19726" end="19734" title="flue gas" label="flue gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="19735" end="19749" title="Carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="19755" end="19772" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="20175" end="20207" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369609" start="20420" end="20454" title="List of oilfield service companies" label="List of oilfield service companies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629007" wikidata="Q3607858" url="?curid=629007" title="Albanese">
<text>Albanese is an Italian surname. It means &quot;Albanian&quot;, in reference to the Arbëreshë people (Italo-Albanians) of southern Italy or someone of Albanian origin. The surname is common in southern Italy but more rare elsewhere in the country. Notable people with the surname include:

*Albano Albanese (1921–2010), Italian hurdler and high jumper
*Alessandro Albanese (born 2000), Belgian professional footballer
*Antonio Albanese (1937–2013), Italian fencer
*Anthony Albanese (born 1963), Australian politician and current prime minister of Australia
*Antonio Albanese (born 1964), Italian comedian, actor, director, and writer
*Catherine L. Albanese (born 1940), American religious studies scholar, professor, lecturer, and author
*Charles Albanese (1937–1995), American serial killer
*Diego Albanese (born 1973), Argentine rugby union player
*Donald J. Albanese (born 1937), American politician
*Enrico Albanese (1834–1889), Italian surgeon, a member of the Expedition of the Thousand and close friend of Garibaldi
*Francesco Albanese (1912–2005), Italian tenor
*Francesca Albanese (born 1977), Italian international lawyer, academic and current UN Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories
*Frank Albanese (1931–2015), American actor
*Giacomo Albanese (1890–1947), Italian mathematician
**Albanese variety, construction of algebraic geometry, named for Giacomo Albanese
*Giuseppe Albanese (born 1979), Italian pianist
*Joe Albanese (1933–2000), American professional baseball player
*Laura Albanese (born 1957), Canadian news anchor and politician
*Lauren Albanese (born 1989), American professional tennis player
*Lewis Albanese (1946–1966), US soldier posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor
*Licia Albanese (1909–2014), Italian soprano
*Pellegrino Albanese (born 1991), Italian footballer
*Roberto Albanese (born 1950), Italian politician and environmentalist
*Rory Albanese (born 1977), American executive producer and writer for &quot;The Daily Show with Jon Stewart&quot;
*Sal Albanese (born 1949), American politician
*Silvano Albanese better known by his stage name Coez (born 1983), Italian singer, rapper
*Thomas Albanese (born 1988), Italian footballer
*Tina Albanese, American television producer and television writer
*Tom Albanese (born 1957), American businessman and former chief executive officer of Rio Tinto
*Valentina Albanese (born 1974), Italian racing driver
*Vannie Albanese (1912–1984), American football player
*Vincenzo Albanese (born 1996), Italian cyclist
*Vito Albanese (1918–1998), American union leader and politician

==See also==
*Albanesi
*Names of the Albanians and Albania
*Albanese Candy

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3607858" start="0" end="8" title="Albanese" label="Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56446973" start="15" end="30" title="Italian surname" label="Italian surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="47" end="55" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56975" start="83" end="99" title="Arbëreshë people" label="Arbëreshë people"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="121" end="135" title="southern Italy" label="southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018651" start="290" end="305" title="Albano Albanese" label="Albano Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q100544827" start="352" end="371" title="Alessandro Albanese" label="Alessandro Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776393" start="418" end="434" title="Antonio Albanese (fencer)" label="Antonio Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q335697" start="464" end="480" title="Anthony Albanese" label="Anthony Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="528" end="555" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599559" start="557" end="573" title="Antonio Albanese" label="Antonio Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19367472" start="634" end="655" title="Catherine L. Albanese" label="Catherine L. Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q109674446" start="738" end="754" title="Charles Albanese" label="Charles Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650753" start="792" end="806" title="Diego Albanese" label="Diego Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27983374" start="850" end="868" title="Donald J. Albanese" label="Donald J. Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277262" start="903" end="918" title="Enrico Albanese" label="Enrico Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="965" end="991" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290268" start="1023" end="1041" title="Francesco Albanese" label="Francesco Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q115860841" start="1070" end="1088" title="Francesca Albanese" label="Francesca Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q112050202" start="1153" end="1214" title="UN Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories" label="UN Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q21095458" start="1216" end="1230" title="Frank Albanese" label="Frank Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522060" start="1260" end="1276" title="Giacomo Albanese" label="Giacomo Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709029" start="1314" end="1330" title="Albanese variety" label="Albanese variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565321" start="1396" end="1413" title="Giuseppe Albanese" label="Giuseppe Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208313" start="1444" end="1456" title="Joe Albanese" label="Joe Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148983" start="1509" end="1523" title="Laura Albanese" label="Laura Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q53322" start="1574" end="1589" title="Lauren Albanese" label="Lauren Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467932" start="1640" end="1654" title="Lewis Albanese" label="Lewis Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q239886" start="1720" end="1734" title="Licia Albanese" label="Licia Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161542" start="1765" end="1784" title="Pellegrino Albanese" label="Pellegrino Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22953722" start="1818" end="1834" title="Roberto Albanese" label="Roberto Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366852" start="1889" end="1902" title="Rory Albanese" label="Rory Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403251" start="2004" end="2016" title="Sal Albanese" label="Sal Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16657896" start="2051" end="2067" title="Silvano Albanese" label="Silvano Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786971" start="2141" end="2156" title="Thomas Albanese" label="Thomas Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807858" start="2190" end="2203" title="Tina Albanese" label="Tina Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814755" start="2257" end="2269" title="Tom Albanese" label="Tom Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="2342" end="2351" title="Rio Tinto (corporation)" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q97463145" start="2353" end="2371" title="Valentina Albanese" label="Valentina Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q103884634" start="2408" end="2423" title="Vannie Albanese" label="Vannie Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23851295" start="2463" end="2480" title="Vincenzo Albanese" label="Vincenzo Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q18683892" start="2511" end="2524" title="Vito Albanese" label="Vito Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q21510278" start="2590" end="2598" title="Albanesi" label="Albanesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223808" start="2600" end="2634" title="Names of the Albanians and Albania" label="Names of the Albanians and Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740517" start="2636" end="2650" title="Albanese Candy" label="Albanese Candy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629008" wikidata="Q1783951" url="?curid=629008" title="Micro-Professor MPF-I">
<text>The Micro-Professor MPF-I is a microcomputer released by Multitech (later renamed Acer) in 1981. The company&#x27;s first branded product, it was marketed as a training system to learn machine code and assembly language for the Zilog Z80 microprocessor. After releasing several iterations of the product, Acer sold the product line to Flite Electronics in 1993.

==History==
In 1981 Multitech released the Micro-Professor MPF-I, a Zilog Z80 microprocessor development board enclosed in a vacuum formed plastic bookcase for storage on a bookshelf. Later Multitech introduced a Tiny-Basic for the MPF-1. The Monitor and Basic fitted into one 4 KB ROM, replacing the 2 KB monitor-only ROM. This configuration was marketed as the MPF-1B.

In 1984, Multitech introduced the MPF-1P or MPF-Plus, a successor to the MPF-1 with the same form factor. It featured a single line 20-digit, 14-segment fluorescent display and a click-type QWERTY keyboard. It had the same expansion connector as the MPF-1 (strictly a Z80-CPU pin-header), so several of the MPF-1 expansion boards could be used on the MPF-1P. It was more a BASIC computer than the MPF-1, with an assembler and disassembler as part of the 8 KB firmware. The MPF-1P featured 4 KB static RAM, with optional battery backup.

1985 saw the release of the MPF-I/88, the last product in the MPF-I line. It was an Intel 8088-based single board computer with a two-line LCD screen. Multitech was renamed Acer Inc. in 1987.

On 24 February 1993, Acer sold the Micro-Professor MPF-I product line to Flite Electronics International Limited, an international distributor for Acer based in Southampton, England. Flite is still manufacturing small batches of the MPF1B at a sub-contract manufacturing facility in Havant, England.

==Product specifications==
Programs are entered into the MPF-I using Z80 machine code in hexadecimal format. The MPF-I monitor program displays both an address and data stored at that address simultaneously using a seven-segment display. There is a spare DIP socket for adding additional ROM or RAM to the MPF-I. There are also two 3.5 mm audio jacks on the top right of the computer, these are to communicate with the audio cassettes that are used to store programs and code typed into the machine. One is used to read the drive and the other is used to write data; on a conventional audio cassette deck the wires would be connected to the headphone and microphone ports. This type of data storage is similar to that of a Radio Shack TRS-80 or the Sinclair ZX-81, which similarly used audio cassettes to store programs the user typed, as well as commercial programs and games the user could buy.

==Modern extensions==
PicoRAM 6116 is a 6116 SRAM emulator and SD card interface for the Microprofessor based on the Raspberry Pi Pico. It facilitates store and restore of complete SRAM memory dumps. PicoRAM 6116 also supports HEX files generated by Z80 assemblers, hence facilitating a modern software development tool chain by using PC-based assemblers and file transfer of the generated HEX files to the Microprofessor via SD card.

==See also==
* Microprofessor II — an unrelated Apple II clone made by Multitech
* Microprofessor III — an unrelated Apple IIe clone made by Multitech

==References==
== External links ==
*Flite Electronics – International Supplier of Microprocessor Training Systems and owner of the overall copyright of the MPF range of products
*A tribute to the Microprofessor System
* MPF-I User&#x27;s manual
* PDF documentation and ROM dumps for the Multitech MPF-1 computer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1783951" start="4" end="25" title="Micro-Professor MPF-I" label="Micro-Professor MPF-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="31" end="44" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q481778" start="82" end="86" title="Acer Inc." label="Acer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103717" start="160" end="175" title="Microprocessor development board" label="training system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="185" end="197" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="202" end="219" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="228" end="237" title="Zilog Z80" label="Zilog Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="238" end="252" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="431" end="440" title="Zilog Z80" label="Zilog Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q175996" start="488" end="501" title="vacuum forming" label="vacuum formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="888" end="907" title="vacuum fluorescent display" label="fluorescent display"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="925" end="931" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="1108" end="1113" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1147" end="1156" title="Assembly_language#Assembler" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q279650" start="1161" end="1173" title="disassembler" label="disassembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="1229" end="1239" title="static RAM" label="static RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="1356" end="1366" title="Intel 8088" label="Intel 8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="1411" end="1421" title="LCD screen" label="LCD screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="1626" end="1637" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234712" start="1748" end="1754" title="Havant" label="Havant"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="1835" end="1838" title="Zilog Z80" label="Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="1839" end="1851" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="1855" end="1866" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780522" start="1885" end="1900" title="Machine code monitor" label="monitor program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046569" start="1981" end="2002" title="seven-segment display" label="seven-segment display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141665" start="2021" end="2024" title="Dual in-line package" label="DIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="2054" end="2057" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2061" end="2064" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="2098" end="2116" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="3.5 mm audio jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q510176" start="2357" end="2370" title="cassette deck" label="cassette deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="2489" end="2507" title="TRS-80" label="Radio Shack TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q263250" start="2515" end="2529" title="ZX81" label="Sinclair ZX-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="2727" end="2734" title="SD card" label="SD card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2781" end="2798" title="Raspberry_Pi#Raspberry_Pi_Pico" label="Raspberry Pi Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265166" start="2850" end="2861" title="memory dump" label="memory dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q572649" start="2891" end="2894" title="Intel HEX" label="HEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948427" start="3115" end="3132" title="Microprofessor II" label="Microprofessor II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561812" start="3148" end="3162" title="Apple II clone" label="Apple II clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502515" start="3183" end="3201" title="Microprofessor III" label="Microprofessor III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761667" start="3217" end="3226" title="Apple IIe" label="Apple IIe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629009" wikidata="Q1522060" url="?curid=629009" title="Giacomo Albanese">
<text>Giacomo Albanese (11 July 1890 – 8 June 1947) was an Italian mathematician known for his work in algebraic geometry. He took a permanent position in the University of São Paulo, Brazil, in 1936.

==Biography==

Albanese attended the school in Palermo, Sicily. He graduated from there in 1909. Then he entered the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa as a student of mathematics, and received his doctorate in 1913. He was awarded the &quot;Ulisse Dini&quot; prize for his doctoral essay on the topic &quot;Continuous systems of curves on an algebraic surface&quot;, written under the direction of Eugenio Bertini.

He taught at Scuola Normale Superiore from 1913 to 1919, with an interruption in 1917–1918, when he was conscripted into the Italian Army to fight in World War I. After spending a year at the University of Padua to work with Francesco Severi, he took up in 1920 a professorship in Analysis and Algebra at the Italian Naval Academy in Livorno. Five years later Albanese moved to the University of Catania, and then went in 1927 to the University of Palermo, where he spent the next two years. From 1929 until 1936 he held the chair of Geometry at the University of Pisa.

==See also==
*Albanese variety

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1522060" start="0" end="16" title="Giacomo Albanese" label="Giacomo Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="61" end="74" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="97" end="115" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q835960" start="153" end="176" title="University of São Paulo" label="University of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="178" end="184" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="243" end="250" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="252" end="258" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q672416" start="313" end="345" title="Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa" label="Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q707148" start="436" end="447" title="Ulisse Dini" label="Ulisse Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q746863" start="537" end="546" title="algebraic function" label="algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q447324" start="593" end="608" title="Eugenio Bertini" label="Eugenio Bertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="761" end="772" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="803" end="822" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q633721" start="836" end="852" title="Francesco Severi" label="Francesco Severi"/>
<link wikidata="Q497499" start="920" end="941" title="Italian Naval Academy" label="Italian Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="945" end="952" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248821" start="993" end="1014" title="University of Catania" label="University of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641504" start="1045" end="1066" title="University of Palermo" label="University of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q645663" start="1161" end="1179" title="University of Pisa" label="University of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709029" start="1196" end="1212" title="Albanese variety" label="Albanese variety"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629014" wikidata="Q347139" url="?curid=629014" title="Jean-Baptiste Greuze">
<text>Jean-Baptiste Greuze (, 21 August 1725 – 4 March 1805) was a French painter of portraits, genre scenes, and history painting.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Greuze was born at Tournus, a market town in Burgundy. He is generally said to have formed his own talent; at an early age his inclinations, though thwarted by his father, were encouraged by a Lyonnese artist named Grandon, or Grondom, who enjoyed during his lifetime considerable reputation as a portrait-painter. Grandon not only persuaded Greuze&#x27;s father to give way to his son&#x27;s wishes, and permit the boy to accompany him as his pupil to Lyon, but, when at a later date he left Lyon for Paris, Grandon carried young Greuze with him.

Settled in Paris, Greuze worked from the living model in the school of the Royal Academy, but did not attract the attention of his teachers; and when he produced his first picture, &quot;Le Père de famille expliquant la Bible a ses enfants&quot;, considerable doubt was felt and shown as to his share in its production. By other and more remarkable works of the same class Greuze soon established his claims beyond contest, and won the notice and support of the well-known connoisseur La Live de Jully, the brother-in-law of Madame d&#x27;Epinay. In 1755 Greuze exhibited his &quot;Aveugle trompé&quot;, upon which, presented by Pigalle the sculptor, he was immediately &quot;agréé&quot; by the Academy.

Towards the close of the same year, he left France for Italy, in company with the Abbé Louis Gougenot. Gougenot had some acquaintance with the arts, and was highly valued by the Academicians, who, during his journey with Greuze, elected him an honorary member of their body on account of his studies in mythology and allegory; his acquirements in these respects are said to have been largely utilized by them, but to Greuze they were of doubtful advantage, and he lost rather than gained by this visit to Italy in Gougenot&#x27;s company. He had undertaken it probably in order to silence those who taxed him with ignorance of great models of style, but the Italian subjects which formed the entirety of his contributions to the Salon of 1757 showed that he had been put on a false track, and he speedily returned to the source of his first inspiration.

===Relations with the Academy===
In the Salon of 1759, Salon of 1761 and Salon of 1763 Greuze exhibited with ever-increasing success; at the Salon of 1765 he reached the zenith of his powers and reputation. In that year he was represented with at least thirteen works, amongst which may be cited &quot;La Jeune Fille qui pleure son oiseau mort&quot;, &quot;La Bonne Mère&quot;, &quot;Le Mauvais fils puni&quot; (Louvre) and &quot;La Malediction paternelle&quot; (Louvre). The Academy took occasion to press Greuze for his diploma picture, the execution of which had been long delayed, and forbade him to exhibit on their walls until he had complied with their regulations. &quot;I have read the letter,&quot; said Diderot, &quot;which is a model of honesty and reverence; I have seen Greuze&#x27;s response, which is a model of vanity and impertinence: he should have backed it up with a masterpiece, and that&#x27;s precisely what he didn&#x27;t do.&quot;

Greuze wished to be received as a historical painter and produced a work which he intended to vindicate his right to despise his qualifications as a genre artist. This unfortunate canvas (&quot;Sévère et Caracalla&quot;) was exhibited in 1769 side by side with Greuze&#x27;s portrait of &quot;Jeaurat&quot; and his admirable &quot;Petite Fille au chien noir&quot;. The Academicians received their new member with all due honours, but at the close of the ceremonies the Director addressed Greuze in these words: &quot;Sir, the Academy has accepted you, but only as a genre painter; the Academy has respect for your former productions, which are excellent, but she has shut her eyes to &quot;this&quot; one, which is unworthy, both of her and of you yourself.&quot; Greuze, greatly incensed, quarrelled with his confreres, and ceased to exhibit until, in 1804, the Revolution had thrown open the doors of the Academy to all the world. At the Salon of 1804 he exhibited &quot;Ariadne&quot;. 
In the following year, on 4 March 1805, he died in the Louvre in great poverty. He had been in receipt of considerable wealth, which he had dissipated by extravagance and bad management (as well as embezzlement by his wife) so that during his closing years he was forced to solicit commissions which his enfeebled powers no longer enabled him to carry out with success. &quot;At the funeral of the long-neglected old man, a young woman deeply veiled and overcome with emotion plainly visible through her veil, laid upon the coffin, just before its removal, a bouquet of immortelles and withdrew to her devotions. Around the stem was a paper inscribed: &quot;These flowers offered by the most grateful of his students are emblems of his glory. It was Mlle Mayer, later the friend of Prudhon.&quot;

The brilliant reputation which Greuze acquired seems to have been due, not to his accomplishments as a painter – for his practice is evidently that current in his own day – but to the character of the subjects which he treated. That return to nature which inspired Rousseau&#x27;s attacks upon an artificial civilization demanded expression in art.

===Legacy===
Diderot, in &quot;Le Fils naturel and Père de famille&quot;, tried to turn the vein of domestic drama to account on the stage; that which he tried and failed to do, Greuze, in painting, achieved with extraordinary success, although his works, like the plays of Diderot, were affected by that very artificiality against which they protested. The touch of melodramatic exaggeration, however, which runs through them finds an apology in the firm and brilliant play of line, in the freshness and vigour of the flesh tints, in the enticing softness of expression, by the alluring air of health and youth, by the sensuous attractions, in short, with which Greuze invests his lessons of bourgeois morality.

&quot;La Jeune Fille à l&#x27;agneau&quot; was bought at the Pourtal&#x27;s sale in 1865 for at least a million francs. One of Greuze&#x27;s pupils, Madame Le Doux, imitated with success the manner of her master; his daughter and granddaughter, Madame de Valory, also inherited some traditions of his talent. Madame de Valory published in 1813 a comédie-vaudeville, &quot;Greuze, ou l&#x27;accorde de village&quot;, to which she prefixed a notice of her grandfather&#x27;s life and works, and the Salons of Diderot also contain, besides many other particulars, the story at full length of Greuze&#x27;s quarrel with the Academy. Four of the most distinguished engravers of that date, Massard père, Flipart, Gaillard and Levasseur, were specially entrusted by Greuze with the reproduction of his subjects, but there are also excellent prints by other engravers, notably by Cars and Le Bas.

Greuze was the father of painter Anna-Geneviève Greuze, who was also his pupil.

==Cultural references==

In the second chapter of Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s Sherlock Holmes story &quot;The Valley of Fear&quot;, Holmes&#x27;s discussion of his enemy Professor Moriarty involves a Greuze painting in his possession, intended to illustrate Moriarty&#x27;s wealth despite his small legitimate salary as an academic. A 1946 episode of the radio series &quot;The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes&quot; entitled &quot;The Girl With the Gazelle&quot; centers around the theft of a fictional Greuze painting of the same name, masterminded by Professor Moriarty.

In the sixth part of &quot;The Leopard&quot;, a novel by the Italian writer Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, the Prince of Salina watches a Greuze painting, &quot;La Mort du Juste&quot;, and he starts thinking about death (as the &quot;safety exit&quot; which relieves older men of their anxieties) and judges that the pretty girls surrounding the dying man and the &quot;disorder of their clothes suggested sex more than sorrow ... were the real subject of the picture.&quot;

In the sixteenth chapter of E. M. Forster&#x27;s novel &quot;Maurice&quot;, Clive mentions that he finds himself unable to approach Greuze&#x27;s &quot;subject matter&quot; from anything more than purely aesthetic perspective, contrasting Greuze&#x27;s work with that of Michelangelo in the process. In chapter 31, when Maurice visits Dr Barry, there are copies of Greuze on the walls.

Chinese author Xiao Yi mentions Greuze&#x27;s work &quot;The Broken Pitcher&quot; throughout the first half of her novel &quot;Blue Nails&quot;. &quot;The Broken Pitcher&quot; is also mentioned in the first scene of the Jean-Paul Sartre play, &quot;The Respectful Prostitute&quot;.

Greuze is mentioned in the song &quot;(We All Wear A) Green Carnation&quot;, Noël Coward&#x27;s celebration of camp and queerness, from his 1929 operetta &quot;Bitter Sweet&quot;: 

==Exhibitions==
Edgar Munhall organized the first major exhibition devoted to the artist: &quot;Jean-Baptiste Greuze, 1725–1805&quot; (1976–1977). The exhibition opened at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford and then traveled to the California Legion of Honor in San Francisco and the Musée des Beaux-Arts in Dijon. In 2002, the first exhibition of Greuze&#x27;s drawings was held at The Frick Collection in New York. It was also organized by Munhall, who wrote the catalog.

==Gallery==

==See also==
*Les Neuf Sœurs
*&quot;The Kings&#x27; Tart&quot;
*&quot;The Bible Reading&quot;

==References and sources==
;References

;Sources

* Normand, &quot;J. B. Greuze&quot; (1892).
* Munhall, Edgar. &quot;Jean-Baptiste Greuze, 1725-1805&quot; (1976).
* Emma Barker, &quot;Greuze and the Painting of Sentiment&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005). .
* 

==External links==
*Works and literature at PubHist
*&quot;Europe in the age of enlightenment and revolution&quot;, a catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Greuze (see index)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347139" start="0" end="20" title="Jean-Baptiste Greuze" label="Jean-Baptiste Greuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="68" end="75" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047337" start="90" end="102" title="genre art" label="genre scenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="108" end="124" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q501900" start="177" end="184" title="Tournus" label="Tournus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="203" end="211" title="Burgundy (French region)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="611" end="615" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q264254" start="1232" end="1252" title="Louise Florence Pétronille Tardieu d&amp;#x27;Esclavelles d&amp;#x27;Epinay" label="Madame d&amp;#x27;Epinay"/>
<link wikidata="Q529623" start="1336" end="1343" title="Jean-Baptiste Pigalle" label="Pigalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="1715" end="1724" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="1729" end="1737" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2307" end="2320" title="Salon of 1759" label="Salon of 1759"/>
<link wikidata="Q59332035" start="2322" end="2335" title="Salon of 1761" label="Salon of 1761"/>
<link wikidata="Q59401257" start="2340" end="2353" title="Salon of 1763" label="Salon of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q58439827" start="2408" end="2421" title="Salon of 1765" label="Salon of 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="2981" end="2988" title="Denis Diderot" label="Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4088" end="4098" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4165" end="4178" title="Salon of 1804" label="Salon of 1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q88588179" start="4198" end="4205" title="Ariadne (painting)" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q463270" start="4964" end="4974" title="Constance Mayer" label="Mlle Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="5277" end="5285" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="6055" end="6064" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q18574722" start="6999" end="7020" title="Anna-Geneviève Greuze" label="Anna-Geneviève Greuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="7097" end="7115" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="7123" end="7138" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q863438" start="7151" end="7169" title="The Valley of Fear" label="The Valley of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q283111" start="7215" end="7233" title="Professor Moriarty" label="Professor Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753486" start="7419" end="7456" title="The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" label="The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q283111" start="7600" end="7618" title="Professor Moriarty" label="Professor Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193736" start="7648" end="7659" title="The Leopard" label="The Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q213482" start="7697" end="7725" title="Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa" label="Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="8124" end="8137" title="E. M. Forster" label="E. M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="8703" end="8719" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507464" start="8732" end="8757" title="The Respectful Prostitute" label="The Respectful Prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="8843" end="8854" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741471" start="8926" end="8938" title="Bitter Sweet (operetta)" label="Bitter Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753820" start="8964" end="8977" title="Edgar Munhall" label="Edgar Munhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q403080" start="9124" end="9142" title="Wadsworth Atheneum" label="Wadsworth Atheneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468251" start="9180" end="9206" title="Legion of Honor (museum)" label="California Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955739" start="9232" end="9252" title="Musée des Beaux-Arts de Dijon" label="Musée des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q682827" start="9331" end="9351" title="The Frick Collection" label="The Frick Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q650732" start="9450" end="9464" title="Les Neuf Sœurs" label="Les Neuf Sœurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15874401" start="9472" end="9492" title="The Kings&amp;#x27; Tart" label="The Kings&amp;#x27; Tart"/>
<link wikidata="Q47516400" start="9506" end="9523" title="The Bible Reading" label="The Bible Reading"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629015" wikidata="Q2879596" url="?curid=629015" title="Barnegat Bay">
<text>Barnegat Bay is a small brackish arm of the Atlantic Ocean, approximately long, along the coast of Ocean County, New Jersey in the United States. It is separated from the Atlantic by the long Island Beach State Park (colloquially called a &quot;barrier island&quot;), as well as by the north end of Long Beach Island, popular segments of the Jersey Shore. The bay is fed by several small rivers, including the Toms River, the Forked River, the Metedeconk River, Cedar Creek, Oyster Creek, Mill Creek, Westecunk Creek, and Tuckerton Creek, all of which empty into the bay through small estuaries along its inner shore. The communities of Toms River, Silverton, and Forked River sit along the river estuaries on the bay.

The bay connects with the ocean through the Barnegat Inlet, along which sits the Barnegat Lighthouse. The bay is part of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway, entered on its north end by the Point Pleasant Canal and connecting on the south end with Little Egg Harbor via the small Manahawkin Bay. In a broader sense, Barnegat Bay is sometimes considered to stretch to the south end of Long Beach Island and to include Little Egg Harbor.

Three bridges span the bay from the mainland to the peninsula: the Mantoloking Bridge from Brick Township to Mantoloking, and the Thomas A. Mathis and J. Stanley Tunney Bridges from Toms River to Ortley Beach. The Barnegat Division of Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge comprises wetlands along the inner southern part of the bay. Along the outside of the bay, on the peninsula, is the Island Beach State Park. Various islands within the bay are a part of the National Wildlife Refuge or the Sedge Islands State Wildlife Management Area. The northern tip of Long Beach Island includes the Barnegat Lighthouse State Park.

==History==
The area surrounding Barnegat Bay and Barnegat Inlet was described by Henry Hudson, in 1609, as &quot;... a great lake of water, as we could judge it to be ... The mouth of the lake hath many shoals, and the sea breaketh on them as it is cast out of the mouth of it.&quot; The bay was originally named in 1614 &quot;Barendegat,&quot; or &quot;Inlet of the Breakers,&quot; by Dutch explorers of the coastline, referring to the waterway&#x27;s turbulent channel. During the American Revolutionary War, the bay was used as refuge by American privateers.

The bay has been a longtime center for commercial fishing. The village of Toms River was a significant whaling port in the 19th century. While still popular for fishing, Barnegat Bay has also become a popular destination for recreational boating. The water quality of the bay has been degraded by pollution in the rivers and creeks that feed it. The preservation of the bay&#x27;s water quality has been an ongoing effort of several public and private organizations.

The bay was immortalized by the famous writer E. B. White, who used it as a setting for his short story &quot;The Family That Dwelt Apart&quot;, published in 1937 as the third story in his long running &quot;Preposterous Parables&quot; series in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. It was adapted into the animated short &quot;The Family That Dwelt Apart&quot;, narrated by White, by the National Film Board of Canada.

The song &quot;My Eyes Adored You&quot;, by New Jersey native Frankie Valli, contains a reference to &quot;walking home every day over Barnegat Bridge and Bay&quot;. On March 22, 1975, the song became a &quot;Billboard&quot; No. 1 hit.

The Trust for Public Land, a national land conservation group, has done extensive work in the Barnegat Bay area for over two decades, protecting over of land. The Trust recently began the new River to Bay Greenway, the primary goal of which is to create a multi-use recreational route across southern New Jersey from the Delaware River to Barnegat Bay.

==Issues==
In the 2000s and 2010s, scientists and residents have drawn attention to fish kills, algal blooms, low dissolved oxygen levels, loss of habitat, diminishing clam populations, and the rise in stinging &quot;Chrysaora quinquecirrha&quot; (sea nettle jellyfish) populations in the bay, mainly due to high levels of nitrogen from fertilizer runoff. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency monitors the health of the bay by testing at four locations as frequently as once a week in the summer months, when surface water can reach .
Community members have also expressed concern over the impact of stored radioactive material and thermal pollution at the Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station in Lacey Township. The plant which was built in 1969 was formerly the oldest operating nuclear power plant in the United States. The plant was decommissioned on September 25, 2018.

==Pollution==
A 2008 baseline sediment pollution study of 15 locations within Barnegat Bay - Little Egg Harbor area including sites at Mill Creek, Cedar Run, Parker Run measured total petroleum hydrocarbons, mercury, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB). The joint US/UK team of scientists reported that TPH content was low and that mercury content ranged from &lt;0.02 to 2.61 mg/kg dry wt. PAH content ranged from as low as 37 ug/kg to 1696 ug/kg with the highest concentrations at Tuckerton Creek, nevertheless these concentrations are not considered harmful to humans or biota. The distribution pattern of PAHs throughout the study area was consistent with the burning from grass, wood and coal sources. Concentrations of PCB were below reported effects ranges suggesting a low risk.

==Islands==
Middle Sedge Island in Barnegat Bay is a island, of which are developed with a single house. Other islands include: Little Sedge Island, Northwest Point Island and Marsh Elder Island. Some are privately owned and some are owned by the state of New Jersey.

==Pop culture references==
Frankie Valli’s song &quot;My Eyes Adored You&quot; references the location in the lyrics saying &quot;... over Barnegat Bridge and Bay...&quot;.

In the television show &quot;The Sopranos&quot;, Tony Soprano owns a boat frequently set and docked along Barnegat Bay.

==References==
==External links==

*Barnegat Bay Partnership
*Save Barnegat Bay – environmental advocacy site
*Rutgers University: Barnegat Bay Shellfish Restoration Program
*Jersey City Anglers Association: Future of Barnegat Bay</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2879596" start="0" end="12" title="Barnegat Bay" label="Barnegat Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="24" end="32" title="Brackish water" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="44" end="58" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q502564" start="99" end="111" title="Ocean County, New Jersey" label="Ocean County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="113" end="123" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="131" end="144" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083013" start="192" end="215" title="Island Beach State Park" label="Island Beach State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="245" end="259" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533347" start="299" end="316" title="Long Beach Island" label="Long Beach Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246511" start="342" end="354" title="Jersey Shore" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820393" start="410" end="420" title="Toms River" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823382" start="444" end="460" title="Metedeconk River" label="Metedeconk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087213" start="637" end="647" title="Toms River, New Jersey" label="Toms River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516839" start="649" end="658" title="Silverton, New Jersey" label="Silverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q765824" start="664" end="676" title="Forked River, New Jersey" label="Forked River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861481" start="764" end="778" title="Barnegat Inlet" label="Barnegat Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378177" start="801" end="820" title="Barnegat Lighthouse" label="Barnegat Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q756421" start="845" end="875" title="Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway" label="Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208128" start="909" end="929" title="Point Pleasant Canal" label="Point Pleasant Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649887" start="967" end="984" title="Little Egg Harbor" label="Little Egg Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746755" start="999" end="1013" title="Manahawkin Bay" label="Manahawkin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637971" start="1247" end="1261" title="Brick Township, New Jersey" label="Brick Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083237" start="1265" end="1276" title="Mantoloking, New Jersey" label="Mantoloking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786890" start="1286" end="1332" title="Thomas A. Mathis and J. Stanley Tunney Bridges" label="Thomas A. Mathis and J. Stanley Tunney Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346225" start="1391" end="1433" title="Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge" label="Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="1444" end="1451" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083013" start="1550" end="1573" title="Island Beach State Park" label="Island Beach State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861485" start="1753" end="1783" title="Barnegat Lighthouse State Park" label="Barnegat Lighthouse State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q179167" start="1868" end="1880" title="Henry Hudson" label="Henry Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="2173" end="2178" title="Dutch (ethnic group)" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2270" end="2296" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="2337" end="2346" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q635139" start="2389" end="2407" title="Fishing industry" label="commercial fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="2453" end="2460" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="2647" end="2656" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="2864" end="2875" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="3070" end="3084" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="3116" end="3130" title="animated short" label="animated short"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704528" start="3137" end="3164" title="The Family That Dwelt Apart (animated short)" label="The Family That Dwelt Apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="3198" end="3227" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945343" start="3245" end="3263" title="My Eyes Adored You" label="My Eyes Adored You"/>
<link wikidata="Q465632" start="3292" end="3305" title="Frankie Valli" label="Frankie Valli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848961" start="3433" end="3464" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 number ones of 1975" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; No. 1 hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770573" start="3467" end="3492" title="The Trust for Public Land" label="The Trust for Public Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="3917" end="3928" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="3935" end="3951" title="dissolved oxygen" label="dissolved oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118900" start="4038" end="4061" title="Chrysaora quinquecirrha" label="Chrysaora quinquecirrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="4181" end="4217" title="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="4432" end="4452" title="radioactive material" label="radioactive material"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914309" start="4457" end="4474" title="thermal pollution" label="thermal pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536314" start="4482" end="4521" title="Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station" label="Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="4912" end="4919" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="4921" end="4946" title="polyaromatic hydrocarbons" label="polyaromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="4957" end="4982" title="polychlorinated biphenyls" label="polychlorinated biphenyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q465632" start="5820" end="5833" title="Frankie Valli" label="Frankie Valli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945343" start="5847" end="5865" title="My Eyes Adored You" label="My Eyes Adored You"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="5996" end="6008" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049580" start="6016" end="6028" title="Tony Soprano" label="Tony Soprano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629018" wikidata="Q203793" url="?curid=629018" title="Xavier Bertrand">
<text>Xavier René Louis Bertrand (; born 21 March 1965) is a French politician. Previously, he was president of the regional council of Hauts-de-France since the 2015 regional elections.

Earlier in his career, Bertrand was Minister of Health from 2005 to 2007 in Dominique de Villepin&#x27;s government under President Jacques Chirac, then served as Minister of Labour, Social Affairs and Solidarity from 2007 to 2009 and as Minister of Labour, Employment and Health from 2010 to 2012. He played a leading role in Nicolas Sarkozy&#x27;s presidential campaign in 2007. He was a member of the Union for a Popular Movement, later the Republicans, until 11 December 2017, when he announced that was &quot;definitively leaving&quot; the party after Laurent Wauquiez was elected the leader of the party.

==Early life and education==
Bertrand was born on 21 March 1965 in Châlons-sur-Marne, in the Marne &quot;département&quot;, of the Champagne-Ardenne &quot;région&quot; of France. He studied at the University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, where he obtained a master&#x27;s degree in public law, then a &quot;Diplôme d&#x27;Études Supérieures Spécialisées&quot; (DESS) in local administration.

Bertrand began his professional life as an insurance agent.

==Political career==
=== Early beginnings ===
At the age of sixteen, Bertrand volunteered for the Rally for the Republic (RPR) and quickly went into politics.

In 1992, Bertrand led the campaign for the &#x27;no&#x27; to the Maastricht Treaty in his department, the Aisne in the region of Picardy. He was at the time assistant to the mayor of Saint-Quentin, Aisne. He was one of the pioneers of the &#x27;Saint-Quentin beach&#x27;, an event similar to Paris-Plage. From 1997 to 2002, he was parliamentary assistant to Jacques Braconnier, Senator for the Aisne, and he was elected to the National Assembly on 16 June 2002 for the 18th legislature (2002–2007), representing the second constituency of the Aisne Department.

In 2003, Alain Juppé, President for the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), put him in charge of leading the debate and explaining the subject of pensions reform during a &quot;Tour of France&quot;. He was chosen to defend this draft bill in the National Assembly. At the same time he was part of the &#x27;Club de la boussole,&#x27; a group of deputies who declared their loyalty to then-President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin.

=== Career in government ===
During this period, Bertrand received favourable attention in the right-wing political milieu. On 31 March 2004, when Raffarin appointed his third government, Bertrand was named Junior Health Minister for Health Insurance. Under his Senior Minister, Philippe Douste-Blazy, he led the reform on health insurance. Later on, he pronounced himself strongly in favour of a European Constitution for the referendum on 29 May 2005.

After the majority of the French electorate answered &quot;no&quot; to the referendum, Raffarin resigned as Prime Minister. Under his successor Dominique de Villepin, Bertrand became the Senior Minister for Health, when Douste-Blazy was reappointed Foreign Affairs Minister. His mandate as Health Minister was marked by the chikungunya epidemic and the law against smoking in public places, ratified in 2004.

Bertrand announced his support to UMP presidential candidate Nicolas Sarkozy on 29 September 2006. He was named Sarkozy&#x27;s official spokesperson on 15 January 2007. He quit the government on 26 March to devote himself fully to the campaign. On 18 May 2007, he was named Minister of Labour, Social Affairs and Solidarity in the Prime Minister François Fillon&#x27;s government.

On 19 June 2007 Bertrand was appointed Minister of Labour, Social Affairs and Solidarity in Fillon&#x27;s second government after the first one had handed in its resignation the day before. He later served as Minister of Labour, Employment and Health from 2010 to 2012.

=== Later career ===
Following the 2012 French legislative election, Bertrand announced his candidacy for the post the UMP parliamentary group&#x27;s chair. Having been endorsed by François Fillon, he lost an internal vote against Christian Jacob.

In the 2015 regional elections, Bertrand won over Marine Le Pen and became the president of the Regional Council of Hauts-de-France.

Amid the Fillon affair, in March 2017, Bertrand joined Valérie Pécresse, Christian Estrosi and others in calling for Alain Juppé to replace François Fillon as the party&#x27;s candidate in the 2017 French presidential election.

In 2020, Bertrand publicly expressed interest in challenging incumbent President Emmanuel Macron in the 2022 French presidential election. By early 2021, Betrand was widely tipped by French and international media to be the center-right&#x27;s candidate. According to 2021 polls, he would be in 3rd position behind Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen. At the party&#x27;s 2021 congress, however, he only came in fourth after Éric Ciotti, Valérie Pécresse and Michel Barnier; he subsequently endorsed Pécresse.

In the 2021 regional elections, Bertrand was re-elected. He obtained 52.37 percent of the vote in the Hauts-de-France region, against 25.65 percent for Sébastien Chenu of the National Rally.

In late 2021, Bertrand launched Nous France, a conservative movement. Ahead of the Republicans&#x27; 2022 convention, he endorsed Bruno Retailleau as the party&#x27;s chairman.

== Political positions ==
===Domestic policy===
Bertrand is considered representative of France&#x27;s moderate right. He was the best-placed traditional conservative in opinion polls for the 2021 Republican congress, but ended up in fourth place.

In 2013, Bertrand led a group of fellow UMP politicians who joined forces with Europe Ecology – The Greens in trying to force a constitutional review of a new law introduced by the Socialist Party which expanded government powers to monitor phone and Internet connection data. However, in a blow to the campaign, UMP parliamentary group leader Christian Jacob later wrote to his colleagues that the group would not seek a legal review.

In 2014, Bertrand advocated a &quot;rewrite&quot; or &quot;repeal&quot; of the law opening marriage to same-sex couples, indicating to Valeurs actuelles: &quot;I can&#x27;t resign myself to seeing the rules of filiation turned upside down to this extent. I am against adoption by homosexual couples, PMA assisted reproductive technology and of course GPA surrogacy.&quot; He reiterated his opposition to same-sex marriage in 2017.

Ahead of the 2022 elections, Bertrand defended liberal economic positions. According to &quot;Marianne&quot; magazine, he intends to position himself on the right of Emmanuel Macron. In particular, he wants to cut production taxes by half, believing that the measures undertaken in this direction by the government are insufficient. This project, which would represent a loss of 33 billion euros for the state, would be compensated &quot;in particular by efforts on public spending&quot;; it provides for a postponement of two years of the retirement age and a reform of the unemployment insurance system that would result in a tightening of the conditions of compensation for the unemployed. Has also promised the &quot;re-industrialisation&quot; of France and quotas on immigration. He has also run on an anti-technocratic message.

===Foreign policy===
In July 2014, Bertrand defended President François Hollande&#x27;s decision to push ahead with delivery of a Mistral-class amphibious assault ship to Russia in defiance of calls by key allies, despite the Russo-Ukrainian War; the deal was later called off.

During his presidential campaign in 2021, Bertrand argued that France should reassert itself by leaving NATO’s integrated command.

==Personal life==
Bertrand married Emmanuelle Gontier, advisor on human resources, on 11 July 1998. They have three children, two of whom are twins. He has been a member of the Grand Orient of France since 1995.

==References==




|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203793" start="0" end="26" title="Xavier Bertrand" label="Xavier René Louis Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677767" start="130" end="145" title="Hauts-de-France" label="Hauts-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q18769744" start="156" end="179" title="2015 French regional elections" label="2015 regional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q107658508" start="218" end="236" title="Minister of Health (France)" label="Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q131660" start="258" end="279" title="Dominique de Villepin" label="Dominique de Villepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="314" end="328" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q105445328" start="345" end="394" title="Minister of Social Affairs (France)" label="Minister of Labour, Social Affairs and Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="509" end="524" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173152" start="586" end="614" title="Union for a Popular Movement" label="Union for a Popular Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012759" start="626" end="637" title="The Republicans (France)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q984375" start="739" end="755" title="Laurent Wauquiez" label="Laurent Wauquiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q38196895" start="760" end="767" title="2017 The Republicans (France) leadership election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q47135" start="861" end="878" title="Châlons-en-Champagne" label="Châlons-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12594" start="887" end="892" title="Marne (department)" label="Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q14103" start="925" end="942" title="Champagne-Ardenne" label="Champagne-Ardenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="949" end="955" title="régions in France" label="région"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496149" start="991" end="1028" title="University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne" label="University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052584" start="1344" end="1366" title="Rally for the Republic" label="Rally for the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="1471" end="1488" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="1512" end="1517" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="1535" end="1542" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182744" start="1589" end="1609" title="Saint-Quentin, Aisne" label="Saint-Quentin, Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1764" end="1782" title="Jacques Braconnier" label="Jacques Braconnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="1784" end="1791" title="Senate of France" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q215569" start="1977" end="1988" title="Alain Juppé" label="Alain Juppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q173152" start="2008" end="2036" title="Union for a Popular Movement" label="Union for a Popular Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="2367" end="2381" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q63263" start="2401" end="2421" title="Jean-Pierre Raffarin" label="Jean-Pierre Raffarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q366016" start="2703" end="2724" title="Philippe Douste-Blazy" label="Philippe Douste-Blazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="2821" end="2842" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276449" start="2851" end="2861" title="2005 French European Constitution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131660" start="3023" end="3044" title="Dominique de Villepin" label="Dominique de Villepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243257" start="3203" end="3214" title="chikungunya" label="chikungunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="3350" end="3365" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101410" start="3635" end="3650" title="François Fillon" label="François Fillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164616" start="3977" end="4009" title="2012 French legislative election" label="2012 French legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q101410" start="4123" end="4138" title="François Fillon" label="François Fillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q707984" start="4173" end="4188" title="Christian Jacob (politician)" label="Christian Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q18769744" start="4198" end="4221" title="2015 French regional elections" label="2015 regional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q12927" start="4241" end="4254" title="Marine Le Pen" label="Marine Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723546" start="4287" end="4322" title="Regional Council of Hauts-de-France" label="Regional Council of Hauts-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q28646654" start="4334" end="4347" title="Fillon affair" label="Fillon affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q455023" start="4380" end="4396" title="Valérie Pécresse" label="Valérie Pécresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q749029" start="4398" end="4415" title="Christian Estrosi" label="Christian Estrosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215569" start="4442" end="4453" title="Alain Juppé" label="Alain Juppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q101410" start="4465" end="4480" title="François Fillon" label="François Fillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020999" start="4518" end="4551" title="2017 French presidential election" label="2017 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="4625" end="4634" title="President of France" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="4635" end="4650" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q30638578" start="4658" end="4691" title="2022 French presidential election" label="2022 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q109049167" start="4924" end="4937" title="2021 The Republicans congress" label="2021 congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844180" start="4977" end="4988" title="Éric Ciotti" label="Éric Ciotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q455023" start="4990" end="5006" title="Valérie Pécresse" label="Valérie Pécresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q438465" start="5011" end="5025" title="Michel Barnier" label="Michel Barnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q97188778" start="5070" end="5093" title="2021 French regional elections" label="2021 regional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q21294609" start="5215" end="5230" title="Sébastien Chenu" label="Sébastien Chenu"/>
<link wikidata="Q205150" start="5238" end="5252" title="National Rally" label="National Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926942" start="5385" end="5401" title="Bruno Retailleau" label="Bruno Retailleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="5536" end="5550" title="Centre-right politics" label="moderate right"/>
<link wikidata="Q109049167" start="5625" end="5649" title="2021 The Republicans congress" label="2021 Republican congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5761" end="5788" title="Europe Ecology – The Greens" label="Europe Ecology – The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="5863" end="5878" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q707984" start="6026" end="6041" title="Christian Jacob (politician)" label="Christian Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098727" start="6198" end="6238" title="Same-sex marriage in France" label="law opening marriage to same-sex couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553781" start="6254" end="6271" title="Valeurs actuelles" label="Valeurs actuelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17900" start="6387" end="6417" title="LGBT adoption" label="adoption by homosexual couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="6423" end="6455" title="assisted reproductive technology" label="assisted reproductive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q334645" start="6474" end="6483" title="surrogacy" label="surrogacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="6598" end="6614" title="liberal economic" label="liberal economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291285" start="6645" end="6653" title="Marianne (magazine)" label="Marianne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="6717" end="6732" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="7363" end="7375" title="Technocracy" label="technocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="7439" end="7448" title="President of France" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="7449" end="7466" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058502" start="7516" end="7553" title="Mistral-class amphibious assault ship" label="Mistral-class amphibious assault ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="7612" end="7631" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7769" end="7773" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="7939" end="7944" title="twins" label="twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="7974" end="7996" title="Grand Orient of France" label="Grand Orient of France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629019" wikidata="Q529623" url="?curid=629019" title="Jean-Baptiste Pigalle">
<text>Jean-Baptiste Pigalle (; 26 January 1714 – 20 August 1785) was a French sculptor whose work was influenced by both baroque and neo-classical trends.

==Life==
Pigalle was born in Paris, the seventh child of a carpenter. Although he failed to obtain the &quot;Prix de Rome&quot;, after a severe struggle he entered the &quot;Académie Royale&quot; and became one of the most popular sculptors of his day.
His earlier work, such as &quot;Child with Cage&quot; (model at Sèvres) and &quot;Mercury Fastening his Sandals&quot; (Berlin, and lead cast in Louvre), is less commonplace than that of his more mature years, but his nude statue of Voltaire, dated 1776 (initially in the Institut de France, purchased by the Louvre in 1962), and his tombs of Comte d&#x27;Harcourt (c. 1764) (Notre-Dame de Paris) and of Marshal Saxe, completed in 1777 (Saint-Thomas Lutheran church, Strasbourg), are good examples of French sculpture in the 18th century.

Pigalle taught the sculptor Louis-Philippe Mouchy, who married his niece, and who closely copied Pigalle&#x27;s style. He is also said to have taught the painter Madeleine-Élisabeth Pigalle, believed to be a distant relative from Sens.
His name is most commonly known today because of the Pigalle red-light district in Paris, located around the square of the same name, Place Pigalle.

Pigalle died in Paris on 20 August 1785.

==Monumental works==
==Busts==
==References==
==External links==
* Virtual Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q529623" start="0" end="21" title="Jean-Baptiste Pigalle" label="Jean-Baptiste Pigalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="72" end="80" title="sculpture" label="sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="115" end="122" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="127" end="140" title="Neoclassical sculpture" label="neo-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="179" end="184" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="259" end="271" title="Prix de Rome" label="Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q337579" start="324" end="339" title="Académie de peinture et de sculpture" label="Académie Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q206493" start="467" end="473" title="Sèvres" label="Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="522" end="528" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="547" end="553" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="635" end="643" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="674" end="692" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22093667" start="745" end="766" title="Comte d&amp;#x27;Harcourt" label="Comte d&amp;#x27;Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="778" end="797" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q76723" start="806" end="818" title="Maurice, comte de Saxe" label="Marshal Saxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="869" end="879" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="910" end="919" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260808" start="970" end="991" title="Louis-Philippe Mouchy" label="Louis-Philippe Mouchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290273" start="1104" end="1131" title="Madeleine-Élisabeth Pigalle" label="Madeleine-Élisabeth Pigalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="1172" end="1176" title="Sens" label="Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q576507" start="1231" end="1238" title="Quartier Pigalle" label="Pigalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272888" start="1239" end="1257" title="red-light district" label="red-light district"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1261" end="1266" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q602107" start="1312" end="1325" title="Place Pigalle" label="Place Pigalle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629020" wikidata="Q8050220" url="?curid=629020" title="Yatesboro, Pennsylvania">
<text>Yatesboro is an unincorporated community that is located in Cowanshannock Township, Pennsylvania. The community is situated west of Rural Valley.

Yatesboro has a post office with ZIP Code 16263.

==History==
Yatesboro was founded as a company town . It was built on farmland by the Rochester and Pittsburgh Coal and Iron Company.

It was one of seventeen company towns that were sold in 1947, including McIntyre, Coal Run, Iselin, Waterman, Lucernemines, Aultman, Ernest, Tidesdale, Coy, Luciusboro, Fulton Run, Nu Mines, Yatesboro, Margaret, Helvetia, Twin Rocks, and Yatesboro Lots.

==Geography==
The elevation of Yatesboro is . Yatesboro appears on the Rural Valley U.S. Geological Survey Map.

Armstrong County is located in the Eastern Time Zone (UTC–5).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8050220" start="0" end="9" title="Yatesboro, Pennsylvania" label="Yatesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="16" end="40" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773682" start="60" end="96" title="Cowanshannock Township, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania" label="Cowanshannock Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182906" start="132" end="144" title="Rural Valley, Pennsylvania" label="Rural Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="163" end="174" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="180" end="188" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="283" end="329" title="Buffalo, Rochester and Pittsburgh Railroad#Coal" label="Rochester and Pittsburgh Coal and Iron Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083072" start="404" end="412" title="McIntyre, Pennsylvania" label="McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842482" start="424" end="430" title="Iselin, Pennsylvania" label="Iselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184179" start="442" end="454" title="Lucernemines, Pennsylvania" label="Lucernemines"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865066" start="456" end="463" title="Aultman, Pennsylvania" label="Aultman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132222" start="465" end="471" title="Ernest, Pennsylvania" label="Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21794040" start="513" end="521" title="Nu Mine, Pennsylvania" label="Nu Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710699" start="544" end="552" title="Helvetia, Pennsylvania" label="Helvetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083200" start="554" end="564" title="Twin Rocks, Pennsylvania" label="Twin Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="735" end="752" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time Zone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629022" wikidata="Q1061330" url="?curid=629022" title="Christchurch Airport">
<text>Christchurch Airport is an international airport serving Christchurch, New Zealand. It is located to the northwest of the city centre, in the suburb of Harewood. Christchurch (Harewood) Airport officially opened on 18 May 1940 and became New Zealand&#x27;s first international airport on 16 December 1950. It is New Zealand&#x27;s second busiest airport, after Auckland and before Wellington by annual passengers, and the second busiest, after Auckland, by aircraft movements.

Christchurch and Auckland are the only airports in New Zealand that regularly handle Boeing 747 and Airbus A380 aircraft. The airport is curfew free, operating 24 hours a day.

The prevailing wind in Christchurch is from the north-east and to a lesser extent from the south-west, but the city is also affected by Canterbury&#x27;s nor&#x27;wester foehn wind. As a result, the airport has two perpendicular runways: a primary runway (02/20) oriented with the north-easterly and south-westerly prevailing winds, and a secondary runway (11/29) oriented for use during nor&#x27;westers. The airport also has a third grass runway, parallel to the primary runway, for use by general aviation. To serve an increasing number of passengers, the airport has completed construction of a major terminal upgrade. The new construction&#x27;s primary wing opened in 2011 and the upgrade was completed in 2013.

==History==


In 1935, the local council decided to locate a new aerodrome at Harewood as the best site for Christchurch.
Development of the aerodrome at Harewood commenced in 1936 when of land was purchased. In 1937, a runway and a terminal were constructed. In 1940, the airport became RNZAF Station Harewood. By 1946 the form of the terminal area development was established with hangars, a small terminal building, the water tower and some barracks buildings. In 1950, Christchurch Airport received clearance for international operations from the government. The two runways and parallel taxiway concept was established in 1953–runway 02/20 at and 11/29 at . In 1954, TEAL introduced Douglas DC-6 aircraft to its trans-Tasman services. In February 1960, a new terminal building, designed by architect Paul Pascoe, was brought into operation.

A southwest extension to runway 02/20 opened in November 1963, extending the runway to and providing for commercial jet operations. In April 1965, scheduled jet services were launched by Qantas to Sydney using the Boeing 707.

Later in 1966, an international wing was added to the domestic terminal. In October 1968, NAC operated its first Boeing 737 to the airport. SAFE Air introduced a Chatham Island air link to Christchurch in December 1969. In 1972 the north-west runway was completely resealed and repainted. The first scheduled Boeing 747 service to land in New Zealand arrived on 3 December 1972, a Qantas flight from Sydney. Air New Zealand introduced its McDonnell Douglas DC-10 aircraft to trans-Tasman services from 31 October 1973.

Extensions to the domestic terminal were completed in September 1975 with a new two level pier added, more than doubling the total floor area. In October that year, Air New Zealand began a weekly DC-8 service linking Christchurch to Nadi, Rarotonga and Papeete. Air New Zealand opened its No.1 Hangar at the airport in August 1979. In December 1980 the two Australian domestic airlines Ansett and Trans Australia Airlines commenced scheduled services from Hobart within a few days of each other.

In June 1982, the government approved an northeastern extension to runway 02/20 at the cost of $7 miliion. The extension was officially opened on 6 July 1984 by prime minister Rob Muldoon, bringing the runway to its present length of .

In February 1985, Newmans Air started scheduled de Havilland Canada Dash 7 services on the tourist routes. The first ever Air New Zealand Boeing 767 service to Melbourne and the inaugural Air New Zealand Boeing 747–200 service to Los Angeles via Honolulu and Nadi (known as the southern connection) departed in October 1985.
In October 1986, Singapore Airlines started Boeing 747 services to the city. The following month, the first British Airways Boeing 747 flight from London arrived. In July 1987, Ansett New Zealand started flying on domestic trunk routes using Boeing 737 aircraft. Also in 1987, the terminal was extended to accommodate Ansett New Zealand and new Air New Zealand lounges; and domestic airbridges were added. Thai Airways began a weekly DC-10 service from Bangkok in November 1988. In March 1989, Air New Zealand introduced a weekly Boeing 747 service from Tokyo and the following month a Boeing 767 service to Perth was introduced. Although dropped years later, the Perth route was restored on a seasonal basis in 2013 with the same aircraft until 2016, when it was upgauged to a Boeing 787 Dreamliner. 

The first Concorde to visit Christchurch was British Airways Concorde G-BOAF on 9 April 1989, arriving from Tahiti on a world tour. It departed towards Sydney on 12 April, in which it lost part of its vertical stabiliser over the Tasman Sea. In September 1990, stage 1 of the International Antarctic Centre tourist attraction was officially opened.

Air Pacific (now Fiji Airways) started a weekly direct flight to Nadi, Fiji in April 1993. Korean Airlines commenced flying to Christchurch in July 1994 using MD-11 aircraft, this was a weekly service from Seoul.
In April 1997 Origin Pacific Airways started operations at the airport with flights to Nelson.
The Canterbury Aero Club opened a new complex to the north-west side of the airport in October 1998.
In September 1998, the new international terminal building was completed, creating an additional of floor space.
In 2004, expansion of the international terminal was completed to create five more international stands and four more international airbridges. Pacific Blue Airlines commenced trans-Tasman flights from Christchurch (its New Zealand base) in January 2004. Emirates started flying to Christchurch from Dubai and Melbourne with Airbus A340 aircraft in July 2004, later switching to a Sydney-Bangkok-Dubai service with a Boeing 777-300ER aircraft before upgrading to a daily Airbus A380 service while dropping Bangkok on 30 October 2016. Jetstar started serving the city with trans-Tasman flights in December 2005. Construction of the five level carpark building commenced in March 2006. Origin Pacific ceased operations in September 2006.

===Airport redevelopment===
Christchurch Airport underwent an extensive expansion project, beginning in March 2006 when construction commenced on a new multi-storey $13 million car park building which opened early in 2007. The new building provided 570 new covered car spaces. Once it was complete, part of the existing car park area was closed to allow for the extra space required for the expanded footprint of a new terminal building. A new tall control tower, positioned close to the new car park building, opened in September 2009. A separate $20 million regional lounge was constructed in 2010 in a joint venture by Air New Zealand and CIAL.

In early 2009, work commenced on replacing the old domestic terminal with a new integrated terminal precinct (ITP) to be built over the existing one. The new terminal replaced the existing ageing domestic terminal and expanded the facilities of the much newer international terminal. Stage 1 of the new terminal, including the new check-in hall, new food/retail precinct, new single domestic security screening, and the new regional departure lounge and baggage claim of the new terminal was completed in May 2011, allowing the old international check-in and the old domestic terminal north of the main pier to be demolished to make way for Stage 2. Stage 2, which includes the new domestic baggage claim and the northern half of the new domestic departure lounge was completed in February 2012.

The old domestic terminal was completely demolished to make way for the new terminal. All construction was completed by late 2012, with some work such as demolition of the old pier continuing into 2013. Between 200 and 400 workers were active on the site each work day for almost four years. Despite 11,000 earthquakes, the terminal project was completed on budget. The new terminal was officially opened by Prime Minister John Key on 18 April 2013.

=== 2010 onwards ===
In April 2011, Air Asia X commenced Airbus A330 services to Kuala Lumpur; these were short lived, ending in May 2012. China Airlines operated seasonal flights from Taipei via Sydney with Airbus A330 aircraft from December 2014 to 2018. An unusual irregular visitor is Uzbekistan Airways, which operates Boeing 767 charters from Tashkent via Kuala Lumpur carrying Russian fishing crews.

In December 2023, United Airlines began operating a seasonal service from San Francisco. This service is the only flight connecting North America with the South Island.

Starting in June 2024, the food court of the airport underwent a major renovation, replacing some older restaurants with new ones, and updating the aesthetic. These renovations were finished by January 2025.

==Kowhai Park==
The airport is to build a solar farm on of land to power the airport. As part of its sustainability goals, it will be big enough to power 20% of Christchurch.

==Runways==
The preferred option by the airport company for increasing the capacity of the existing runways is by introducing independent operations. This can be achieved by adding a extension to the north-eastern end of the main runway 20/02 which would give it a total length of . When the prevailing north-easterly winds are blowing this would allow for intersection departures for most aircraft types while other aircraft land on runway 11. Large wide body aircraft would still have to use the full length of the runway.
The runway 11/29 would be widened to and extended by to the north-west into the Harewood golf course; the airport has purchased land from the club already. This would increase the runway length to and is estimated to cost $12 million, as presently some Tasman and Pacific Island flights are unable to take off fully loaded in nor&#x27;west wind conditions. A runway end safety area (RESA) will be added to each end to make it comply with ICAO standards. Eventually all the runways will have a RESA. 
Also Runway 11/29 may be lengthened up to to provide for enhanced take-off capability for Code D (Boeing 767-sized aircraft) and Code E (Boeing 777, Boeing 787, Airbus A350) aircraft flying on medium and long haul routes in northwest wind operational conditions. When completed with peak operation periods both runways will be used simultaneously.
Statistics indicated that Runway 02 was used 70% of the time, Runway 20 at 20%, Runway 29 at 8% and Runway 11 (predominantly for landings) at 2% of the time.

==Terminal and gates==
Christchurch Airport consists of a single terminal that caters for both domestic and international flights. It is in size and is situated on the eastern side of the airport.

The main terminal building contains a combined check-in hall for domestic and international flights. It has 58 check-in counters, in addition to self-service check-in kiosks. A common baggage claim hall is also located on the ground floor. There is a large retail area on the first floor, with many food and retail outlets as well as waiting areas. A major feature of the terminal is a $15 million state-of-the-art baggage handling system, which is long.

The airport has 37 gates in total. The regional wing is located in the south-west of the terminal, and handles all Air New Zealand Link turboprop flights. It has 12 gates, numbered 3–14. The central zone handles mainline Air New Zealand and Jetstar domestic services and has eight gates (16–22a) and gates(15,15a,15b,15c); all (except Gate 15, which can be shared with turboprops) are equipped with jetbridges. The international wing is located in the north-east section of the terminal and has 13 gates (23–35), all except 31 and 33 have jetbridges. Gates 21/24 and 22/25 are shared swing gates which can be used for domestic or international flights as the need arises. Gate 30 has a dual jetbridge which is used for the Airbus A380. When available it can also accommodate two narrow body jets gate position 30R and 30L.
==Airlines and destinations==
As of December 2023, Christchurch airport is served by 11 airlines with scheduled services. The airport has direct flights to 18 domestic and 10 international destinations. A total of 900 scheduled domestic and 157 international flights arrive and depart each week.

===Passenger===
===Cargo===
==Statistics==

As the gateway for Christchurch and the South Island, Christchurch International Airport is New Zealand&#x27;s second largest airport.

A total of 6,281,655 passengers travelled in and out of Christchurch International Airport in the year of 2024, an increase of 9.6 per cent over the previous year.

A record 6.31 million passengers travelled in the 2016 year. Airline seat capacity grew 7% to 7.9 million passengers with several new services starting.

===Traffic===
==Operations==
===Military===

Since the closure of RNZAF Base Wigram, the Royal New Zealand Air Force (RNZAF) always flies to Christchurch International Airport when visiting the city. There are regular RNZAF flights between Wellington, Ohakea, Auckland.

With the development of Antarctic scientific expeditions, since the 1950s Christchurch Airport has been the base for all Antarctic flights operated by the United States Navy, the United States Air Force, the United States Air National Guard, and the Royal New Zealand Air Force as part of Operation Deep Freeze.

===SOFIA===

In July 2013, a Boeing 747SP modified as the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) airborne telescope landed at the airport. A spokesman said it was likely that Christchurch would be a winter base for SOFIA for twenty years. The city was chosen as a southern hemisphere base because of the long airport runway and the favourable atmospheric conditions and relatively empty airspace in southern New Zealand.

===General aviation===
There are several general aviation organisations operating from the airport. Garden City Helicopters operates from a base adjacent to the airport (ICAO: NZGI). It operates a medivac service using fixed-wing aircraft (NZ Flying Doctor Service), charter flights and also operates the rescue helicopter in Canterbury with a secondary helipad in Hagley Park adjacent to Christchurch Hospital (ICAO: NZJC). Christchurch International Airport Limited maintains a grass runway parallel to the primary runway for the Canterbury Aero Club. Among the general aviation companies, Mainland Air operates flights to Oamaru. Air Safaris runs a link service to Lake Tekapo Airport.

===Aviation services===
The Christchurch Engine Centre, established in 1953, is located at the airport and is now a joint facility run by Pratt &amp; Whitney and Air New Zealand. A full MRO service is offered to IAE V2500 engines. Formerly, PW JT8D and Rolls-Royce Dart engines were overhauled at the facility.
Air New Zealand has several maintenance facilities at the airport such as 1 Hangar (which can accommodate six Code C aircraft), 3 Hangar (one Code C aircraft) and 5 Hangar (one Code C aircraft) but no longer has a paint hangar.

==Access, ground transport, and parking==
The main access road into the airport connects to both
Russley Road (State Highway 1) and Memorial Avenue at a diamond interchange. The distance from the airport to the city centre is roughly .

A drop off and pick up area called &#x27;The Loop&#x27; is situated on the ground floor of the multi-level car park building. A number of different taxi and shuttle companies operate services from the airport terminals. Uber also partnered with CIAL to have a dedicated pick-up and drop-off zone for its service.

Three different city bus routes service the airport terminal: the number 3 route to the central city via Avonhead and Riccarton, continuing to Sumner; the number 29 route to the central city via Fendalton; and the number 125 on its route from Redwood to Halswell. In late August 2023, a fourth bus line was announced to be serving the Airport, the 8 Port to Port Route. With service starting September 04th, this bus travels between the Airport and the Port town of Lyttelton via the CBD.

==Accidents and incidents==
* On 21 November 1957 at 11.33am a SAFE Air Bristol Freighter (registered ZK-AYH) suffered a catastrophic structural failure on a flight from Paraparaumu to Oamaru and crashed on the Russley Golf Course very near the airport with the loss of all four lives.
* On 6 June 2003, an Air Adventures New Zealand Ltd Piper PA-31 Chieftain (registered ZK-NCA) crashed into trees and terrain short of runway 20, killing the pilot and seven of the nine passengers on board. The aircraft was flying too low during an ILS approach in foggy weather.
* An attempted hijacking of Eagle Airways Flight 2279 from Blenheim to Christchurch occurred on 8 February 2008. After the British Aerospace Jetstream 32EP landed, the offender, a Somalian woman, was overpowered by the two pilots and she was later arrested at the scene on Runway 29 after the aircraft came to a stop.
*In November 2014, a New Zealand Member of Parliament, Gerry Brownlee, was fined $2000 by the Civil Aviation Authority for a breach of security that occurred at Christchurch Airport on 24 July 2014. An official inquiry found that Brownlee (then Minister of Transport) and two of his aides had evaded security screening by entering a departure lounge through an exit door while in a rush to board a domestic flight.
*On 31 May 2024, a Jetstar Airbus A320 (registered VH-VFF) operating flight JQ225 from Auckland lost directional control while landing on runway 02 and slid off the edge of the runway. No injuries were reported, but the airport was closed while the aircraft was towed to the terminal and the runway inspected.

==Demographics==
The statistical area of Christchurch Airport, which includes commercial areas near the airport, covers . It had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.
Christchurch Airport had a population of 177 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 9 people (5.4%) since the 2013 census, and a decrease of 6 people (−3.3%) since the 2006 census. There were 75 households, comprising 99 males and 75 females, giving a sex ratio of 1.32 males per female. The median age was 50.1 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 21 people (11.9%) aged under 15 years, 39 (22.0%) aged 15 to 29, 87 (49.2%) aged 30 to 64, and 30 (16.9%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 81.4% European/Pākehā, 16.9% Māori, 6.8% Asian, and 3.4% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 18.6, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 47.5% had no religion, 37.3% were Christian, 3.4% were Muslim and 1.7% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 12 (7.7%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 45 (28.8%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $29,100, compared with $31,800 nationally. 18 people (11.5%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 75 (48.1%) people were employed full-time, 33 (21.2%) were part-time, and 6 (3.8%) were unemployed.

==See also==
* List of airports in New Zealand
* List of airlines of New Zealand
* List of busiest airports in New Zealand
* Transport in New Zealand

==References==
===Bibliography===

==External links==

*Airport website
*CIAL&#x27;s commercial property website
*Canterbury Aero Club website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1061330" start="0" end="20" title="Christchurch Airport" label="Christchurch Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="27" end="48" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="57" end="69" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656944" start="152" end="160" title="Harewood, New Zealand" label="Harewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608524" start="331" end="345" title="List of busiest airports in New Zealand" label="second busiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q45938" start="361" end="369" title="Auckland Airport" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150574" start="381" end="391" title="Wellington Airport" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="563" end="573" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="578" end="589" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033756" start="809" end="824" title="Nor&amp;#x27;west arch" label="nor&amp;#x27;wester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="825" end="835" title="foehn wind" label="foehn wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152885" start="2179" end="2190" title="Paul Pascoe" label="Paul Pascoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="2435" end="2445" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="2757" end="2767" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="2887" end="2910" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-10" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q247116" start="3354" end="3360" title="Ansett Australia" label="Ansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448822" start="3365" end="3389" title="Trans Australia Airlines" label="Trans Australia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="3641" end="3652" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Rob Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19574836" start="3720" end="3731" title="Newmans Air" label="Newmans Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q178487" start="3750" end="3776" title="de Havilland Canada Dash 7" label="de Havilland Canada Dash 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="4044" end="4062" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="4135" end="4150" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770646" start="4204" end="4222" title="Ansett New Zealand" label="Ansett New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q188710" start="4433" end="4445" title="Thai Airways" label="Thai Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428" start="4805" end="4826" title="Boeing 787 Dreamliner" label="Boeing 787 Dreamliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="4840" end="4848" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048193" start="5106" end="5136" title="International Antarctic Centre" label="International Antarctic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q407719" start="5197" end="5209" title="Fiji Airways" label="Fiji Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="5251" end="5255" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="5271" end="5286" title="Korean Airlines" label="Korean Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356329" start="5407" end="5429" title="Origin Pacific Airways" label="Origin Pacific Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061085" start="5846" end="5867" title="Pacific Blue Airlines" label="Pacific Blue Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q180432" start="5957" end="5965" title="Emirates (airline)" label="Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="6027" end="6038" title="Airbus A340" label="Airbus A340"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="6119" end="6135" title="Boeing 777-300ER" label="Boeing 777-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="6173" end="6184" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q767627" start="6236" end="6243" title="Jetstar" label="Jetstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="6888" end="6901" title="control tower" label="control tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q406632" start="8372" end="8382" title="Air Asia X" label="Air Asia X"/>
<link wikidata="Q500253" start="8417" end="8429" title="Kuala Lumpur International Airport" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q610003" start="8625" end="8643" title="Uzbekistan Airways" label="Uzbekistan Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q860952" start="8685" end="8693" title="Tashkent International Airport" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="8762" end="8777" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="8818" end="8831" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="9284" end="9296" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="10262" end="10266" title="ICAO" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790392" start="11444" end="11467" title="baggage handling system" label="baggage handling system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061299" start="11884" end="11893" title="jetbridge" label="jetbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="12208" end="12219" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999704" start="13170" end="13187" title="Wigram Aerodrome" label="RNZAF Base Wigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="13193" end="13220" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150574" start="13344" end="13354" title="Wellington Airport" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277291" start="13356" end="13362" title="RNZAF Base Ohakea" label="Ohakea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277288" start="13364" end="13372" title="RNZAF Base Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="13530" end="13548" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="13554" end="13577" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="13597" end="13615" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756995" start="13664" end="13685" title="Operation Deep Freeze" label="Operation Deep Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421517" start="13717" end="13729" title="Boeing 747SP" label="Boeing 747SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q261229" start="13746" end="13794" title="Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy" label="Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="14093" end="14101" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="14169" end="14185" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="14347" end="14366" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819552" start="14433" end="14450" title="Westpac Rescue Helicopter (New Zealand)" label="rescue helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736659" start="14720" end="14732" title="Mainland Air" label="Mainland Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782" start="14753" end="14759" title="Oamaru" label="Oamaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698176" start="14761" end="14772" title="Air Safaris (NZ airline)" label="Air Safaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695299" start="14796" end="14815" title="Lake Tekapo Airport" label="Lake Tekapo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q173150" start="14956" end="14975" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547145" start="15468" end="15484" title="New Zealand State Highway 1" label="(State Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="15815" end="15819" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829340" start="16014" end="16022" title="Avonhead" label="Avonhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322943" start="16027" end="16036" title="Riccarton, New Zealand" label="Riccarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070280" start="16052" end="16058" title="Sumner, New Zealand" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443217" start="16104" end="16113" title="Fendalton" label="Fendalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306469" start="16152" end="16159" title="Redwood, Canterbury" label="Redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643588" start="16163" end="16171" title="Halswell" label="Halswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q911909" start="16375" end="16384" title="Lyttelton, New Zealand" label="Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q917934" start="16471" end="16488" title="Bristol Freighter" label="Bristol Freighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q745036" start="16737" end="16758" title="Piper PA-31 Navajo" label="Piper PA-31 Chieftain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325012" start="16992" end="17017" title="Eagle Airways Flight 2279" label="Eagle Airways Flight 2279"/>
<link wikidata="Q647915" start="17087" end="17119" title="British Aerospace Jetstream" label="British Aerospace Jetstream 32EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="17144" end="17152" title="Somalis" label="Somalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="17315" end="17335" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352603" start="17337" end="17351" title="Gerry Brownlee" label="Gerry Brownlee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17527" end="17548" title="Ministry of Transport (New Zealand)#Ministers of Transport" label="Minister of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="17724" end="17735" title="Airbus A320 family" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="18267" end="18290" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="18333" end="18344" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="18391" end="18402" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="18742" end="18748" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="18756" end="18761" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="18768" end="18773" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="19067" end="19076" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="19088" end="19094" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074182" start="19568" end="19599" title="List of airports in New Zealand" label="List of airports in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856251" start="19602" end="19633" title="List of airlines of New Zealand" label="List of airlines of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608524" start="19636" end="19675" title="List of busiest airports in New Zealand" label="List of busiest airports in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q14477542" start="19678" end="19702" title="Transport in New Zealand" label="Transport in New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629023" wikidata="Q1196205" url="?curid=629023" title="The Vicar of Wakefield">
<text>The Vicar of Wakefield: A Tale, Supposed to Be Written by Himself is a 1766 novel by Anglo-Irish writer Oliver Goldsmith (1728–1774). It was written from 1761 to 1762 and published in 1766. It was one of the most popular and widely read 18th-century novels among the British citizenry, and remains a classic of English literature. The work also finds mention in some of the best known novels of the 19th-century, such as &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; and &quot;Frankenstein&quot;.

==Publication==
Dr. Samuel Johnson, one of Goldsmith&#x27;s closest friends, told how &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot; came to be sold for publication: 

The novel was &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot;, and Johnson had sold it to Francis Newbery, nephew of publisher John Newbery. Newbery &quot;kept it by him for nearly two years unpublished&quot;.

The 1929 edition was illustrated by Arthur Rackham (1867–1939).

==Plot summary==

The Vicar – Dr. Charles Primrose – lives an idyllic life in a country parish with his wife Deborah, sons George (eldest), Moses, Bill, and Dick, and daughters Olivia and Sophia. He is wealthy due to investing an inheritance he received from a deceased relative, and he donates the £35 that his job pays annually to the widows and orphans of local clergy. On the evening of George&#x27;s wedding to wealthy Arabella Wilmot, the Vicar loses all his money through the bankruptcy of his merchant investor who has left town abruptly.

The wedding is called off by Arabella&#x27;s father, who is known for his prudence with money. George, who was educated at Oxford and is old enough to be considered an adult, is sent away to town. The rest of the family move to a new and more humble parish on the land of Squire Thornhill, who is known to be a womanizer. On the way, they hear about the dubious reputation of their new landlord. Also, references are made to the squire&#x27;s uncle Sir William Thornhill, who is known throughout the country for his worthiness and generosity.

A poor and eccentric friend, Mr. Burchell, whom they meet at an inn, rescues Sophia from drowning. She is instantly attracted to him, but her ambitious mother does not encourage her feelings.

Then follows a period of happy family life, interrupted only by regular visits of the dashing Squire Thornhill and Mr. Burchell. Olivia is captivated by Thornhill&#x27;s hollow charm; but he also encourages the social ambitions of Mrs. Primrose and her daughters to a ludicrous degree.

Finally, Olivia is reported to have fled. First Burchell is suspected, but after a long pursuit Dr. Primrose finds his daughter, who was in fact deceived by Squire Thornhill. He planned to marry her in a mock ceremony and leave her shortly after, as he had done with several women before.

When Olivia and her father return home, they find their house in flames. Although the family has lost almost all their belongings, the evil Squire Thornhill insists on the payment of the rent. As the vicar cannot pay, he is brought to prison.

A series of dreadful developments follows. The vicar&#x27;s daughter, Olivia, is reported dead, Sophia is abducted, and George too is sent to prison in chains and covered with blood, as he had challenged Thornhill to a duel when he had heard about his wickedness.

Then Mr. Burchell arrives and solves all problems. He rescues Sophia, Olivia is not dead, and it emerges that Mr. Burchell is in reality the worthy Sir William Thornhill, who travels through the country in disguise. In the end, there is a double wedding: George marries Arabella, as he originally intended, and Sir William Thornhill marries Sophia. Squire Thornhill&#x27;s servant turns out to have tricked him, and what the Squire thought to be a sham marriage of himself and Olivia is in fact valid. Finally, even the wealth of the vicar is restored, as the bankrupt merchant is reported found.

==Structure and narrative technique==
The book consists of 32 chapters which fall into three parts:
* Chapters 1–3: beginning
* Chapters 4–29: main part
* Chapters 30–32: ending

Chapter 17, when Olivia is reported to be fled, can be regarded as the climax as well as an essential turning point of the novel. From chapter 17 onward it changes from a comical account of eighteenth-century country life into a pathetic melodrama with didactic traits.

There are quite a few interpolations of different literary genres, such as poems, histories or sermons, which widen the restricted view of the first person narrator and serve as didactic fables.

The novel can be regarded as a &quot;fictitious memoir&quot;, as it is told by the vicar himself by retrospection.

==Main characters==
===Charles Primrose===
He is the vicar in the title, and the narrator of the story. He presents one of the most harmlessly simple and unsophisticated yet also ironically complex figures ever to appear in English fiction. He has a mild, forgiving temper, as seen when he forgives his daughter Olivia with open arms. He is a loving husband and a father of six healthy, blooming children. However, though he usually has a sweet, benevolent temper, he can sometimes be a bit silly, stubborn, or vain. For instance, he is obsessed with a particularly obscure, and not very important, matter of church doctrine. One of his &quot;favourite topics&quot;, he declares, is matrimony, and explains that he is proud of being &quot;a strict monogamist&quot; (in the sense that he is opposed to remarriage of any sort and believes scripture allows only one marriage partner for a person&#x27;s lifetime). He tactlessly adheres to his &quot;principles&quot; in the face of a violent disagreement with the neighbour who was soon to become his son&#x27;s father-in-law (who is about to be married a fourth time). He &quot;...was called out by one of my relations, who, with a face of concern, advised me to give up the dispute, at least till my son&#x27;s wedding was over.&quot; However, he angrily cries that he will not &quot;relinquish the cause of truth&quot;, and hotly says, &quot;You might as well advise me to give up my fortune as my argument.&quot; This is ironic, as he immediately finds out that his fortune has been unexpectedly reduced to almost nothing. This makes Mr. Wilmot break off the intended marriage with Mr. Primrose&#x27;s son George and Miss Arabella Wilmot, and thus his son&#x27;s happiness is almost shattered. He is sometimes proud of what he fancies is his ability at arguing, and often misjudges his family&#x27;s supposed friends and neighbours. However, despite all his faults, he is affectionate, faithful, loving, patient and essentially good-natured.

===Deborah Primrose===
Dr. Charles Primrose&#x27;s wife. She is faithful, if still rather independent-minded. She has some vanity of her own, however: she has a &quot;passion&quot; for clothes, and is seen making a &quot;wash&quot; for her girls. She is also eager to see her daughters splendidly married, and this ambition sometimes blinds her. Dr. Charles Primrose refers to her as &quot;a good-natured notable woman; and as for breeding, there were few country ladies who could shew (show) more. She could read any English book without much spelling, but for pickling, preserving, and cookery, none could excel her.&quot; She is even prouder of her children than her husband, especially her beautiful girls.

===Olivia and Sophia Primrose===
Their father originally wished to name each after their aunt Grissel, but other considerations prevented him. They are affectionate, generally dutiful daughters. Of his daughters, the vicar claims, &quot;Olivia...had that luxuriancy of beauty with which painters generally draw Hebe; open, sprightly, and commanding ...
Sophia&#x27;s features were not so striking at first; but often did more certain execution; for they were soft, modest, and alluring. The one vanquished by a single blow, the other by efforts successfully repeated...Olivia wished for many lovers, Sophia to secure one. Olivia was often affected from too great a desire to please. Sophia even represt [repressed] excellence from her fears to offend.&quot;
They both alike reflect their father&#x27;s nature of being good-hearted, though prone to occasional fault; Olivia runs away with Mr. Thornhill in a rush of impetuous passion, and even the more sensible Sophia joins in with making &quot;a wash&quot; for herself and dressing up in fancy clothes.

==Reception==
In literary history books, &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot; is often described as a sentimental novel, which displays the belief in the innate goodness of human beings. But it can also be read as a satire on the sentimental novel and its values, as the vicar&#x27;s values are apparently not compatible with the real sinful world. It is only with Sir William Thornhill&#x27;s help that he can get out of his calamities. Moreover, an analogy can be drawn between Mr. Primrose&#x27;s suffering and the Book of Job. This is particularly relevant to the question of why evil exists.

The novel is mentioned in &quot;The Romance of Certain Old Clothes&quot; by Henry James, George Eliot&#x27;s &quot;Middlemarch&quot;, Stendhal&#x27;s &quot;The Life of Henry Brulard&quot;, Arthur Schopenhauer&#x27;s &quot;The Art of Being Right&quot;, Jane Austen&#x27;s &quot;Emma&quot;, Charles Dickens&#x27; &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; and &quot;David Copperfield&quot;, Mary Shelley&#x27;s &quot;Frankenstein&quot;, Sarah Grand&#x27;s &quot;The Heavenly Twins&quot;, Charlotte Brontë&#x27;s &quot;The Professor&quot; and &quot;Villette&quot;, Louisa May Alcott&#x27;s &quot;Little Women&quot; and in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe&#x27;s &quot;The Sorrows of Young Werther&quot;, as well as his &quot;Dichtung und Wahrheit&quot;. Goethe wrote:
&quot;Now Herder came, and together with his great knowledge brought many other aids and the later publications besides. Among these he announced to us the &quot;Vicar of Wakefield&quot; as an excellent work, with a German translation of which he would make us acquainted by reading it aloud to us himself. … A Protestant country clergyman is, perhaps the most beatific subject for a modern idyl; he appears, like Melchizedek, as priest and king in one person.&quot; &quot;The Autobiography of Johann Goethe&quot;, p. 368 ff.
==Adaptations==
A play &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield: A drama in 3 parts&quot; (1850) by Joseph Stirling Coyne.
Silent film adaptations of the novel were produced in 1910, in 1913, and in 1916.

In 1959 an Italian television series &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot; was broadcast.

Composer Liza Lehmann composed a 1906 comic light opera &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot; to a libretto by Laurence Housman.

==Notes==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;The Vicar of Wakefield&quot; at Internet Archive and Google Books (scanned books original editions color illustrated)
 (plain text and HTML)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="85" end="96" title="Anglo-Irish people" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="104" end="120" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="311" end="329" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="427" end="447" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="464" end="476" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="501" end="519" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Dr. Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="755" end="767" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q314938" start="875" end="889" title="Arthur Rackham" label="Arthur Rackham"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414944" start="926" end="931" title="Vicar (Anglicanism)" label="Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="992" end="998" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="3229" end="3233" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="4814" end="4824" title="irony" label="ironically"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="4867" end="4874" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="5894" end="5901" title="wedding" label="wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="7154" end="7158" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="7190" end="7198" title="pickling" label="pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="7200" end="7210" title="Food preservation" label="preserving"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="7216" end="7223" title="cooking" label="cookery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="7609" end="7615" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="7651" end="7655" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451276" start="8495" end="8512" title="sentimental novel" label="sentimental novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="8609" end="8615" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="8911" end="8922" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="8973" end="8988" title="theodicy" label="why evil exists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761396" start="9023" end="9057" title="The Romance of Certain Old Clothes" label="The Romance of Certain Old Clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313129" start="9106" end="9117" title="Middlemarch" label="Middlemarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557868" start="9147" end="9172" title="The Life of Henry Brulard" label="The Life of Henry Brulard"/>
<link wikidata="Q432196" start="9213" end="9235" title="The Art of Being Right" label="The Art of Being Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q223880" start="9268" end="9272" title="Emma (novel)" label="Emma"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="9308" end="9328" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189811" start="9345" end="9362" title="David Copperfield (novel)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="9396" end="9408" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950721" start="9416" end="9427" title="Sarah Grand" label="Sarah Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q762203" start="9497" end="9510" title="The Professor (novel)" label="The Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449570" start="9527" end="9535" title="Villette (novel)" label="Villette"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="9574" end="9586" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q151883" start="9640" end="9668" title="The Sorrows of Young Werther" label="The Sorrows of Young Werther"/>
<link wikidata="Q569377" start="9697" end="9718" title="Dichtung und Wahrheit" label="Dichtung und Wahrheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="9750" end="9756" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287205" start="10354" end="10375" title="Joseph Stirling Coyne" label="Joseph Stirling Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989852" start="10428" end="10435" title="The Vicar of Wakefield (1910 film)" label="in 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989854" start="10437" end="10444" title="The Vicar of Wakefield (1913 film)" label="in 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989858" start="10450" end="10457" title="The Vicar of Wakefield (1916 film)" label="in 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q97304144" start="10503" end="10525" title="The Vicar of Wakefield (TV series)" label="The Vicar of Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887488" start="10557" end="10569" title="Liza Lehmann" label="Liza Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884308" start="10656" end="10672" title="Laurence Housman" label="Laurence Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="10747" end="10763" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="10768" end="10780" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629026" wikidata="Q148901" url="?curid=629026" title="Meridian (astronomy)">
<text>In astronomy, the meridian is the great circle passing through the celestial poles, as well as the zenith and nadir of an observer&#x27;s location. Consequently, it contains also the north and south points on the horizon, and it is perpendicular to the celestial equator and horizon. Meridians, celestial and geographical, are determined by the pencil of planes passing through the Earth&#x27;s rotation axis. For a location &quot;not&quot; on this axis, there is a unique meridian plane in this axial-pencil through that location. The intersection of this plane with Earth&#x27;s surface defines two &quot;geographical meridians&quot; (either one east and one west of the prime meridian, or else the prime meridian itself and its anti-meridian), and the intersection of the plane with the celestial sphere is the celestial meridian for that location and time.

There are several ways to divide the meridian into semicircles. In one approach, the observer&#x27;s upper meridian extends from a celestial pole and passes through the zenith to contact the opposite pole, while the lower meridian passes through the nadir to contact both poles at the opposite ends. In another approach known as the horizontal coordinate system, the meridian is divided into the local meridian, the semicircle that contains the observer&#x27;s zenith and the north and south points of their horizon, and the opposite semicircle, which contains the nadir and the north and south points of their horizon.

On any given (sidereal) day/night, a celestial object will appear to drift across, or transit, the observer&#x27;s upper meridian as Earth rotates, since the meridian is fixed to the local horizon. At culmination, the object contacts the upper meridian and reaches its highest point in the sky. An object&#x27;s right ascension and the local sidereal time can be used to determine the time of its culmination (see hour angle).

The term &quot;meridian&quot; comes from the Latin &quot;meridies&quot;, which means both &quot;midday&quot; and &quot;south&quot;, as the celestial equator appears to tilt southward from the Northern Hemisphere.

==See also==
* Meridian (geography)
* Prime meridian (planets)
* Prime vertical, the vertical circle perpendicular to a meridian
* Longitude (planets)

==References==

*Millar, William (2006). &quot;The Amateur Astronomer&#x27;s Introduction to the Celestial Sphere&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
*Local Horizon and Meridian. (&quot;A Modern Almagest - An Updated Version of Ptolemy’s Model of the Solar System&quot; by Richard Fitzpatrick, Professor of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="18" end="26" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146657" start="34" end="46" title="great circle" label="great circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119" start="67" end="81" title="celestial pole" label="celestial pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="99" end="105" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q145825" start="110" end="115" title="nadir (astronomy)" label="nadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q339264" start="183" end="188" title="true north" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q667" start="193" end="198" title="south" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="213" end="220" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="232" end="245" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="253" end="270" title="celestial equator" label="celestial equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q15736718" start="345" end="361" title="pencil of planes" label="pencil of planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="382" end="408" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s rotation axis" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s rotation axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="473" end="487" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="meridian plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="607" end="628" title="geographical meridian" label="geographical meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="673" end="687" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="790" end="806" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="814" end="832" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="celestial meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133242" start="913" end="923" title="semicircle" label="semicircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="963" end="977" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="upper meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="1078" end="1092" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="lower meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625696" start="1195" end="1223" title="horizontal coordinate system" label="horizontal coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="1258" end="1272" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="local meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195520" start="1552" end="1564" title="diurnal motion" label="drift across"/>
<link wikidata="Q611114" start="1684" end="1695" title="culmination" label="culmination"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="1795" end="1810" title="right ascension" label="right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q191747" start="1825" end="1838" title="sidereal time" label="sidereal time"/>
<link wikidata="Q734439" start="1897" end="1907" title="hour angle" label="hour angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="2103" end="2122" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="2140" end="2160" title="Meridian (geography)" label="Meridian (geography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="2163" end="2187" title="Prime meridian (planets)" label="Prime meridian (planets)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362234" start="2190" end="2204" title="Prime vertical" label="Prime vertical"/>
<link wikidata="Q106867959" start="2256" end="2275" title="Longitude (planets)" label="Longitude (planets)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629028" wikidata="Q32099" url="?curid=629028" title="Meridian (geography)">
<text>In geography and geodesy, a meridian is the locus connecting points of equal longitude, which is the angle (in degrees or other units) east or west of a given prime meridian (currently, the IERS Reference Meridian). In other words, it is a coordinate line for longitudes, a line of longitude. The position of a point along the meridian at a given longitude is given by its latitude, measured in angular degrees north or south of the Equator. On a Mercator projection or on a Gall-Peters projection, each meridian is perpendicular to all circles of latitude. Assuming a spherical Earth, a meridian is a great semicircle on Earth&#x27;s surface. Adopting instead a spheroidal or ellipsoid model of Earth, the meridian is half of a north-south great ellipse. The length of a meridian is twice the length of an Earth quadrant, equal to on a modern ellipsoid (WGS 84).

== Pre-Greenwich ==
The first prime meridian was set by Eratosthenes in 200 BC. This prime meridian was used to provide measurement of the earth, but had many problems because of the lack of latitude measurement. Many years later around the 19th century there were still concerns of the prime meridian. Multiple locations for the geographical meridian meant that there was inconsistency, because each country had their own guidelines for where the prime meridian was located.

==Etymology==

The term &quot;meridian&quot; comes from the Latin &quot;meridies&quot;, meaning &quot;midday&quot;; the subsolar point passes through a given meridian at solar noon, midway between the times of sunrise and sunset on that meridian. Likewise, the Sun crosses the celestial meridian at the same time. The same Latin stem gives rise to the terms a.m. (ante meridiem) and p.m. (post meridiem) used to disambiguate hours of the day when utilizing the 12-hour clock.

==International Meridian Conference==

Because of a growing international economy, there was a demand for a set international prime meridian to make it easier for worldwide traveling which would, in turn, enhance international trading across countries. As a result, a Conference was held in 1884, in Washington, D.C. Twenty-six countries were present at the International Meridian Conference to vote on an international prime meridian. Ultimately the outcome was as follows: there would be only one prime meridian, the prime meridian was to cross and pass at Greenwich (which was the 0°), there would be two longitude direction up to 180° (east being plus and west being minus), there will be a universal day, and the day begins at the mean midnight of the initial meridian.

== Geographic ==
 Toward the ending of the 12th century there were two main locations that were acknowledged as the geographic location of the meridian, France and Britain. These two locations often conflicted and a settlement was reached only after there was an International Meridian Conference held, in which Greenwich was recognized as the 0° location.

The meridian through Greenwich (inside Greenwich Park), England, called the Prime Meridian, was set at zero degrees of longitude, while other meridians were defined by the angle at the center of the Earth between where it and the prime meridian cross the equator. As there are 360 degrees in a circle, the meridian on the opposite side of the Earth from Greenwich, the antimeridian, forms the other half of a circle with the one through Greenwich, and is at 180° longitude near the International Date Line (with land mass and island deviations for boundary reasons). The meridians from Greenwich (0°) west to the antimeridian (180°) define the Western Hemisphere and the meridians from Greenwich (0°) east to the antimeridian (180°) define the Eastern Hemisphere. Most maps show the lines of longitude.

The position of the prime meridian has changed a few times throughout history, mainly due to the transit observatory being built next door to the previous one (to maintain the service to shipping). Such changes had no significant practical effect. Historically, the average error in the determination of longitude was much larger than the change in position. The adoption of World Geodetic System 84&quot; (WGS84) as the positioning system has moved the geodetic prime meridian 102.478 metres east of its last astronomic position (measured at Greenwich). The position of the current geodetic prime meridian is not identified at all by any kind of sign or marking at Greenwich (as the older astronomic position was), but can be located using a GPS receiver.

== Effect of Prime Meridian (Greenwich Time) ==
It was in the best interests of the nations to agree to one standard meridian to benefit their fast growing economy and production. The disorganized system they had before was not sufficient for their increasing mobility. The coach services in England had erratic timing before the GWT. United States and Canada were also improving their railroad system and needed a standard time as well. With a standard meridian, stage coach and trains were able to be more efficient. The argument of which meridian is more scientific was set aside in order to find the most convenient for practical reasons. They were also able to agree that the universal day was going to be the mean solar day. They agreed that the days would begin at midnight and the universal day would not impact the use of local time. A report was submitted to the &quot;Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada&quot;, dated 10 May 1894; on the &quot;Unification of the Astronomical, Civil and Nautical Days&quot;; which stated that:
:civil day- begins at midnight and ends at midnight following,
:astronomical day- begins at noon of civil day and continue until following noon, and
:nautical day- concludes at noon of civil day, starting at preceding noon.

== Magnetic meridian ==
The magnetic meridian is an equivalent imaginary line connecting the magnetic south and north poles and can be taken as the horizontal component of magnetic force lines along the surface of the Earth. Therefore, a compass needle will be parallel to the magnetic meridian. However, a compass needle will not be steady in the magnetic meridian, because of the longitude from east to west being complete geodesic. The angle between the magnetic and the true meridian is the magnetic declination, which is relevant for navigating with a compass. Navigators were able to use the azimuth (the horizontal angle or direction of a compass bearing) of the rising and setting Sun to measure the magnetic variation (difference between magnetic and true north).

== True meridian ==
The true meridian is the chord that goes from one pole to the other, passing through the observer, and is contrasted with the magnetic meridian, which goes through the &quot;magnetic&quot; poles and the observer. The true meridian can be found by careful astronomical observations, and the magnetic meridian is simply parallel to the compass needle. The arithmetic difference between the true and magnetic meridian is called the magnetic declination, which is important for the calibration of compasses.

Henry D. Thoreau classified this true meridian versus the magnetic meridian in order to have a more qualitative, intuitive, and abstract function. He used the true meridian since his compass varied by a few degrees. There were some variations. When he noted the sight line for the True Meridian from his family&#x27;s house to the depot, he could check the declination of his compass before and after surveying throughout the day. He noted this variation down.

== Meridian passage ==
The meridian passage is the moment when a celestial object passes the meridian of longitude of the observer. At this point, the celestial object is at its highest point. When the Sun passes two times an altitude while rising and setting can be averaged to give the time of meridian passage. Navigators utilized the Sun&#x27;s declination and the Sun&#x27;s altitude at local meridian passage, in order to calculate their latitude with the formula.

Latitude = (90° – noon altitude + declination)

The declination of major stars are their angles north and south from the celestial equator. The meridian passage will not occur exactly at 12 hours because of the Earth orbit excentricity (see Equation of time).

== Standard meridian ==
A standard meridian is a meridian used for determining standard time. For instance, the 30th meridian east (UTC+02:00) is the standard meridian for Eastern European Time. Since the adoption of time zones – as opposed to local mean time or solar time – in the late 19th century and early 20th century, most countries have adopted the standard time of one of the 24 meridians closest to their geographical position, as decided by the International Meridian Conference in 1884. Although, a few time zones are offset by an additional 30 or 45 minutes, such as in the Chatham Islands, South Australia and Nepal.

== Measurement of Earth rotation ==
Many of these instruments rely on the ability to measure the longitude and latitude of the Earth. These instruments also were typically affected by local gravity, which paired well with existing technologies such as the magnetic meridian.

==See also==
* Meridian (astronomy)
* Meridian arc
* Prime meridian
* Meridian Centre
* Principal meridian
** Public Land Survey System, United States
** Dominion Land Survey, Canada

== References ==
==External links==

* The Principal Meridian Project (US)
* Resources page of the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="3" end="12" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="17" end="24" title="geodesy" label="geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="28" end="36" title="Meridian (geography)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211548" start="44" end="49" title="locus (mathematics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="77" end="86" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="101" end="106" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="111" end="118" title="degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="128" end="133" title="angular units" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="159" end="173" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333287" start="190" end="213" title="IERS Reference Meridian" label="IERS Reference Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="240" end="255" title="coordinate line" label="coordinate line"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="274" end="291" title="Meridian (geography)" label="line of longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="373" end="381" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="433" end="440" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="447" end="466" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123" start="475" end="497" title="Gall-Peters projection" label="Gall-Peters projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="516" end="529" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="537" end="556" title="circle of latitude" label="circles of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349283" start="569" end="584" title="spherical Earth" label="spherical Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q146657" start="602" end="618" title="great semicircle" label="great semicircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335878" start="677" end="692" title="Earth ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600352" start="741" end="754" title="great ellipse" label="great ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="807" end="821" title="Earth quadrant" label="Earth quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="855" end="861" title="World Geodetic System" label="WGS 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="895" end="909" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="921" end="933" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399772" start="1462" end="1476" title="subsolar point" label="subsolar point"/>
<link wikidata="Q168182" start="1518" end="1522" title="noon" label="noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1603" end="1606" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="1619" end="1637" title="meridian (astronomy)" label="celestial meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209499" start="1700" end="1745" title="12-hour clock" label="a.m. (ante meridiem) and p.m. (post meridiem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209499" start="1803" end="1816" title="12-hour clock" label="12-hour clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194993" start="2177" end="2210" title="International Meridian Conference" label="International Meridian Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="2974" end="3007" title="Royal Greenwich Observatory" label="Greenwich (inside Greenwich Park)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131108" start="3029" end="3043" title="Prime meridian (Greenwich)" label="Prime Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="3234" end="3241" title="Degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q838283" start="3411" end="3425" title="180° longitude" label="180° longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="3435" end="3458" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="3597" end="3615" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="3697" end="3715" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4132" end="4156" title="World Geodetic System#WGS84" label="World Geodetic System 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928951" start="4211" end="4219" title="Satellite geodesy" label="geodetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751404" start="4267" end="4277" title="Geodetic astronomy" label="astronomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043682" start="5887" end="5892" title="South magnetic pole" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q842763" start="5897" end="5908" title="North magnetic pole" label="north poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="5944" end="5953" title="Component (vector)" label="component"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="6023" end="6037" title="compass needle" label="compass needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="6210" end="6218" title="geodesic" label="geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243289" start="6280" end="6300" title="magnetic declination" label="magnetic declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q243289" start="7008" end="7028" title="magnetic declination" label="magnetic declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="7084" end="7100" title="Henry D. Thoreau" label="Henry D. Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q186058" start="8259" end="8275" title="Equation of time" label="Equation of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777301" start="8358" end="8371" title="standard time" label="standard time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277379" start="8391" end="8409" title="30th meridian east" label="30th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8411" end="8420" title="UTC+02:00" label="UTC+02:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q190252" start="8451" end="8472" title="Eastern European Time" label="Eastern European Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q219919" start="8523" end="8538" title="local mean time" label="local mean time"/>
<link wikidata="Q192854" start="8542" end="8552" title="solar time" label="solar time"/>
<link wikidata="Q115459" start="8866" end="8881" title="Chatham Islands" label="Chatham Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q187180" start="8883" end="8898" title="Time in Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297477" start="8903" end="8908" title="Time in Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="9202" end="9222" title="Meridian (astronomy)" label="Meridian (astronomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="9225" end="9237" title="Meridian arc" label="Meridian arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="9240" end="9254" title="Prime meridian" label="Prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511683" start="9257" end="9272" title="Meridian Centre" label="Meridian Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245083" start="9275" end="9293" title="Principal meridian" label="Principal meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257433" start="9297" end="9322" title="Public Land Survey System" label="Public Land Survey System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291060" start="9341" end="9361" title="Dominion Land Survey" label="Dominion Land Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629030" wikidata="Q444411" url="?curid=629030" title="Hughes Tool Company">
<text>Hughes Tool Company was an American manufacturer of drill bits. Founded in 1908, it was merged into Baker Hughes Incorporated in 1987.

==History==
The company was established in December 1908 as Sharp-Hughes Tool Company when Howard R. Hughes Sr. patented a roller cutter bit that dramatically improved the rotary drilling process for oil drilling rigs. He partnered with longtime business associate Walter Benona Sharp to manufacture and market the bit. Following her husband&#x27;s death in 1912, Sharp&#x27;s widow Estelle Sharp sold her 50% share in the company to Howard Hughes Sr. in 1914. The company was renamed Hughes Tool Company on February 3, 1915.

After Hughes Sr. died of a heart attack in 1924, his son Howard Jr. inherited the majority interest in the company, and then convinced his relatives to sell their shares to him as well. Legally emancipated at the age of 18, Howard began using the profits from Hughes Tool to fund his other ventures. Toolco paid Hughes an annual salary of $50,000, and Hughes charged all major expenses such as planes, automobiles, and houses, to the company. In 1937, Hughes used Hughes Tool to buy a controlling interest in TWA.

In 1932, Hughes formed Hughes Aircraft Company as a division of the Hughes Tool Company. Hughes Aircraft thrived on wartime contracts during World War II (though not on the only two contracts it received to actually build airplanes), and by the early 1950s was one of America&#x27;s largest defense contractors and aerospace companies with revenues far outpacing the original oil tools business. In 1953, Hughes Aircraft became a separate company and was donated to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute as its endowment. Hughes Aircraft&#x27;s helicopter manufacturing business was retained by Hughes Tool Co. as its Aircraft Division until 1972.

At the end of Prohibition in the United States, Hughes agreed to construct a brewery on company property. Gulf Brewing Co. brewed Grand Prize beer for a number of years.

For a period of time in the 1940s to late-1950s, Hughes Tool owned the RKO companies, including RKO Pictures, RKO Studios, RKO Theatres, and the RKO Radio Network.

In 1946, Hughes gave Noah Dietrich &quot;full charge at Toolco.&quot; Dietrich hired Fred Ayers to bring order to the production line, and Dietrich invested more than $5,000,000 of the company reserves modernizing the plant. Automation replaced handiwork, and the company standardized on drill bit sizes, while embarking on an advertising campaign. The company also opened plants in Ireland and West Germany, taking advantage of cheaper labor, and lower transportation costs to clients in Saudi Arabia and Russia. Profits for the next 8 years amounted to $285,000,000.

During the early 1960s, a wholly owned subsidiary Hughes Dynamics was created, that offered consulting and services in data processing, information technology, credit information processing, and advanced business techniques and management methods. After some $9.5 million of Hughes Tool money was invested in it, results were deemed not acceptable, and it was quickly shut down.

For a brief period in the early-1960s, Hughes Tool held a minority stake in Northeast Airlines. Hughes Tool&#x27;s majority stake in TWA was sold off in 1966. Two years later, in 1968, Hughes Tool Company purchased the North Las Vegas Air Terminal.

In the late-1960s, Hughes Tool ventured into the hotel and casino business with the acquisition of the Sands, Castaways, Landmark, Frontier, Silver Slipper, and Desert Inn, all in Las Vegas. Hughes Tool also purchased KLAS-TV, Las Vegas&#x27; CBS affiliate. In the early-1970s, Hughes Tool ventured back into the airline industry with the takeover of the largest regional air carrier in the western United States: Air West, renamed Hughes Airwest following the purchase. Hughes Tool also briefly owned Los Angeles Airways, a small airline operating a commuter service with a fleet of helicopters.

In 1968, Hughes Tool purchased Sports Network Incorporated and renamed it the Hughes Television Network, with Dick Bailey continuing as president.

The huge main plant for Hughes Tool located in Houston, Texas, fronting Polk Ave, had grown to be one of the biggest oil tool manufacturers in the world. It had the latest, largest, and most automated equipment for foundries, forging, heat treating, and machining anywhere. At its peak during the Texas oil boom, it was a center for manufacturing, design, research, metallurgy, and engineering for oil field technologies. This included the drill bit (well) and tool joint product lines critical for oil and gas drilling, some of the first technologies for ram blast bits for drilling in mines, geothermal drilling, and a hydraulic powered jackhammer known as the Hughes Impactor. It also manufactured a line of truck and crane-mounted earth augering machines (&quot;diggers&quot;) that were most commonly used to produce holes up to a depth of about for building and bridge foundations. It even had a fully functioning drilling simulator inside its main research lab where production or prototype drill bits could be tested on any kind of rock at temperatures and pressures normally encountered in actual drilling operations.

In 1972, Howard Hughes sold the Hughes Tool Company; it had been the consistently profitable part of his empire, and produced the profits that built all the rest from the very beginning. This became the &quot;new&quot; Hughes Tool Company while the remaining divisions of the business were placed in a new holding company, the Summa Corporation.

During the 1979 visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States, Deng visited the company&#x27;s Houston plant.

Hughes Tool Company merged with Baker International to form Baker Hughes Incorporated in 1987.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q444411" start="0" end="19" title="Hughes Tool Company" label="Hughes Tool Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q335283" start="52" end="62" title="drill bits" label="drill bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="100" end="125" title="Baker Hughes" label="Baker Hughes Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q164075" start="227" end="247" title="Howard R. Hughes Sr." label="Howard R. Hughes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q890886" start="315" end="323" title="drilling" label="drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688575" start="340" end="352" title="drilling rig" label="drilling rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964289" start="401" end="420" title="Walter Benona Sharp" label="Walter Benona Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="1172" end="1175" title="Trans World Airlines" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="1201" end="1224" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512226" start="1648" end="1679" title="Howard Hughes Medical Institute" label="Howard Hughes Medical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="1839" end="1871" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="2092" end="2104" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276885" start="2141" end="2158" title="RKO Radio Network" label="RKO Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994618" start="2182" end="2195" title="Noah Dietrich" label="Noah Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674244" start="2781" end="2796" title="Hughes Dynamics" label="Hughes Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642115" start="3187" end="3205" title="Northeast Airlines" label="Northeast Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5807775" start="3330" end="3358" title="North Las Vegas Airport" label="North Las Vegas Air Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107391" start="3464" end="3469" title="Sands Hotel" label="Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049620" start="3471" end="3480" title="Castaways (casino)" label="Castaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745429" start="3482" end="3490" title="The Landmark Hotel and Casino" label="Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150966" start="3492" end="3500" title="New Frontier Hotel and Casino" label="Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516318" start="3502" end="3516" title="Silver Slipper (Las Vegas)" label="Silver Slipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200583" start="3522" end="3532" title="Desert Inn" label="Desert Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="3541" end="3550" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332381" start="3579" end="3586" title="KLAS-TV" label="KLAS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3604" end="3607" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933323" start="3793" end="3807" title="Hughes Airwest" label="Hughes Airwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681946" start="3863" end="3882" title="Los Angeles Airways" label="Los Angeles Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933449" start="4037" end="4062" title="Hughes Television Network" label="Hughes Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="4154" end="4161" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707889" start="4404" end="4418" title="Texas oil boom" label="Texas oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048051" start="4547" end="4563" title="drill bit (well)" label="drill bit (well)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4663" end="4676" title="ram blast bit" label="ram blast bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365511" start="4701" end="4720" title="geothermal drilling" label="geothermal drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766" start="4746" end="4756" title="jackhammer" label="jackhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108049" start="5561" end="5578" title="Summa Corporation" label="Summa Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494823" start="5597" end="5640" title="visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States" label="visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="5642" end="5646" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="5710" end="5716" title="merger" label="merged"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317420" start="5722" end="5741" title="Baker International" label="Baker International"/>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="5750" end="5775" title="Baker Hughes" label="Baker Hughes Incorporated"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629032" wikidata="Q3272182" url="?curid=629032" title="Axel Möller">
<text>Didrik Magnus Axel Möller (16 February 1830 – 25 October 1896) was a Swedish astronomer.

He matriculated as a student at Lund University in 1846, received his Ph.D. in 1853 and was Professor of Astronomy there from 1863 until 1895.

He calculated the orbits of comets and asteroids. He notably calculated the orbit of the periodic comet 4P/Faye, as well as the perturbations of the asteroid 55 Pandora.

He was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1869 and won the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1881.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3272182" start="0" end="25" title="Axel Möller" label="Didrik Magnus Axel Möller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="77" end="87" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="122" end="137" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="262" end="267" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="273" end="281" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422981" start="338" end="345" title="4P/Faye" label="4P/Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="383" end="391" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q107177" start="392" end="402" title="55 Pandora" label="55 Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="436" end="469" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q753072" start="490" end="534" title="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629033" wikidata="Q477823" url="?curid=629033" title="Three Sisters (play)">
<text>Three Sisters () is a play by the Russian author and playwright Anton Chekhov. It was written in 1900 and first performed in 1901 at the Moscow Art Theatre. The play is often included on the shortlist of Chekhov&#x27;s outstanding plays, along with &quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot;, &quot;The Seagull&quot; and &quot;Uncle Vanya&quot;.

==Characters==
===The Prozorovs===
* Olga Sergeyevna Prozorova (Olga) – The eldest of the three sisters, she is the matriarchal figure of the Prozorov family, though at the beginning of the play she is only 28 years old. Olga is a teacher at the high school, where she frequently fills in for the headmistress whenever the latter is absent. Olga is a spinster and at one point tells Irina that she would have married &quot;any man, even an old man if he had asked&quot; her. Olga is very motherly even to the elderly servants, keeping on the elderly nurse/retainer Anfisa, long after she has ceased to be useful. When Olga reluctantly takes the role of headmistress permanently, she takes Anfisa with her to escape the clutches of the heartless Natasha.
* Maria Sergeyevna Kulygina (Masha) – The middle sister, she is 23 at the beginning of the play. She married her husband, Kulygin, when she was 18 and just out of school. When the play opens she has been disappointed in the marriage and falls completely in love with the idealistic Lieutenant-Colonel Vershinin. They begin a clandestine affair. When he is transferred away, she is crushed, but returns to life with her husband, who accepts her back despite knowing what she has done. She has a short temper, which is seen frequently throughout the play, and is the sister who disapproves the most of Natasha. Onstage, her directness often serves as a tonic to the melodrama, and her ironic wit comes across as heroic She provides much of the humour. She was trained as a concert pianist.
* Irina Sergeyevna Prozorova – The youngest sister, she is 20 at the beginning of the play. It is her &quot;name day&quot; at the beginning of the play and though she insists she is grown-up she is still enchanted by things such as a spinning top brought to her by Fedotik. Her only desire is to go back to Moscow, which they left eleven years before the play begins. She believes she will find her true love in Moscow, but when it becomes clear that they are not going to Moscow, she agrees to marry the Baron Tuzenbach, whom she admires but does not love. She gets her teaching degree and plans to leave with the Baron, but he is shot and killed by the psychopath Solyony in a pointless duel. She decides to leave anyway and dedicate her life to work and service.
* Andrei Sergeyevich Prozorov (Andrey) – The brother of the three sisters. In Act I, he is a young man on the fast track to becoming a faculty professor in Moscow. However, his inertia, weak-willed indecisiveness, and poor judgment (all of which will become apparent throughout the play) put paid to those dreams. In Act II, he still longs for his old days as a bachelor dreaming of life in Moscow, but is now, due to his fatefully ill-conceived wedding to Natasha, stuck in a provincial town with a baby and a job as secretary to the County Council. In Act III, his debts have grown to 35,000 rubles and he is forced to mortgage the house, but does not tell his sisters or give them any shares in the family home. Act IV finds Andrei a pathetic shell of his former self, now the father of two (although he may not be the biological father of the younger child). He acknowledges he is a failure and laughed at in town for being a member of the village council whose president, Protopopov (never seen onstage), is cuckolding him.
* Natalia Ivanovna Prozorov (Natasha) – Andrei&#x27;s love interest, later his wife. She begins the play as an awkward young woman who dresses poorly and is ridiculed and teased by Andrei&#x27;s sisters. Much fun is made of her ill-becoming green sash and she bursts into tears. She &quot;apparently&quot; has no family of her own, although not known to be an orphan (a signal that she cares for no one but herself) and the reader never learns her maiden name. She agrees to marry Andrei despite seemingly being surprised by the proposal. Act II finds a very different Natasha. She has grown bossy and flagrantly carries on an affair with Protopopov, the president of the council on which her husband sits bureaucratic superior, and who may well be the biological father of her younger child, especially since she has bustled Andrei out of their bedroom into more modest quarters. In Act III, she has become even more controlling. She is determined, among other things, to expel the sisters&#x27; now elderly former family retainer, Anfisa, who is no longer fit for hard work, and still throws temper tantrums whenever she doesn&#x27;t get her way, an increasingly rare event. Act IV finds that she has control of the house, and, as the châtelaine, is planning to radically change the grounds to her liking. Inarguably, she is the victor by the end of the play — caring for no one besides her own children, Bobik and Sofia, upon whom she dotes. The only woman in the play with children, she rules the Prozorov&#x27;s now mortgaged (to pay for her husband&#x27;s debts and her expensive tastes) former family home with an iron fist. She orders the sisters&#x27; beloved trees in the garden to be cut down because she thinks them ugly.
* Fyodor Ilyich Kulygin – Masha&#x27;s older husband and the Latin teacher at the high school. Kulygin is a cheerful man, extremely learned but often unaware of the emotions of the people around him. In the first act he seems almost foolish, but begins to grow more and more sympathetic as Masha&#x27;s affair with Vershinin progresses. Even as Kulygin becomes aware of Masha&#x27;s infidelity, he continues to make gestures of affection towards her, and never confronts or condemns her. He does, however, consider it improper for her to play the piano in public. During the fire in Act 3, he confesses to Olga that he might have married her instead; the idea that the two might have been happier together is hinted at many times during the play. Throughout the play, even at the most serious moments, he tries to make the other characters laugh with abstruse academic humour that often falls flat. Despite this, he is able to give his wife comfort through humour in her darkest hour when she loses her lover. At the end of the play, knowing what Masha has done, he asks her to come back to him and promises not to say a word about what has passed.

===The soldiers===

* Aleksandr Ignatyevich Vershinin – Lieutenant colonel commanding the artillery battery, Vershinin is a true philosopher. He knew the sisters&#x27; father in Moscow; when they were little they called him the &quot;Lovesick Major&quot;. He married the woman he was lovesick for, but the marriage has become unhappy. His wife regularly attempts suicide, but he does not change his behaviour. In the course of the play, he enters into an affair with Masha which only ends when his company is transferred out. His first act speech about the hope he has for civilization speaks directly to Masha&#x27;s melancholic heart, and, upon hearing it, she declares &quot;I&#x27;m staying for lunch.&quot;
* Baron Nikolaj Lvovich Tuzenbach – A lieutenant in the army and not deemed handsome, Tuzenbach often tries to impress Irina, whom he has loved for five years. He quits the Army to go to work in an attempt to impress her. When Irina finally agrees to marry him, Tuzenbach becomes the object of Solyony&#x27;s murderous jealousy. Solyony taunts him to provoke him, and between Acts III and IV, he retaliates and challenges Solyony to a duel. He is killed in the duel on the day before he was to marry Irina.
* Staff Captain Vassily Vasilyevich Solyony – A captain in the army and an experienced duellist, Solyony is a social misfit, prone to sudden outbursts of rage, mockery, misogyny and vulgarity. He spends much of his time mocking Tuzenbach, who is the closest thing he has to a friend. Solyony becomes infatuated with Irina and awkwardly declares his feelings to her, but becomes angry and sexually aggressive when Irina rejects him. He swears to kill anyone who gets close to her, and in the final act he fulfills this promise by provoking Tuzenbach into a duel and shooting him. Solyony claims to have a remarkable resemblance to the poet Lermontov in both face and personality, often quoting him, although Lermontov was killed in a duel by refusing to fire at his opponent, Nikolai Martynov, who aimed at Lermontov&#x27;s heart. Thus, Solyony turns out to be the polar opposite of Lermontov in actual character and closer to Martynov. He always carries a small perfume bottle which he frequently (almost pathologically) sprinkles his hands and body with; it is later revealed that he does it to mask the smell of corpses on him.
* Ivan Romanovich Chebutykin – Sixty years old and an army doctor, Chebutykin starts off as a fun, eccentric old man who exults in his place as family friend and lavishes upon Irina the expensive but inappropriate gift of a samovar. Later on in Act III, while drunk, he suffers an existential crisis and loudly reveals to all Natasha&#x27;s and Protopopov&#x27;s affair. In Act IV however, he seems to have come to terms with his crisis or perhaps been broken by it. He was in love, apparently unrequitedly, with the Prozorov siblings&#x27; mother, a married woman.
* Alexei Petrovich Fedotik – A sub-lieutenant, Fedotik hangs around the house buying many gifts for the family. He also is an amateur photographer, and takes photos of the group. In Act III, he loses all his belongings in the fire, but retains his cheerful nature.
* Vladimir Karlovich Rode – Another sub-lieutenant, Rode is a drill coach at the high school.

===Others===
* Ferapont – Door-keeper at the local council offices, Ferapont is an old man with a partial hearing loss. He repeatedly blurts out random facts, usually relating to Moscow.
* Anfisa – An elderly family retainer and former nurse, Anfisa is 81 years old and has worked forever for the Prozorov family. Natasha begins to despise her for her feebleness and threatens to throw her out but Olga rescues her, taking her to live at Olga&#x27;s teacher&#x27;s flat.

===Unseen characters===
The play has several important characters who are talked about frequently, but never seen onstage. These include Protopopov, head of the local Council and Natasha&#x27;s lover; Vershinin&#x27;s suicidal wife and two daughters; Kulygin&#x27;s beloved superior the headmaster of the high school, and Natasha&#x27;s children (Bobik and Sofia). JL Styan contends in his &quot;The Elements of Drama&quot; that in the last act Chekhov revised the text to show that Protopopov is the real father of Sofia: &quot;The children are to be tended by their respective fathers&quot; — Andrey pushes Bobik in his pram, and Protopopov sits with Sofia.

==Synopsis==
=== Act I===
Olga (the eldest sister) has worked as a schoolteacher and after school tutor for four years. Masha, middle sister and artist of the family (trained as a concert pianist), is married to Feodor Kulygin, a schoolteacher. Masha, younger than he, was enchanted by his wisdom but seven years later she sees through his pedantry and attempts to compensate for the emptiness between them. Irina, the youngest sister, is still full of expectation, speaking of going to Moscow and meeting her true love. The sisters grew up in Moscow, and they all long to return to the happiness of that time. Andrei is the only young man in the family; his sisters adore him. He falls in love with Natalia Ivanovna (&quot;Natasha&quot;), who is rather &quot;common&quot; compared to the sisters and regarded by them with disdain. The play begins on the first anniversary of the death of their father, Sergei Prozorov. It is also Irina&#x27;s name-day, and everyone, including the soldiers (led by Vershinin) bringing with them a sense of noble idealism, come together to celebrate it. At the close of the act, Andrei confesses his feelings to Natasha, and proposes.

=== Act II===
Almost a year later, Andrei and Natasha are married with their baby (offstage), a son named Bobik. Natasha is having an affair with Protopopov, Andrei&#x27;s superior, who is never seen onstage. Masha comes home flushed from a night out, and it is clear that she and her companion, Lieutenant-Colonel Vershinin, are giddy with their mutual love for one another. Natasha manipulatively quashes the plans for a party in the home; the resultant quiet suggests that happiness is being quashed as well. Tuzenbach and Solyony both declare their love for Irina.

=== Act III ===
About a year later in Olga and Irina&#x27;s room—a clear sign that Natasha is taking over the household, as she asked them to share a room so that Bobik could have a separate room. There has been a fire in the town, and people are passing in and out, carrying materials to give aid. Olga, Masha and Irina are angry with Andrei for mortgaging their home without their knowledge or consent, keeping the money to pay off his gambling debts and ceding all power over the household to Natasha. Natasha is cruel to the aged family retainer, Anfisa, but Olga&#x27;s best efforts to counter this fail. Masha, alone with her sisters, tells them of her romance with Vershinin. At one point, Kulygin blunders into the room, doting foolishly on Masha, and she leaves. Irina despairs at the turn her life has taken, the life of a municipal worker, and rails at the folly of her aspirations. Supported by Olga&#x27;s realistic outlook, Irina decides to accept Tuzenbach&#x27;s offer of marriage although she does not love him. Andrei vents his self-hatred, acknowledges his awareness of his folly and his disappointment in Natasha, and begs his sisters&#x27; forgiveness for everything.

=== Act IV ===
The soldiers are preparing to leave the area. A photograph is taken. There is tension because Solyony has challenged Tuzenbach to a duel. Solyony had told Irina that he would kill any successful suitor for her hand, but she still agreed to marry Tuzenbach, notwithstanding which she confesses that she cannot love him. Tuzenbach, having left the Army, is under no obligation to agree to the duel but does so anyway, losing his life for what would have been a loveless marriage. As the soldiers are leaving, a shot is heard, and Tuzenbach&#x27;s death in the duel is announced shortly before the end of the play.

Masha has to be pulled, sobbing, from Vershinin&#x27;s arms, but her husband compassionately asks that they start again. Olga has reluctantly accepted the position of permanent headmistress of the school where she teaches and is moving out. She is taking Anfisa with her, rescuing the elderly woman from Natasha.

Irina&#x27;s fate is uncertain but, even in her grief at Tuzenbach&#x27;s death, she wants to persevere as a teacher. Natasha remains as the , in charge of everything. Andrei is stuck in his marriage with two children, unwilling and unable to do anything for his wife or himself. As the play closes, the three sisters stand in a desperate embrace, gazing off as the soldiers depart to the sound of marching music. As Chebutykin sings &quot;Ta-ra-ra-boom-di-ay&quot; to himself, Olga&#x27;s final lines seek an end to the confusion the sisters feel at life&#x27;s sufferings and joy: &quot;If we only knew... If we only knew.&quot;

==Premiere==
The play was written for the Moscow Art Theatre and it opened on 31 January 1901, under the direction of Konstantin Stanislavski and Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko. Stanislavski played Vershinin and the sisters were Olga Knipper (for whom Chekhov wrote the part of Masha), Margarita Savitskaya as Olga and Maria Andreyeva as Irina. Maria Lilina (Stanislavski&#x27;s wife) was Natasha, Vsevolod Meyerhold appeared as Tusenbach, Mikhail Gromov as Solyony, Alexander Artyom as Artem Chebutykin, Ioasaf Tikhomirov as Fedotik, Ivan Moskvin as Rode, Vladimir Gribunin as Ferapont, and Maria Samarova as Anfisa.

Reception was mixed. Chekhov felt that Stanislavski&#x27;s &quot;exuberant&quot; direction had masked the subtleties of the work and that only Knipper had shown her character developing in the manner the playwright had intended. In the directors&#x27; view, the point was to show the hopes, aspirations and dreams of the characters, but audiences were affected by the pathos of the sisters&#x27; loneliness and desperation and by their eventual, uncomplaining acceptance of their situation. Nonetheless the piece proved popular and soon it became established in the company&#x27;s repertoire.

==Notable productions==
* John Gielgud&#x27;s 1936–37 landmark season at the Queen&#x27;s Theatre included a well-received production with Peggy Ashcroft as Irina and Michael Redgrave as Tusenbach.
* In 1942, Judith Anderson portrayed Olga, Katharine Cornell portrayed Masha, Gertrude Musgrove portrayed Irina, and Ruth Gordon portrayed Natasha on Broadway. The production was significant enough to land the cast on the cover of &quot;Time&quot; on 21 December 1942, which proclaimed it &quot;a dream production by anybody&#x27;s reckoning – the most glittering cast the theatre has seen, commercially, in this generation&quot;.
* The 1963 inaugural season of the Guthrie Theater included a production with Jessica Tandy as Olga. 
* There is a filmed record of a mid-1960s production by The Actors Studio with Kim Stanley and Geraldine Page as Masha and Olga, respectively, supported by Sandy Dennis&#x27;s Irina and Shelley Winters as Natasha.
* American Film Theatre in 1970 filmed a version with a witty Masha from Joan Plowright opposite Alan Bates as Vershinin, with Ronald Pickup as Tusenbach and Laurence Olivier, who co-directed, playing Chebutykin. The film was based on a theatre production that Olivier directed at the National Theatre in 1967.
* Rosemary Harris, Ellen Burstyn and Tovah Feldshuh played, respectively, Olga, Masha and Irina at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the 1970s with René Auberjonois as Solyony.
* A 1982 production at Manhattan Theatre Club, had Dianne Wiest as Masha, Lisa Banes as Olga, Mia Dillon as Irina, Christine Ebersole as Natasha, Sam Waterston as Vershinin, Jeff Daniels as Andrei, Bob Balaban as Tusenbach, and Jack Gilford as Chebutykin.
* Chicago&#x27;s Steppenwolf Theatre Company put one together under the direction of Austin Pendleton, with Molly Regan as Olga, Joan Allen as Masha, Rondi Reed as Natasha, and Kevin Anderson as Solyony.
* In 1985 Casper Wrede directed a production at the Royal Exchange, Manchester with Cheryl Prime as Natasha, Emma Piper as Olga, Janet McTeer as Masha, Niamh Cusack as Irina and Espen Skjønberg as Dr Chebutykin.
* The Roundabout Theatre in New York had Jerry Stiller as Chebutykin, Billy Crudup as Solyony, Eric Stoltz as Tuzenbach, Lili Taylor as Irina, Paul Giamatti as Andrei, Amy Irving as Olga, Jeanne Tripplehorn as Masha, Calista Flockhart as Natasha, and David Strathairn as Vershinin.
* In 1990, the Irish theatrical dynasty, the Cusacks, were cast in the play, in a new version by Frank McGuinness, which opened at the Gate Theatre in Dublin with the three award-winning sisters Sinéad Cusack (Masha), Sorcha Cusack (Olga) and Niamh Cusack (Irina) in the title rôles and their father Cyril Cusack as Dr. Chebutykin. This is the only production ever to cast three &#x27;real&#x27; sisters, professional actors in their own right, in the title rôles. The production, which was directed by the then newly appointed Artistic Director of the Royal Shakespeare Company, Adrian Noble, transferred to London&#x27;s Royal Court Theatre for a sell-out season in 1991. Amongst the supporting cast were Lesley Manville as Natasha and Finbar Lynch as Tusenbach.
* In 1991, sisters Vanessa Redgrave (Olga) and Lynn Redgrave (Masha) made their first and only appearance together onstage in this, with niece Jemma Redgrave as Irina at the Queen&#x27;s Theatre, London.
* In 1999, &quot;The Thrie Sisters&quot;, a translation into Scots by David Purves was produced by Theatre Alba at Lauriston Halls on the Edinburgh Festival Fringe.
* In 2003, Romanian director adapted the play in a controversial production at the &quot;Andrei Mureșanu&quot; theatre in Sfântu Gheorghe, highly criticized by Michael Billington, but praised by other critics, leading to a local controversy in the Romanian press which would catapult Afrim to national superstardom in Romanian theatre.
* The play was produced in 2010 at the Lyric Hammersmith by Filter with a cast including Poppy Miller, Romola Garai, and Clare Dunne.
* In 2010, the play was adapted by for Theatre na Fidlovačce, Prague as &quot;Tři sestry&quot;. The sisters played Andrea Černá, Zuzana Vejvodová and Martina Randová and other actors were Otakar Brousek ml. as Vershinin, Tomáš Töpfer as Doctor Chebutykin
* In 2012, the play was staged at the Young Vic, directed by Benedict Andrews in his own new version. The cast included Vanessa Kirby, Mariah Gale, and Sam Troughton.
* In 2014, the play was staged at the Southwark Playhouse, directed by Russell Bolam. The cast included Olivia Hallinan, Holliday Grainger, and Paul McGann.
* In 2017, the play was staged at the Studio Theatre directed by Jackson Gay in conjunction with a modern adaption called &quot;No Sisters&quot; directed by Aaron Posner.
* In 2017, the play was staged by Sydney Theatre Company at the Drama Theatre, Sydney Opera House from 6 November — 16 December. The new adaptation was by Andrew Upton and the cast included Alison Bell as Olga, Miranda Daughtry as Irina and Harry Greenwood as Tusenbach.
*In 2019, the play was staged at the Almeida Theatre in London, with Alan Williams playing Ivan Romanovich Chebutykin.

==Adaptations==
* &quot;Three Sisters&quot; has been adapted into a full-length opera by Hungarian composer Péter Eötvös and Claus H. Henneberg, as &quot;Tri sestry (Three Sisters)&quot;. It was premiered at the Opéra National de Lyon in 1998, directed by Ushio Amagatsu, and conducted by Kent Nagano and the composer.
* &quot;Three Sisters on Hope Street&quot;, a 2008 British play co-written by Diane Samuels and Tracy-Ann Oberman, reinterprets Chekhov&#x27;s play by transferring events to Liverpool after World War II and re-casting the Pozorov sisters as three Jewish Englishwomen. It opened at the Everyman Theatre, Liverpool on 25 January 2008 before beginning a second run at the Hampstead Theatre in London.
* In 2011, the play was adapted by Blake Morrison for Northern Broadsides as &quot;We Are Three Sisters&quot;, drawing out parallels with the lives of the Brontë sisters.
* Track 3, a 2013 adaptation of the play created by Theatre Movement Bazaar co-founders, Tina Kronis and Richard Alger. It premiered in Los Angeles and has played in the UK, China, and in 2017 was the first US production in over 25 years to play in the Chekhov International Theatre Festival in Moscow.
* In 2014, an adaptation by John Byrne, set in Dunoon, Scotland, in the middle of the 20th Century, was produced by the Tron Theatre Company, Glasgow.
* &quot;Moscow Moscow Moscow Moscow Moscow Moscow&quot;, a stage adaptation by Halley Feiffer that approaches the story through a contemporary lens, originally premiering in 2017.
* In 2020, an adaptation by Inua Ellams, set in Owerri, Nigeria during the Nigerian Civil War between 1967 and 1970, was staged at the Lyttelton Theatre in London.
*In 2021, an adaptation by Cristina García, &quot;The Palacios Sisters&quot;, set in 1985 Miami with the three sisters newly-arrived from Havana was done as a radionovela. In 2024, it was translated into Spanish as &quot;Las hermanas Palacios&quot; and performed as a stage play at GALA Hispanic Theatre in Washington, DC.
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Oxquarry Books, an English translation of &quot;Three Sisters&quot;
* Project Gutenberg, English translations of several Chekhov plays, including &quot;Three Sisters&quot;
* Full text of &quot;Three Sisters&quot; 
* &quot;Three Sisters&quot; from Czech theatre &#x27;Divadlo na Fidlovačce&#x27;, Prague</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="64" end="77" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345276" start="86" end="101" title="1900 in literature" label="written in 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q840812" start="137" end="155" title="Moscow Art Theatre" label="Moscow Art Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="255" end="273" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q650063" start="287" end="298" title="The Seagull" label="The Seagull"/>
<link wikidata="Q753298" start="315" end="326" title="Uncle Vanya" label="Uncle Vanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q216584" start="1985" end="1993" title="name day" label="name day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23856" start="2111" end="2123" title="spinning top" label="spinning top"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="3178" end="3192" title="County council" label="County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452788" start="3726" end="3739" title="love interest" label="love interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="4120" end="4131" title="Married and maiden names" label="maiden name"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="6612" end="6630" title="Lieutenant colonel" label="Lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46599" start="8414" end="8423" title="Mikhail Lermontov" label="Lermontov"/>
<link wikidata="Q224418" start="9129" end="9136" title="samovar" label="samovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603358" start="9186" end="9204" title="existential crisis" label="existential crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10918728" start="9502" end="9516" title="sub-lieutenant" label="sub-lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="9937" end="9949" title="Hearing impairment" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q216584" start="11908" end="11916" title="name-day" label="name-day"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="12010" end="12018" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672741" start="15275" end="15294" title="Ta-ra-ra Boom-de-ay" label="Ta-ra-ra-boom-di-ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q840812" start="15509" end="15527" title="Moscow Art Theatre" label="Moscow Art Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="15585" end="15608" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Konstantin Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q203860" start="15613" end="15642" title="Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko" label="Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q466584" start="15695" end="15707" title="Olga Knipper" label="Olga Knipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404064" start="15752" end="15772" title="Margarita Savitskaya" label="Margarita Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026593" start="15785" end="15800" title="Maria Andreyeva (actress)" label="Maria Andreyeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261578" start="15811" end="15823" title="Maria Lilina" label="Maria Lilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q165721" start="15864" end="15882" title="Vsevolod Meyerhold" label="Vsevolod Meyerhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070394" start="15933" end="15949" title="Alexander Artyom" label="Alexander Artyom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972072" start="16001" end="16013" title="Ivan Moskvin" label="Ivan Moskvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148959" start="16023" end="16040" title="Vladimir Gribunin" label="Vladimir Gribunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29866969" start="16058" end="16072" title="Maria Samarova" label="Maria Samarova"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="16705" end="16717" title="John Gielgud" label="John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q230832" start="16818" end="16832" title="Peggy Ashcroft" label="Peggy Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q318263" start="16846" end="16862" title="Michael Redgrave" label="Michael Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q230415" start="16888" end="16903" title="Judith Anderson" label="Judith Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q272086" start="16920" end="16937" title="Katharine Cornell" label="Katharine Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q232562" start="16994" end="17005" title="Ruth Gordon" label="Ruth Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="17114" end="17118" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17314" end="17335" title="Guthrie Theater production history#1963" label="1963 inaugural season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027239" start="17343" end="17358" title="Guthrie Theater" label="Guthrie Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q182104" start="17386" end="17399" title="Jessica Tandy" label="Jessica Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259474" start="17489" end="17500" title="Kim Stanley" label="Kim Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q228650" start="17505" end="17519" title="Geraldine Page" label="Geraldine Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q239691" start="17566" end="17578" title="Sandy Dennis" label="Sandy Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202144" start="17596" end="17611" title="Shelley Winters" label="Shelley Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743776" start="17626" end="17647" title="American Film Theatre" label="American Film Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062618" start="17651" end="17672" title="Three Sisters (1970 film)" label="1970 filmed a version"/>
<link wikidata="Q230035" start="17697" end="17711" title="Joan Plowright" label="Joan Plowright"/>
<link wikidata="Q309160" start="17721" end="17731" title="Alan Bates" label="Alan Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356744" start="17751" end="17764" title="Ronald Pickup" label="Ronald Pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="17782" end="17798" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q234195" start="17937" end="17952" title="Rosemary Harris" label="Rosemary Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q211144" start="17954" end="17967" title="Ellen Burstyn" label="Ellen Burstyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q443842" start="17972" end="17986" title="Tovah Feldshuh" label="Tovah Feldshuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="18038" end="18063" title="Brooklyn Academy of Music" label="Brooklyn Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q348445" start="18082" end="18098" title="René Auberjonois" label="René Auberjonois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749316" start="18134" end="18156" title="Manhattan Theatre Club" label="Manhattan Theatre Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q217573" start="18162" end="18174" title="Dianne Wiest" label="Dianne Wiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557799" start="18185" end="18195" title="Lisa Banes" label="Lisa Banes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947385" start="18205" end="18215" title="Mia Dillon" label="Mia Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q437438" start="18226" end="18244" title="Christine Ebersole" label="Christine Ebersole"/>
<link wikidata="Q284876" start="18257" end="18270" title="Sam Waterston" label="Sam Waterston"/>
<link wikidata="Q53680" start="18285" end="18297" title="Jeff Daniels" label="Jeff Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q621490" start="18309" end="18320" title="Bob Balaban" label="Bob Balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q555182" start="18339" end="18351" title="Jack Gilford" label="Jack Gilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611082" start="18384" end="18411" title="Steppenwolf Theatre Company" label="Steppenwolf Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q572004" start="18452" end="18468" title="Austin Pendleton" label="Austin Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q229305" start="18496" end="18506" title="Joan Allen" label="Joan Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365554" start="18517" end="18527" title="Rondi Reed" label="Rondi Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740075" start="18544" end="18558" title="Kevin Anderson (actor)" label="Kevin Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049046" start="18581" end="18593" title="Casper Wrede" label="Casper Wrede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="18623" end="18649" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q232292" start="18700" end="18712" title="Janet McTeer" label="Janet McTeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411986" start="18723" end="18735" title="Niamh Cusack" label="Niamh Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587400" start="18749" end="18764" title="Espen Skjønberg" label="Espen Skjønberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q316857" start="18824" end="18837" title="Jerry Stiller" label="Jerry Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q313650" start="18853" end="18865" title="Billy Crudup" label="Billy Crudup"/>
<link wikidata="Q318267" start="18878" end="18889" title="Eric Stoltz" label="Eric Stoltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q233502" start="18904" end="18915" title="Lili Taylor" label="Lili Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="18926" end="18939" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q235020" start="18951" end="18961" title="Amy Irving" label="Amy Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q120366" start="18971" end="18989" title="Jeanne Tripplehorn" label="Jeanne Tripplehorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26424" start="19000" end="19017" title="Calista Flockhart" label="Calista Flockhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q310318" start="19034" end="19050" title="David Strathairn" label="David Strathairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q370940" start="19162" end="19178" title="Frank McGuinness" label="Frank McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q728893" start="19200" end="19212" title="Gate Theatre" label="Gate Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="19216" end="19222" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q224782" start="19260" end="19273" title="Sinéad Cusack" label="Sinéad Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491160" start="19283" end="19296" title="Sorcha Cusack" label="Sorcha Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411986" start="19308" end="19320" title="Niamh Cusack" label="Niamh Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148591" start="19365" end="19377" title="Cyril Cusack" label="Cyril Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="19618" end="19643" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q373765" start="19645" end="19657" title="Adrian Noble" label="Adrian Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="19688" end="19707" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q444410" start="19772" end="19787" title="Lesley Manville" label="Lesley Manville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844079" start="19803" end="19815" title="Finbar Lynch" label="Finbar Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q347879" start="19849" end="19865" title="Vanessa Redgrave" label="Vanessa Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q156552" start="19877" end="19890" title="Lynn Redgrave" label="Lynn Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719909" start="19973" end="19987" title="Jemma Redgrave" label="Jemma Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122620" start="20004" end="20024" title="Sondheim Theatre" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="20095" end="20100" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q63348891" start="20104" end="20116" title="David Purves" label="David Purves"/>
<link wikidata="Q130390591" start="20133" end="20145" title="Theatre Alba" label="Theatre Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="20172" end="20197" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202362" start="20321" end="20336" title="Sfântu Gheorghe" label="Sfântu Gheorghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488776" start="20359" end="20377" title="Michael Billington (critic)" label="Michael Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061418" start="20574" end="20591" title="Lyric Hammersmith" label="Lyric Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449224" start="20595" end="20601" title="Filter (theatre company)" label="Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229574" start="20624" end="20636" title="Poppy Miller" label="Poppy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q234546" start="20638" end="20650" title="Romola Garai" label="Romola Garai"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579708" start="20656" end="20667" title="Clare Dunne (Irish actress)" label="Clare Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90815903" start="20708" end="20729" title="Divadlo na Fidlovačce" label="Theatre na Fidlovačce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="20731" end="20737" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755339" start="20784" end="20796" title="Andrea Černá" label="Andrea Černá"/>
<link wikidata="Q231241" start="20798" end="20814" title="Zuzana Vejvodová" label="Zuzana Vejvodová"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592224" start="20890" end="20902" title="Tomáš Töpfer" label="Tomáš Töpfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665408" start="20962" end="20971" title="Young Vic" label="Young Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887240" start="20985" end="21001" title="Benedict Andrews" label="Benedict Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159535" start="21044" end="21057" title="Vanessa Kirby" label="Vanessa Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761754" start="21059" end="21070" title="Mariah Gale" label="Mariah Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041680" start="21076" end="21089" title="Sam Troughton" label="Sam Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571159" start="21129" end="21148" title="Southwark Playhouse" label="Southwark Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546948" start="21195" end="21210" title="Olivia Hallinan" label="Olivia Hallinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263743" start="21212" end="21229" title="Holliday Grainger" label="Holliday Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="Q335863" start="21235" end="21246" title="Paul McGann" label="Paul McGann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506845" start="21453" end="21475" title="Sydney Theatre Company" label="Sydney Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="21498" end="21516" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758784" start="21574" end="21586" title="Andrew Upton" label="Andrew Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082082" start="21609" end="21620" title="Alison Bell (actress)" label="Alison Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65235591" start="21660" end="21675" title="Harry Greenwood (actor)" label="Harry Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="21890" end="21895" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q389851" start="21918" end="21930" title="Péter Eötvös" label="Péter Eötvös"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098547" start="21935" end="21953" title="Claus H. Henneberg" label="Claus H. Henneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539942" start="21964" end="21990" title="Tri sestry (opera)" label="Tri sestry (Three Sisters)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205" start="22022" end="22044" title="Opéra National de Lyon" label="Opéra National de Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614506" start="22066" end="22080" title="Ushio Amagatsu" label="Ushio Amagatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q819447" start="22099" end="22110" title="Kent Nagano" label="Kent Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878512" start="22137" end="22165" title="Three Sisters on Hope Street" label="Three Sisters on Hope Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271566" start="22207" end="22220" title="Diane Samuels" label="Diane Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831668" start="22225" end="22242" title="Tracy-Ann Oberman" label="Tracy-Ann Oberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22319" end="22331" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061525" start="22414" end="22441" title="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool" label="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222684" start="22498" end="22515" title="Hampstead Theatre" label="Hampstead Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640836" start="22562" end="22576" title="Blake Morrison" label="Blake Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058174" start="22581" end="22600" title="Northern Broadsides" label="Northern Broadsides"/>
<link wikidata="Q835808" start="22682" end="22696" title="Brontë sisters" label="Brontë sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224236" start="23029" end="23039" title="John Byrne (playwright)" label="John Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020251" start="23048" end="23054" title="Dunoon" label="Dunoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="23056" end="23064" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845421" start="23121" end="23141" title="Tron Theatre" label="Tron Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571684" start="23231" end="23245" title="Halley Feiffer" label="Halley Feiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186737" start="23295" end="23299" title="Critical lens" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q32001113" start="23360" end="23371" title="Inua Ellams" label="Inua Ellams"/>
<link wikidata="Q583619" start="23380" end="23386" title="Owerri" label="Owerri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="23388" end="23395" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="23407" end="23425" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="23467" end="23484" title="Lyttelton Theatre" label="Lyttelton Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="23488" end="23494" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403438" start="23778" end="23799" title="GALA Hispanic Theatre" label="GALA Hispanic Theatre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629035" wikidata="Q264254" url="?curid=629035" title="Louise d'Épinay">
<text>Louise Florence Pétronille Tardieu d&#x27;Esclavelles d&#x27;Épinay (11 March 1726 – 17 April 1783), better known as Mme d&#x27;Épinay, was a French writer, a &quot;saloniste&quot; and woman of fashion, known on account of her liaisons with Friedrich Melchior, Baron von Grimm, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who gives unflattering reports of her in his &quot;Confessions&quot;, as well as her acquaintanceship with Denis Diderot, Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert, Baron d&#x27;Holbach and other French men of letters during the Enlightenment. She was also one of many women referenced in Simone de Beauvoir&#x27;s &quot;The Second Sex&quot; as an example of noble expansion of women&#x27;s rights during the 18th century.

==Early life==
Louise d&#x27;Épinay was born at the fortress of Valenciennes. She was the daughter of Tardieu d&#x27;Esclavelles, a brigadier of infantry and commanding officer, and Florence-Angélique Prouveur. After her father was killed in battle when she was ten, she was sent to Paris in the care of her aunt Marie-Josèphe Prouveur who was married to Louis-Denis de La Live de Bellegarde, an immensely wealthy &quot;fermier-général&quot;, a collector-general of taxes; treated to the stultifying education that was a girl&#x27;s lot, on 23 December 1745 she married her cousin Denis Joseph de La Live d&#x27;Épinay, who was made a &quot;fermier-général&quot;. The marriage was at once an unhappy one; and the prodigality, dissipation and infidelities of her husband justified her in obtaining a formal separation of assets in May 1749. She settled in the Château of La Chevrette in the valley of Montmorency, a few miles north of Paris, and there received a number of distinguished visitors.

==Liaisons==

Conceiving a strong attachment for Jean-Jacques Rousseau, she furnished for him in 1756 in the valley of Montmorency a cottage which she named the Hermitage, and in this retreat he found for a time the quiet and natural rural pleasures he praised so highly. Rousseau, in his &quot;Confessions&quot;, asserted that the inclination was all on her side; but as, after her visit to Geneva (1757–59), Rousseau became her bitter enemy, little weight can be given to his statements on this point.

Her intimacy with Grimm, which began in 1755, marks a turning-point in her life, for under his influence she escaped from the somewhat compromising conditions of her life at La Chevrette. In 1757–1759, she paid a long visit to Geneva, where she was a constant guest of Voltaire. In Grimm&#x27;s absence from France (1775–1776), Madame d&#x27;Épinay continued, under the superintendence of Diderot, the correspondence he had begun with various European sovereigns. She spent most of her later life at La Briche, a small house near La Chevrette, in the society of Grimm and of a small circle of men of letters. One notable guest was Mozart who stayed at the home for two months in 1778 where he was welcomed by both Grimm and d’Epinay.

==&quot;L&#x27;Histoire de Madame de Montbrillant&quot;==
Her pseudo-memoires are written in the form of a sort of autobiographic romance, &quot;L&#x27;Histoire de Madame de Montbrillant&quot;, begun when she was thirty but never published in her lifetime. It intersperses fictionalized set pieces exhibiting the &quot;sensibilité&quot; of the earliest generation of Romantics, with genuine letters and autobiographical material. Bequeathed to Baron Grimm, a mangled version of the manuscript was edited by J. P. A. Parison and J. C. Brunet (Paris, 1818) as &quot;Mémoires et correspondance de Madame d&#x27;Épinay&quot; with all the names changed to identify the supposed originals: Madame d&#x27;Épinay figures in it as Madame de Montbrillant, and René is generally recognized as Rousseau, Volx as Grimm, Gamier as Diderot, who is sometimes credited with major interventions in the text. The work has had a checkered career since. The only accurate edition is George Roth, ed. &quot;Les Pseudo-mémoires de Madame d&#x27;Épinay&quot;, 3 vols., 1951.

==Other works==
Her &quot;Conversations d&#x27;Émilie&quot;, a dialogue recollecting the education of her granddaughter, Émilie de Belsunce, was published in 1774. The &quot;, was published at Paris (1818) from a manuscript which she had bequeathed to Grimm.

Many of Madame d&#x27;Épinay&#x27;s letters are contained in the &quot; (1818), which provided material for Francis Steegmuller&#x27;s joint biography, and have since appeared in a definitive redaction. Two anonymous works, &quot;Lettres à mon fils&quot; (Geneva, 1758) and &quot;Mes moments heureux&quot; (Geneva, 1759), are also by Madame d&#x27;Épinay.

In January 1783, three months before her death, she was awarded the Prix Monyon, recently established by the Académie to honour the author of the &quot;book published in the current year that might be of most benefit to society&quot;; it was her &quot;Conversations d&#x27;Émilie&quot; (1774).

==Issue==
* Louis-Joseph de La Live d&#x27;Épinay (25 September 1746 - 10 April 1813), a militar, editor and musician.
* Françoise-Suzanne-Thérèse de La Live d&#x27;Épinay (24 August 1747 - 3 June 1748), died in infancy.
* Angélique-Louise-Charlotte de La Live d&#x27;Épinay (1 August 1749 - 1 June 1824), recognized by Denis d&#x27;Épinay as his own, but she probably was a product of her mother&#x27;s affair with Louis Dupin de Francueil.
* Jean-Claude Leblanc de Beaulieu (29 May 1753 - 13 July 1825), also a child of Louis Dupin, he was sent to the countryside and entered in church. He later was Bishop of Soissons and Arles.

==See also==

*Conversation tart

==Notes==

==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q264254" start="0" end="67" title="Louise d&amp;#x27;Épinay" label="Louise Florence Pétronille Tardieu d&amp;#x27;Esclavelles d&amp;#x27;Épinay"/>
<link wikidata="Q264254" start="117" end="134" title="Louise d&amp;#x27;Épinay" label="Mme d&amp;#x27;Épinay"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="165" end="174" title="Salon (gathering)" label="saloniste"/>
<link wikidata="Q61852" start="241" end="276" title="Friedrich Melchior, Baron von Grimm" label="Friedrich Melchior, Baron von Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="282" end="303" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207595" start="356" end="367" title="Confessions (Rousseau)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="412" end="425" title="Denis Diderot" label="Denis Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="427" end="455" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104" start="457" end="477" title="Baron d&amp;#x27;Holbach" label="Baron d&amp;#x27;Holbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="521" end="534" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="581" end="599" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q470098" start="613" end="627" title="The Second Sex" label="The Second Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q163795" start="780" end="792" title="Valenciennes" label="Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147614" start="1136" end="1151" title="Ferme générale" label="fermier-général"/>
<link wikidata="Q316891" start="1616" end="1627" title="Montmorency, Val-d&amp;#x27;Oise" label="Montmorency"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="2105" end="2111" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="2487" end="2495" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2811" end="2825" title="Intellectual#Man of Letters" label="men of letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="2849" end="2855" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="3320" end="3329" title="Romanticism" label="Romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482502" start="4373" end="4392" title="Francis Steegmuller" label="Francis Steegmuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996393" start="5565" end="5582" title="Conversation tart" label="Conversation tart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629040" wikidata="Q2350303" url="?curid=629040" title="Brad Davis (basketball)">
<text>Bradley Ernest Davis (born December 17, 1955) is an American former professional basketball player who spent the bulk of his National Basketball Association (NBA) career with the Dallas Mavericks. He has been associated with the Mavericks for the team&#x27;s entire existence as either a player, assistant coach or broadcaster.

==Early years==
Born in Monaca, Pennsylvania, Davis graduated from Monaca High School and played basketball there under head coach Dave Nichol. As a senior, he received Class B all-Pennsylvania honors. Davis also tried out for the Pittsburgh Pirates of Major League Baseball.

==College career==
Davis accepted a basketball scholarship from the University of Maryland, to play under head coach Lefty Driesell. As a freshman, he was named the starter at point guard, playing alongside guard John Lucas, while averaging 12.6 points, 4.6 assists and 3.3 rebounds.

As a junior, he averaged 12.4 points, 4.9 assists, 3.5 rebounds and 0.9 steals. He declared for the NBA draft after the season, finishing with an average of 12.2 points and 5.1 assists per game during his three-year stint in college.

==Professional career==
Davis was selected by the Los Angeles Lakers in the first round (15th pick overall) of the 1977 NBA draft. As a rookie, he missed eight weeks with a broken hand and was passed on the depth chart by fellow rookie Norm Nixon. In his second season, he was waived after 10 games on October 27, 1978.

In 1978, he played with the Montana Sky of the Western Basketball Association. Although he was a teammate of Cazzie Russell, the squad finished in last place.

On February 12, 1979, he signed as a free agent with the Indiana Pacers, to provide depth after Kevin Stacom was traded. He was released eighteen games into the 1979–80 season on October 20. In 1979, he signed with the Anchorage Northern Knights of the Continental Basketball Association (CBA), where he helped them win the league championship. He was selected as the CBA Newcomer of the Year and named to the All-CBA Second Team in 1980.

On February 29, 1980, he was signed as a free agent by the Utah Jazz. The coaching staff didn&#x27;t feel that he was going to make the team, so the organization gave the Pistons permission to invite Davis to their camp, by making him a free agent.

On April 24, 1980, he was invited to a two-day tryout camp by the Detroit Pistons. On July 11, he signed a free agent contract with the Detroit Pistons. He was cut on October 8. He played with the Anchorage Northern Knights of the Continental Basketball Association during the 1979–80 basketball season.

On December 2, 1980, Davis signed as a free agent with the NBA expansion team Dallas Mavericks, when the franchise was nearly two months into the 1980–81 season and became the starting point guard. On March 27, 1981, he signed a contract extension. In the 1982–83 season, set a team record with 7.2 assists per game, set an NBA record for a guard with a .572 field goal percentage and tied for the team lead with 80 steals. On June 23, 1983, he signed a contract extension. He became a fan favorite and spent the rest of his NBA career (12 seasons) with the Mavericks. In the 1984–85 season, he ranked third in the league in 3-point shooting and free-throw percentage. In the 1987–88 season, he was a part of a team that reached the Western Conference Finals only to lose to the eventual champion Los Angeles Lakers in seven games. On August 1, 1992, he announced his official retirement. He averaged 8.6 points, 5.1 assists, 1.9 rebounds and 24.2 minutes per game during his career.

Davis was the final Maverick remaining from the team&#x27;s first season, the franchise leader in assists, games played and minutes played. On November 14, 1992, Davis was the first Maverick to have his number retired when his #15 jersey was raised to the rafters of Reunion Arena.

==Personal life==
In 1993, Davis became an assistant for the Mavericks under head coach Dick Motta. At the same time, he took a position as the color commentator for Mavericks televised games. He later moved to radio broadcasts.

Davis was the radio analyst until the 2007–08 season, when he swapped positions with Mavericks TV commentator Bob Ortegel. They later switched back to their original roles and Davis remained the color commentator on Mavericks&#x27; radio broadcasts. He also serves as the Mavericks&#x27; player development coach and a community services representative for the team.

He is the brother of former NBA player Mickey Davis. He is married to Kelli Davis and father to three children: son Michael and daughters Erin and Cara Davis.

==References==
==External links==
*Career statistics from basketball-reference.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2350303" start="0" end="20" title="Brad Davis (basketball)" label="Bradley Ernest Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="68" end="91" title="professional basketball" label="professional basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="125" end="156" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="179" end="195" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186675" start="353" end="373" title="Monaca, Pennsylvania" label="Monaca, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="560" end="578" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="582" end="603" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091796" start="723" end="737" title="Lefty Driesell" label="Lefty Driesell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212413" start="782" end="793" title="point guard" label="point guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325022" start="819" end="829" title="John Lucas II" label="John Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q622521" start="991" end="1000" title="NBA draft" label="NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="1176" end="1194" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959877" start="1241" end="1255" title="1977 NBA draft" label="1977 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663482" start="1362" end="1372" title="Norm Nixon" label="Norm Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987618" start="1494" end="1524" title="Western Basketball Association" label="Western Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q770696" start="1556" end="1570" title="Cazzie Russell" label="Cazzie Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="1644" end="1654" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170329" start="1664" end="1678" title="Indiana Pacers" label="Indiana Pacers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337476" start="1703" end="1715" title="Kevin Stacom" label="Kevin Stacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344217" start="1826" end="1852" title="Anchorage Northern Knights" label="Anchorage Northern Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q204348" start="1860" end="1894" title="Continental Basketball Association" label="Continental Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915024" start="1975" end="1999" title="Continental Basketball Association Newcomer of the Year Award" label="CBA Newcomer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q170649" start="2106" end="2115" title="Utah Jazz" label="Utah Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="2363" end="2378" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="2404" end="2414" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="2433" end="2448" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344217" start="2494" end="2520" title="Anchorage Northern Knights" label="Anchorage Northern Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q204348" start="2528" end="2562" title="Continental Basketball Association" label="Continental Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="2641" end="2651" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="2680" end="2696" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q212413" start="2787" end="2798" title="point guard" label="point guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628047" start="3335" end="3360" title="NBA Conference Finals" label="Western Conference Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="3399" end="3417" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859962" start="3854" end="3867" title="Reunion Arena" label="Reunion Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561234" start="3958" end="3968" title="Dick Motta" label="Dick Motta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933563" start="4210" end="4221" title="Bob Ortegel" label="Bob Ortegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856912" start="4507" end="4519" title="Mickey Davis" label="Mickey Davis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629042" wikidata="Q197502" url="?curid=629042" title="Zhao Mausoleum (Tang dynasty)">
<text>Zhao Mausoleum (昭陵; pinyin: Zhāolíng; &quot;Zhao&quot; means the light rays of the sun) is the largest mausoleum of the Tang dynasty and the tomb of Emperor Taizong of Tang (599–649).

It is located in Jiuzong Mountain, Shaanxi, China, it is the biggest mausoleum of the Tang dynasty. Besides being the final resting place of Emperor Taizong of Tang it also has an additional 200 tombs of royals and high ranked officials accompanied around.

The famous stone reliefs Six Steeds of Zhao Mausoleum are exhibited in the Stele Forest Museum of Xi&#x27;an (4 steeds) and Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, U.S. (2 steeds) separately. They were most likely designed by the court painter and administrator Yan Liben, who is recorded as making other works for the mausoleum, and may have designed the mausoleum itself.

Planning and designing began in 636, after the death of the Empress Zhangsun, who requested a simple burial.
The Zhao Mausoleum also shows many paintings of the Tang Imperial guards and officers, all of which are elite soldiery. 

==See also==
* List of mausoleums
* Qianling Mausoleum

==Notes==
==References==
* Loehr, Max, &quot;The Great Painters of China&quot;, 1980, Phaidon Press, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q197502" start="0" end="14" title="Zhao Mausoleum (Tang dynasty)" label="Zhao Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="20" end="26" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="120" end="132" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="149" end="172" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Emperor Taizong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="202" end="218" title="Jiuzong Mountain" label="Jiuzong Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="220" end="227" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="229" end="234" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="271" end="283" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="326" end="349" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Emperor Taizong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="460" end="466" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089022" start="468" end="496" title="Six Steeds of Zhao Mausoleum" label="Six Steeds of Zhao Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q641427" start="518" end="530" title="Stele Forest" label="Stele Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="541" end="551" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="581" end="607" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="609" end="613" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q984276" start="675" end="688" title="court painter" label="court painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q721435" start="707" end="716" title="Yan Liben" label="Yan Liben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152149" start="880" end="896" title="Empress Zhangsun" label="Empress Zhangsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124978" start="981" end="1001" title="Imperial Guards (Tang dynasty)" label="Tang Imperial guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627375" start="1066" end="1084" title="List of mausoleums" label="List of mausoleums"/>
<link wikidata="Q950653" start="1087" end="1105" title="Qianling Mausoleum" label="Qianling Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794982" start="1134" end="1144" title="Max Loehr" label="Loehr, Max"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629053" wikidata="Q3345532" url="?curid=629053" title="Allan Donald">
<text>Allan Anthony Donald (born 20 October 1966) is a South African former cricketer who is also the former bowling coach of Bangladesh national cricket team. Often nicknamed &#x27;White Lightning&#x27; due to his quick bowling, he is considered one of the South Africa national cricket team&#x27;s greatest pace bowlers of all time. He was an integral member of the South African team in its resurgence into international cricket since readmission and played an influential role as a frontline genuine seam bowler to boost South Africa to new heights. During his playing career, he was known for his bowling speed and aggression on the field. He is also remembered for his infamous runout during South Africa&#x27;s loss in the 1999 World Cup semi-final match against Australia. Donald is the first South African to take 300 Test wickets.

Donald was one of the top fast bowlers in Test cricket, reaching the top of the ICC Test rankings in 1998, peaking with a ranking of 895 points the next year. In One Day Internationals (ODIs), he reached 794 points in 1998, ranked second behind teammate Shaun Pollock. He shared the new ball with Pollock from the 1996/1997 tour of India until his retirement in 2002. Donald is known for his friendship with Pollock especially when they used to be regular bowling partners for South Africa. Donald described Pollock as South Africa&#x27;s Glenn McGrath. He featured in four World Cup tournaments for South Africa in 1992, 1996, 1999 and 2003.

During his playing career, he was well known for applying zinc cream on his cheeks and nose to avoid the effects of sunburn. Donald was one of 10 South African cricketers to make their test debuts during their one-off test tour to the West Indies in 1992. He was part of South Africa&#x27;s first ODI team as well as South Africa&#x27;s first World Cup team. He had picked up a total of 38 wickets across the four World Cup tournaments he played and is currently the second all-time leading wicket taker for South Africa in World Cups, after Imran Tahir.

Since retiring Donald has been a coach with a number of teams, including international sides. From 2018 to 2019 he was the Assistant Coach at Kent County Cricket Club in England. In 2019, Donald was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame.

== Early life ==
Donald played cricket, soccer and rugby as a child and completed his primary education at the Technical High School.

He once took 9/16 against his uncle&#x27;s school Grey College in Bloemfontein and made it to the Orange Free State team in 1984. However, he injured his groin and could not take part further before reaching the standards required to play at first-class level. He subsequently missed out the opportunity to play on the Nuffield Week and also missed out on an opportunity of potentially being picked for South African schools cricket side. But, he still managed to be picked as a twelfth man for South Africa Schools XI in 1984 and 1985. He had to wait one more year following the injury to make his first-class debut in 1985.

== Domestic career ==
In November 1985, he made his first-class debut in the Currie Cup playing for Orange Free State against the Transvaal cricket team at the age of 19 and was included for the match at the last minute as an injury replacement to Corrie van Zyl who injured his foot badly prior to the match. He was originally supposed to be the twelfth man of the side during the match but was called upon by his captain Chris Broad just ten minutes before the toss. He managed to pick up just the sole wicket of Jimmy Cook on his first-class debut at Transvaal, Johannesburg.

He became an integral member of the Warwickshire County Cricket Club and was a mainstay of the club for several years. He played an important part in helping the club to win the 1989 NatWest Bank Trophy by picking up 14 wickets in the tournament, the most by any bowler in that tournament. The club released Merrick following the end of 1989 season which paved way for Donald to become a regular fixture in the side. However, his county career was clouded with confusions yet again as Warwickshire signed Australian batsman Tom Moody for the 1990 season. Largely, to his relief, the club persisted with Donald by handing him a long-term contract commencing from the 1991 season, despite the consistent performances from Moody in the county championships. He repaid the faith nearly helping Warwickshire to win the 1991 County Championship with his bowling prowess capturing 83 wickets at 19.68 as he was behind only Pakistan&#x27;s Waqar Younis in terms of the bowling averages during that championship.

He was a crucial member of the side which claimed two trophies including the 1995 NatWest Trophy and 1995 County Championship in a single English season in 1995. He also picked up a tally of 89 wickets in 1995 for the club. He was the joint highest wicket taker during the 1995 NatWest Trophy picking up 11 scalps along with Anil Kumble. Interestingly, Warwickshire had initially told Donald that the 1995 season would be his last with the club in order to recruit West Indian veteran Brian Lara. However, Lara pulled out for personal reasons and as a result Donald was handed a further two-year contract with the club. His long association with the Warwickshire club which dates back to 1987 was finally ended in 2000 with both Donald and the club mutually agreeing to part ways. He later joined Worcestershire County Cricket Club for the 2002 season.

He made his T20 debut for Eagles against Dolphins at the 2004 Standard Bank Pro20 Series.

== International career==

=== ODI debut ===
He made his ODI and international debut for South Africa against India on 10 November 1991 at Eden Gardens, Kolkata which also turned out to be South Africa&#x27;s comeback return to international cricket after serving years long ban from international cricket due to apartheid. It was also South Africa&#x27;s very first One Day International appearance as well as South Africa&#x27;s first competitive international match in 22 years and Donald was the second cap of the South African ODI side. He picked up a five-wicket haul on his ODI debut including the priced wickets of Ravi Shastri, Sachin Tendulkar, Navjot Singh Sidhu and despite his heroics with the ball, South Africa lost the match by three wickets. His fifer also gave a glimmer of hope for Proteas as South Africa gave good fightback against a strong Indian batting line-up in its attempt to defend a meagre total of 177. His bowling spell of 5/29 in 8.4 overs stood as the best bowling performance by a South African bowler on ODI debut for 24 years and the record was later surpassed by Kagiso Rabada who returned with the bowling figures of 6/16 against Bangladesh on his ODI debut in 2015. He became the first South African bowler to take a fifer on ODI debut as well as the first South African to take a five-wicket haul for South Africa in ODI history.

=== 1992 World Cup ===
He was included in South African squad for the 1992 Cricket World Cup which also marked South Africa&#x27;s maiden appearance in a World Cup tournament. On 26 February 1992, he featured in South Africa&#x27;s first World Cup match which was against Australia and starred with the ball in the first match of South Africa during the 1992 World Cup. He picked up 13 wickets in 1992 World Cup (the most for South Africa during the 1992 World Cup) at an average of 25.3 and at an economy rate of 4.21.

=== Test debut ===
He made his test debut on 18 April 1992 at the age of 26 against the West Indies in the one-off test tour to the West Indies at Barbados, a test match which also marked the historic occasion of being South Africa&#x27;s first test in nearly 22 years since their readmission. The test match also marked South Africa&#x27;s first test match against a non-white nation as it was also their first test ever against the West Indies. On his debut he scored a pair including a 21 ball duck in the first innings. However, he shined with the ball on his test debut picking up six wickets (2–67 and 4–77) for the match inclusive of a four-wicket haul in the second innings. He also picked up the priced wicket of Brian Lara. However, West Indies managed to win the one-off test by 52 runs to take the series 1–0.

During the Boxing Day test match against India which commenced on 26 December 1992, he recorded one of the best bowling performances of his career with 12 scalps for the match picking up five-wicket hauls in both innings to help South Africa win the match by nine wickets – Donald was adjudged the player of the match. He grabbed 5/55 in the first innings to restrict India to just 212, following it up with a spell of 7/84 in the second innings to restrict India to just 215.

He was part of the South African test squad which toured to England in 1994 to play their first test series in English soil after a gap of 29 years and also their first series in England post-apartheid era. He became the first South African bowler in 39 years since Hugh Tayfield to pick up a five wicket-haul at Lord&#x27;s and he sealed his spot in the Lord&#x27;s honours boards.

He featured in South African ODI and test squads for the historic home series against England in 1995 as it marked the first instance of England touring South Africa to play a test series since South Africa&#x27;s readmission to cricket scene. He won the man of the series award for his display with the ball as he also picked the joint most wickets in the series from either sides along with Dominic Cork with a tally of 19 wickets. In the second match of the series at Johannesburg, the battle between Atherton and Donald became intense especially with the way Atherton batted towards the end of the match to save England from defeat by scoring unbeaten 185 off 492 balls, chasing of 479.

=== 1996 World Cup ===
He was part of the South African squad which reached quarter-finals of the 1996 Cricket World Cup. During a group stage match between the United Arab Emirates and South Africa in the 1996 World Cup, UAE skipper Sultan Zarawani faced Donald without a helmet as he only wore a sunhat on his head, which literally frustrated Donald and the gesture of Zarawani had prompted him to bowl fierce bouncers on the batsman. Sultan came to bat when UAE was reeling at 68/6 in a huge run chase of 322 and was subsequently hit on the head by a fierce bouncer delivered by Donald. Donald recorded in his autobiography that he feared initially that he had killed him. Despite the blow, Zarawani still continued to refuse the offer of a helmet but only lasted six more balls before he was dismissed and taken straight to hospital. For the quarter-final against West Indies, Donald was left out of the team so that two spinners could be selected, a decision later described as &quot;the single biggest mistake of the tournament&quot;. He was the leading wicket-taker for South Africa during the 1996 World Cup, with eight wickets.

He played a key role in South Africa&#x27;s triumph over India in the final of the 1996–97 Standard Bank International One-Day Series where he recorded 3/48 in the final. He was also the leading wicket-taker of the tournament with 18 scalps. During the Tri-series final at Durban, Donald &quot;got involved in an incident that has since caused [him] a lot of grief&quot;. Donald was being hit around the park by Sachin Tendulkar and Rahul Dravid in the final as Dravid top-scored for India with 84. He received media backlash for possibly using racial languages during his spat with Dravid. Donald said he got carried away and confronted Dravid face-to-face saying &quot;This isn&#x27;t such a fucking easy game&quot;. He was an&quot; member of the South African which won the four nation Sameer Cup 1996–97 where South Africa emerged victorious in the final after defeating Pakistan by 7 wickets and he was the leading wicket taker during the tournament taking 14 wickets.

=== Leading wicket taker ===
He led the bowling charts in test cricket for the year 1998 as he ended up as the leading wicket taker in across all test matches for the calendar year 1998 with a tally of 80 wickets. His record tally of 80 wickets is also the fourth most by any bowler in a single calendar year in test cricket history just behind Shane Warne (96 scalps in 2005), Muttiah Muralitharan (90 scalps in 2006) and Dennis Lillee (85 scalps in 1981). On 26 December 1998, during a test match against the West Indies, he became the then quickest South African to reach 250 test wickets (now the fourth fastest bowler in test history to reach 250 test scalps) in terms of number of test matches and he achieved it in his 50th test match. His South African record was later surpassed by his successor Dale Steyn who did it in 49 test matches.

He was one of the key players to miss out the inaugural edition of the ICC KnockOut Trophy in 1998 as he alongside Klusener and Roger Telemachus were undergoing a mandatory forced period of rest as per the player management policies, guidelines and directive of CSA. He also subsequently missed the 50 over cricket tournament at the 1998 Commonwealth Games.

He was part of the South African squad in their tour of England in 1998 featuring in both test and ODI squads. Across the five match test series Donald recorded 33 wickets, the highest by any bowler from either team during the series. Donald alongside Atherton were awarded the player of the series trophy. During the fourth test of the series at Trent Bridge South Africa batted first, scoring 374 in its first innings. England responded with 336, with Donald taking 5 wickets. In their second innings, South Africa only scored 208 leaving England a target of 247 to win the match. Michael Atherton was at the crease when Donald began a spell of bowling both would later describe in their respective autobiographies as one of the most intense periods of test match cricket they ever played.

=== 1999 World Cup ===
In the 1999 Cricket World Cup, South Africa had progressed to the semi-finals, and Donald until then had an excellent tournament, taking 12 wickets in 8 matches.

In the 1999 Cricket World Cup semi-final between South Africa and Australia, Donald was the last batsman on the South African team. Australia batting first making only 213, Donald taking 4–32 and Pollock 5–36. The game swung back and forth with South Africa eventually needing to score 16 runs off the last 8 balls to win with only one wicket remaining. Klusener scored consecutive fours on the first two balls of the over (bowled by Damien Fleming), levelling the scores and leaving South Africa with only 1 run to win in 4 balls with Klusener on strike. The third ball was a dot, and Donald narrowly escaped getting run out when he backed out too far and tried to get back to his crease. The fourth saw Klusener mis-hit his shot to mid-wicket fielder Mark Waugh. Klusener went for the run, although chances of a run-out were high and two balls were still remaining. However, Donald at the other end, keeping his eyes on the ball and hoping to avoid another mix-up like in the last delivery, did not see Klusener sprinting down the pitch and did not hear the call to run, and Klusener was almost at the bowler&#x27;s end by the time Donald (who had also dropped his bat) began running. By then, Waugh had thrown the ball to Fleming, who rolled it to Adam Gilchrist who took the bails off at the other end, meaning Donald was run-out by some distance for a diamond duck as Donald was only halfway down the pitch, thus ending the match with the scores level. However, a tie meant that Australia progressed to the final since they had beaten South Africa in the group stages of the tournament. Although the match technically ended in a tie, South Africa had previously lost to Australia in the Super-Six phase, and needed to win outright to progress to the final. As commentator Bill Lawry put it during the final ball:&quot;...this will be out surely – oh it&#x27;s out, it&#x27;s gonna be run out...oh, that is South Africa out – Donald did not run, I cannot believe it. Australia go into the World Cup Final – ridiculous running with two balls to go. Donald did not go, Klusener came – what a disappointing end for South Africa.&quot;

In 2014, Klusener stated in an interview that Donald was not to blame for what happened. Klusener stated that he became impatient and, although he made it to the bowler&#x27;s end, there was genuinely no run. After the match, he was cross at himself and regretted attempting the run.

Donald finished the 1999 World Cup tournament as the second leading wicket taker for South Africa with 16 scalps just one wicket behind Klusener. His 16 wickets came at an impressive average of 20.31 and at an economy rate of 3.96.

=== Post 1999 World Cup ===
His reputation started to take a hit among public following South Africa&#x27;s exit from the 1999 World Cup as public opinions on him were mostly critical of his approach regarding running between the wickets especially when he engaged in the brainfade runout which cost South Africa a golden chance to reach their first World Cup final. Although, he was largely successful with the ball throughout the tournament, his World Cup heroics with the ball was largely overshadowed by the runout incident which is still remembered by South Africans. He was seen as a villain by many South Africans and he received negative publicity due to media bashing him for his blunder during the crucial stage of the semi-final. He received severe opposition from ardent cricket fans upon his arrival to South Africa from England after the World Cup semi-final.

On 19 November 2000 during the first test of the three match home series against New Zealand, he reached the milestone of 300 test wickets, the first South African to achieve the feat.

He announced his retirement from test cricket in January 2002 soon after playing the first test match of the three match home series against Australia at Johannesburg. He broke down with emotions as South Africa endured a crushing defeat in the hands of Australia by an innings and 360 runs. However, it was later revealed that he was forced to give up test cricket due to flow of injuries which started to take a toll on his fitness levels and body. On 13 September 2002, he became the fastest South African bowler to pick 250 ODI wickets in terms of matches (148), a feat he achieved during the group stage match between South Africa and the West Indies during the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy and also became the third joint-fastest bowler in the world to do so along with Waqar Younis in 148 ODI matches.

He featured in his fourth and final World Cup tournament in 2003 which was also a home World Cup for himself as the tournament was jointly conducted by South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya. By, the time he was already 37 and way past his prime. He retired from ODI cricket and from international cricket following South Africa&#x27;s disastrous 2003 World Cup campaign where South Africa were knocked out from group stage for the first time. He himself too had an awful World Cup tournament personally as he managed to pick up only one wicket in three matches with a mediocre average of 133.

He retired from all forms of cricket in 2004 after playing in his final home domestic season citing deterioration of physical conditions.

When he retired, he was South Africa&#x27;s record wicket-taker with 330 Test wickets at an average of 22.25, and claimed 272 One Day International wickets at an average of 21.78. Both of these records have now been overtaken by Dale Steyn and Shaun Pollock respectively.

== After retirement ==
Having retired from playing, Donald pursued a commentary stint with the South African Broadcasting Corporation. (SABC) in their coverage of South Africa&#x27;s home Tests, alongside former teammate Daryll Cullinan. In May 2007, Donald was appointed as a temporary bowling consultant for the England cricket team. His involvement impressed many, and was praised by several players. Donald&#x27;s original brief contract was extended until September 2007. Donald decided not to continue with his coaching role at the end of September 2007, citing the strain of touring and his wish to be with his family. Donald was a coach at Warwickshire County Cricket Club, and in partnership with fellow coach Ashley Giles helped the county to win the Second Division of the County Championship in 2008.

Donald coached the reigning Zimbabwean domestic champions, Mountaineers, in 2010. He served as the bowling coach for the New Zealand cricket team for the ODI series against Pakistan, and the 2011 Cricket World Cup. In May 2011, he was one of the top contenders who was willing to become the fast bowling coach of Australian cricket team but he lost the opportunity as Cricket Australia opted to pick countryman Craig McDermott instead. As a result, according to a report in May 2011, Donald decided to rejoin New Zealand cricket coaching staff after previously serving in an interim capacity on a contractual basis and he was tipped to sign a two-year deal with New Zealand Cricket. However a month later as of June 2011, he later reversed his decision and stated he had ambitions in order to secure a coaching position in South African cricket.

In July 2011, Donald joined Gary Kirsten&#x27;s coaching team as bowling coach to the South African cricket team. Kirsten left his post in May 2013, and Russell Domingo was appointed as his replacement. Donald was the bowling coach of South Africa under head coach Domingo; he was replaced by Charl Langeveldt. Donald was also the bowling coach of Royal Challengers Bangalore in the Indian Premier League. In 2012, there were reports claiming that he would join the Bangladeshi coaching staff but he denied such reports insisting that he would remain with he South African cricket.

He was appointed as the bowling coach of the Pune Warriors India for the 2012 Indian Premier League replacing Geoff Marsh. He was later promoted as the head coach of the Pune Warriors India for the 2013 Indian Premier League.

Donald stepped down from the position of South Africa bowling coach after the 2015 Cricket World Cup.

In 2016, reports emerged that he would be considered in an interim capacity as a temporary bowling coach of Australia for the test tour to Sri Lanka and home series against South Africa.

Donald was appointed assistant coach at Kent County Cricket Club in early 2017. He was expected to join the county at the start of the 2017 season but was denied a work permit as he did not, at the time, hold a suitable coaching qualification. As a result, in April 2017, Sri Lanka hired Donald as bowling consultant for the ICC Champions Trophy 2017 and Donald did not work with Kent during the 2017 season. He was successful in obtaining his Level 3 coaching qualification during 2017 and formally joined Kent in early 2018, leading the team during the 2017–18 Regional Super50 competition ahead of the 2018 English season. He also subsequently left Kent at the end of the 2019 season.

In September 2019, he joined as a consulting coach the Free State Cricket Union for all Free State cricket teams for the duration of October 2019.

In February 2020, he was appointed head coach of the Knights franchise for the upcoming 2020–21 CSA T20 Challenge.

In March 2022, he was appointed as the pace bowling coach of Bangladesh national cricket team until the 2022 ICC Men&#x27;s T20 World Cup.

== Legacy ==
South African wicket-keeper batsman Dane Vilas played the role of him in the 2008 film &quot;Hansie&quot; which was based on the life story of former Proteas captain Hansie Cronje.

Fellow South African seamer Nantie Hayward who used to admire Donald and considered him as his role model stated that he had probably played in the wrong era due to the presence of Donald. He conceded that his international career was cut short due to South Africa penetrating with Donald and Makhaya Ntini but recalled the Donald&#x27;s epic spell to Atherton in the 1998 test as something he was glad to have witnessed it and claimed that it was one of the best bowling spells that he had ever seen.

Atherton was known as Donald&#x27;s &#x27;bunny&#x27; as Atherton has been dismissed by Donald 11 times across 17 test matches.

Donald was also loyal towards his former captain Cronje whom he referred to as a person with the ability to lead the side with ease and called him as a natural leader.

In July 2019, Donald was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3345532" start="0" end="20" title="Allan Donald" label="Allan Anthony Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="70" end="77" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q806537" start="120" end="152" title="Bangladesh national cricket team" label="Bangladesh national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="252" end="286" title="South Africa national cricket team" label="South Africa national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q597080" start="308" end="315" title="bowling (cricket)" label="bowlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594609" start="724" end="749" title="1999 Cricket World Cup 2nd semi-final" label="1999 World Cup semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="916" end="919" title="International Cricket Council" label="ICC"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="998" end="1019" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q12454494" start="1090" end="1103" title="Shaun Pollock" label="Shaun Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392178" start="1375" end="1388" title="Glenn McGrath" label="Glenn McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="1410" end="1431" title="Cricket World Cup" label="World Cup tournaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="1538" end="1542" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q649717" start="1596" end="1603" title="sunburn" label="sunburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530644" start="2022" end="2033" title="Imran Tahir" label="Imran Tahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195284" start="2178" end="2202" title="Kent County Cricket Club" label="Kent County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146533" start="2253" end="2277" title="ICC Cricket Hall of Fame" label="ICC Cricket Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608132" start="2465" end="2477" title="Grey College, Bloemfontein" label="Grey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="2481" end="2493" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111326" start="3119" end="3129" title="Currie Cup (cricket)" label="Currie Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527911" start="3172" end="3194" title="Transvaal cricket team" label="Transvaal cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172966" start="3290" end="3304" title="Corrie van Zyl" label="Corrie van Zyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528610" start="3465" end="3476" title="Chris Broad (cricketer)" label="Chris Broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527005" start="3557" end="3567" title="Jimmy Cook" label="Jimmy Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q190959" start="3596" end="3605" title="Transvaal (province)" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="3607" end="3619" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="3658" end="3690" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585315" start="3800" end="3824" title="1989 NatWest Trophy" label="1989 NatWest Bank Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537597" start="4146" end="4155" title="Tom Moody" label="Tom Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585938" start="4164" end="4175" title="1990 English cricket season" label="1990 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586825" start="4288" end="4299" title="1991 English cricket season" label="1991 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20181317" start="4436" end="4460" title="1991 County Championship" label="1991 County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766640" start="4554" end="4566" title="Waqar Younis" label="Waqar Younis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998558" start="4704" end="4723" title="1995 NatWest Trophy" label="1995 NatWest Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19758009" start="4728" end="4752" title="1995 County Championship" label="1995 County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590317" start="4783" end="4787" title="1995 English cricket season" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849991" start="4952" end="4963" title="Anil Kumble" label="Anil Kumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q202877" start="5112" end="5122" title="Brian Lara" label="Brian Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725667" start="5424" end="5458" title="Worcestershire County Cricket Club" label="Worcestershire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422392" start="5507" end="5513" title="Knights (cricket team)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289672" start="5522" end="5530" title="Dolphins (South African cricket team)" label="Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288601" start="5543" end="5569" title="Standard Bank Pro20 Series" label="Standard Bank Pro20 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035004" start="5711" end="5723" title="Eden Gardens" label="Eden Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="5725" end="5732" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="5885" end="5894" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518502" start="6195" end="6207" title="Ravi Shastri" label="Ravi Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q270100" start="6227" end="6245" title="Navjot Singh Sidhu" label="Navjot Singh Sidhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225238" start="6672" end="6685" title="Kagiso Rabada" label="Kagiso Rabada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139945" start="7013" end="7035" title="1992 Cricket World Cup" label="1992 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="7495" end="7505" title="Test cricket" label="test debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565868" start="7552" end="7607" title="South African cricket team in the West Indies in 1992" label="West Indies in the one-off test tour to the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="7611" end="7619" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="7898" end="7909" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q202877" start="8186" end="8196" title="Brian Lara" label="Brian Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="8298" end="8308" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565847" start="8784" end="8840" title="South African cricket team in England in 1994" label="South African test squad which toured to England in 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932844" start="9031" end="9044" title="Hugh Tayfield" label="Hugh Tayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050834" start="9058" end="9089" title="List of international cricket five-wicket hauls at Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="five wicket-haul at Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678867" start="9120" end="9146" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s honours boards" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s honours boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057134" start="9164" end="9250" title="English cricket team in South Africa in 1995–96" label="South African ODI and test squads for the historic home series against England in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529098" start="9542" end="9554" title="Dominic Cork" label="Dominic Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="9939" end="9961" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="1996 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101549" start="10002" end="10022" title="United Arab Emirates national cricket team" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636753" start="10075" end="10090" title="Sultan Zarawani" label="Sultan Zarawani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="10454" end="10467" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="10669" end="10677" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092070" start="11062" end="11112" title="1996–97 Standard Bank International One-Day Series" label="1996–97 Standard Bank International One-Day Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="11252" end="11258" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q9488" start="11391" end="11407" title="Sachin Tendulkar" label="Sachin Tendulkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q470772" start="11412" end="11424" title="Rahul Dravid" label="Rahul Dravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409237" start="11768" end="11786" title="Sameer Cup 1996–97" label="Sameer Cup 1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q555240" start="12299" end="12310" title="Shane Warne" label="Shane Warne"/>
<link wikidata="Q379709" start="12332" end="12352" title="Muttiah Muralitharan" label="Muttiah Muralitharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189313" start="12377" end="12390" title="Dennis Lillee" label="Dennis Lillee"/>
<link wikidata="Q971637" start="12873" end="12892" title="ICC KnockOut Trophy" label="ICC KnockOut Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q596313" start="12896" end="12900" title="1998 ICC KnockOut Trophy" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525094" start="12930" end="12946" title="Roger Telemachus" label="Roger Telemachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184993" start="13101" end="13127" title="Cricket at the 1998 Commonwealth Games" label="50 over cricket tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116581" start="13135" end="13158" title="1998 Commonwealth Games" label="1998 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565849" start="13180" end="13270" title="South African cricket team in England in 1998" label="South African squad in their tour of England in 1998 featuring in both test and ODI squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096399" start="13508" end="13520" title="Trent Bridge" label="Trent Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109117" start="13744" end="13760" title="Michael Atherton" label="Michael Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139952" start="13984" end="14006" title="1999 Cricket World Cup" label="1999 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212428" start="14574" end="14588" title="Damien Fleming" label="Damien Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q58390" start="14874" end="14884" title="Fielding (cricket)" label="mid-wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177366" start="14893" end="14903" title="Mark Waugh" label="Mark Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379580" start="14954" end="14961" title="Run out" label="run-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q349516" start="15391" end="15405" title="Adam Gilchrist" label="Adam Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809630" start="15419" end="15424" title="Bail (cricket)" label="bails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279202" start="15497" end="15509" title="diamond duck" label="diamond duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q13119294" start="15917" end="15927" title="Bill Lawry" label="Bill Lawry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105730743" start="17701" end="17762" title="New Zealand cricket team in South Africa in 2000–01" label="first test of the three match home series against New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q26882854" start="17905" end="18006" title="Australian cricket team in South Africa in 2001–02" label="January 2002 soon after playing the first test match of the three match home series against Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139957" start="18699" end="18727" title="2003 Cricket World Cup" label="World Cup tournament in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="19517" end="19538" title="One Day International" label="One Day International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419926" start="19759" end="19797" title="South African Broadcasting Corporation" label="South African Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226273" start="19885" end="19900" title="Daryll Cullinan" label="Daryll Cullinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="19978" end="19998" title="England cricket team" label="England cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="20312" end="20344" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805449" start="20383" end="20395" title="Ashley Giles" label="Ashley Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="20448" end="20467" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20632" end="20642" title="Pakistani cricket team in New Zealand in 2010–11#ODI series" label="ODI series"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="20669" end="20691" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002584" start="20846" end="20863" title="Cricket Australia" label="Cricket Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724663" start="20889" end="20904" title="Craig McDermott" label="Craig McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515242" start="21140" end="21159" title="New Zealand Cricket" label="New Zealand Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520841" start="21618" end="21634" title="Charl Langeveldt" label="Charl Langeveldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156897" start="21673" end="21700" title="Royal Challengers Bangalore" label="Royal Challengers Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q396412" start="21708" end="21729" title="Indian Premier League" label="Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351794" start="21981" end="22007" title="2012 Indian Premier League" label="2012 Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743480" start="22018" end="22029" title="Geoff Marsh" label="Geoff Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629447" start="22106" end="22132" title="2013 Indian Premier League" label="2013 Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139964" start="22213" end="22235" title="2015 Cricket World Cup" label="2015 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019637" start="22364" end="22386" title="Australian cricket team in Sri Lanka in 2016" label="test tour to Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019897" start="22391" end="22423" title="South African cricket team in Australia in 2016–17" label="home series against South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195284" start="22466" end="22490" title="Kent County Cricket Club" label="Kent County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864599" start="22561" end="22572" title="Kent County Cricket Club in 2017" label="2017 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="22698" end="22707" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q21968116" start="22751" end="22776" title="ICC Champions Trophy 2017" label="ICC Champions Trophy 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q42529701" start="22981" end="23005" title="2017–18 Regional Super50" label="2017–18 Regional Super50"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816432" start="23031" end="23035" title="Kent County Cricket Club in 2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500100" start="23170" end="23194" title="Free State (cricket team)" label="Free State Cricket Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422392" start="23316" end="23323" title="Knights (cricket team)" label="Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861981" start="23351" end="23376" title="2020–21 CSA T20 Challenge" label="2020–21 CSA T20 Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q806537" start="23440" end="23472" title="Bangladesh national cricket team" label="Bangladesh national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602679" start="23483" end="23516" title="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup" label="2022 ICC Men&amp;#x27;s T20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215856" start="23568" end="23578" title="Dane Vilas" label="Dane Vilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q681723" start="23698" end="23711" title="Hansie Cronje" label="Hansie Cronje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525548" start="23742" end="23756" title="Nantie Hayward" label="Nantie Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886365" start="24007" end="24020" title="Makhaya Ntini" label="Makhaya Ntini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146533" start="24558" end="24582" title="ICC Cricket Hall of Fame" label="ICC Cricket Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629054" wikidata="Q2052512" url="?curid=629054" title="1984 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom">
<text>The 1984 European Parliament election was the second European election to be held in the United Kingdom. It was held on 14 June. The electoral system was First Past the Post in England, Scotland and Wales and Single transferable vote in Northern Ireland. The turnout was again the lowest in Europe. In England, Scotland and Wales, the Liberal Party and Social Democratic Party were in alliance, collecting 2,591,635 votes but not a single seat.

The election represented a small recovery for Labour, under Michael Foot&#x27;s replacement Neil Kinnock, taking 15 seats from the Conservatives. In the general election of 1983, they had only had a vote share of 2% more than the SDP–Liberal Alliance (although they had nearly 10 times more MP&#x27;s elected) and 15% less than the Conservatives. This was the last European election in the UK in which the governing party won a majority of seats.

A by-election to the British Parliament also took place on the same day in the Portsmouth South constituency – the Alliance gained the seat from the Conservatives.
==Results==

===United Kingdom===

&quot;Source: UK Parliament briefing&quot;

*Overall (England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) turnout: 32.6% (EC average: 61%)
*Overall votes cast: 13,998,190

===Great Britain===

&quot;Source: UK Parliament briefing&quot;

&quot;Total votes cast – 13,312,898. All parties listed.&quot;

===Northern Ireland===

&quot;Source: Northern Ireland Social and Political Archive&quot;



=== Constituency results ===

&quot;Source: &quot;

==See also==
*Elections in the United Kingdom: European elections
*List of members of the European Parliament for the United Kingdom (1984–1989)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2052512" start="4" end="37" title="1984 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1984 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="89" end="103" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="133" end="149" title="electoral system" label="electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="154" end="173" title="First Past the Post" label="First Past the Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="177" end="184" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="186" end="194" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="199" end="204" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="209" end="233" title="Single transferable vote" label="Single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="237" end="253" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="335" end="348" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="353" end="376" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="492" end="498" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="506" end="518" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="538" end="550" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="577" end="590" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="599" end="623" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389478" start="676" end="696" title="SDP–Liberal Alliance" label="SDP–Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="915" end="933" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232496" start="973" end="989" title="1984 Portsmouth South by-election" label="Portsmouth South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="1194" end="1201" title="voter turnout" label="turnout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1548" end="1599" title="Elections in the United Kingdom#European elections" label="Elections in the United Kingdom: European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914111" start="1601" end="1678" title="List of members of the European Parliament for the United Kingdom (1984–1989)" label="List of members of the European Parliament for the United Kingdom (1984–1989)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629055" wikidata="Q64624275" url="?curid=629055" title="In the clear">
<text>In the clear may refer to:
* Plaintext, unencrypted information
* &quot;In the Clear&quot;, a song by Foo Fighters from &quot;Sonic Highways&quot;
* &quot;In the Clear&quot;, an album by Ivy
* &quot;In the Clear&quot;, a song by Cap&#x27;n Jazz from &quot;Shmap&#x27;n Shmazz&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="29" end="38" title="Plaintext" label="Plaintext"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151253" start="126" end="140" title="Sonic Highways" label="Sonic Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149713" start="155" end="167" title="In the Clear" label="In the Clear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499622" start="256" end="275" title="Shmap&amp;#x27;n Shmazz" label="Shmap&amp;#x27;n Shmazz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629063" wikidata="Q722633" url="?curid=629063" title="Lake Aschersleben">
<text>Lake Aschersleben or Lake Gatersleben (&quot;Ascherslebener See&quot; or &quot;Gaterslebener See&quot; in German) is a former long but shallow lake in Germany, northeast of the Harz Mountains. The lake was about 12 km long and stretched from the town of Aschersleben until the village of Gatersleben. Originally, it was a natural lake which eventually silted up. From the middle of the 15th until the beginning of the 18th century, it existed again as a man-made lake, afterwards the area was converted into agricultural land. Part of the land is now covered by several artificial lakes which formed as a consequence of underground and opencast lignite mining in the 20th century, the largest being the Concordiasee.

The lake had formed naturally and had attracted settlers in prehistoric times, but eventually silted up. In 1446, a dam was constructed near the village of Gatersleben on the order of the bishop of Halberstadt and water from the river Selke was diverted into the lakebed, leading to the restoration of the lake. By an order of Frederick I of Prussia, the lake was completely drained after 1703 and the lakebed was converted into agricultural land. Two new villages, Friedrichsaue and Königsaue, were founded.

The lakebed contains 20-25m thick Pleistocene and Holocene sediments, from the Eemian Stage (previous interglacial period) to the present. Fluviatile, limnic and periglacial sediments interchange. All in all, 11 sedimentation cycles are present.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q722633" start="0" end="17" title="Lake Aschersleben" label="Lake Aschersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q722633" start="21" end="37" title="Lake Aschersleben" label="Lake Gatersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="106" end="112" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="143" end="147" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="151" end="158" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="177" end="181" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q486991" start="254" end="266" title="Aschersleben" label="Aschersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q686432" start="288" end="299" title="Gatersleben" label="Gatersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="645" end="652" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124200" start="703" end="715" title="Concordiasee" label="Concordiasee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="834" end="837" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="906" end="912" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072" start="916" end="927" title="Halberstadt" label="Halberstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q878343" start="953" end="958" title="Selke (river)" label="Selke"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="1045" end="1056" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1060" end="1067" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703872" start="1184" end="1197" title="Friedrichsaue" label="Friedrichsaue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681197" start="1202" end="1211" title="Königsaue" label="Königsaue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="1262" end="1273" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="1278" end="1286" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295340" start="1307" end="1319" title="Eemian Stage" label="Eemian Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q487294" start="1330" end="1342" title="interglacial" label="interglacial"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629068" wikidata="Q7226648" url="?curid=629068" title="Polynomially reflexive space">
<text>In mathematics, a polynomially reflexive space is a Banach space &quot;X&quot;, on which the space of all polynomials in each degree is a reflexive space.

Given a multilinear functional &quot;M&quot;&quot;n&quot; of degree &quot;n&quot; (that is, &quot;M&quot;&quot;n&quot; is &quot;n&quot;-linear), we can define a polynomial &quot;p&quot; as

:formula_1

(that is, applying &quot;M&quot;&quot;n&quot; on the &quot;diagonal&quot;) or any finite sum of these. If only &quot;n&quot;-linear functionals are in the sum, the polynomial is said to be &quot;n&quot;-homogeneous.

We define the space &quot;P&quot;&quot;n&quot; as consisting of all &quot;n&quot;-homogeneous polynomials.

The &quot;P&quot;1 is identical to the dual space, and is thus reflexive for all reflexive &quot;X&quot;. This implies that reflexivity is a prerequisite for polynomial reflexivity.

==Relation to continuity of forms==

On a finite-dimensional linear space, a quadratic form &quot;x&quot;↦&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is always a (finite) linear combination of products &quot;x&quot;↦&quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) &quot;h&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) of two linear functionals &quot;g&quot; and &quot;h&quot;. Therefore, assuming that the scalars are complex numbers, every sequence &quot;xn&quot; satisfying &quot;g&quot;(&quot;xn&quot;) → 0 for all linear functionals &quot;g&quot;, satisfies also &quot;f&quot;(&quot;xn&quot;) → 0 for all quadratic forms &quot;f&quot;.

In infinite dimension the situation is different. For example, in a Hilbert space, an orthonormal sequence &quot;xn&quot; satisfies &quot;g&quot;(&quot;xn&quot;) → 0 for all linear functionals &quot;g&quot;, and nevertheless &quot;f&quot;(&quot;xn&quot;) = 1 where &quot;f&quot; is the quadratic form &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = ||&quot;x&quot;||2. In more technical words, this quadratic form fails to be weakly sequentially continuous at the origin.

On a reflexive Banach space with the approximation property the following two conditions are equivalent:
* every quadratic form is weakly sequentially continuous at the origin;
* the Banach space of all quadratic forms is reflexive.

Quadratic forms are 2-homogeneous polynomials. The equivalence mentioned above holds also for &quot;n&quot;-homogeneous polynomials, &quot;n&quot;=3,4...

== Examples ==

For the formula_2 spaces, the &quot;P&quot;&quot;n&quot; is reflexive if and only if &lt; . Thus, no formula_2 is polynomially reflexive. (formula_4 is ruled out because it is not reflexive.)

Thus if a Banach space admits formula_2 as a quotient space, it is not polynomially reflexive. This makes polynomially reflexive spaces rare.

The Tsirelson space &quot;T&quot;* is polynomially reflexive.

==Notes==
== References ==

*Alencar, R., Aron, R. and S. Dineen (1984), &quot;A reflexive space of holomorphic functions in infinitely many variables&quot;, &quot;Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.&quot; 90: 407–411.
*Farmer, Jeff D. (1994), &quot;Polynomial reflexivity in Banach spaces&quot;, &quot;Israel Journal of Mathematics&quot; 87: 257–273. 
*Jaramillo, J. and Moraes, L. (2000), &quot;Dualily and reflexivity in spaces of polynomials&quot;, &quot;Arch. Math. (Basel)&quot; 74: 282–293. 
*Mujica, Jorge (2001), &quot;Reflexive spaces of homogeneous polynomials&quot;, &quot;Bull. Polish Acad. Sci. Math.&quot; 49:3, 211–222. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226648" start="18" end="46" title="Polynomially reflexive space" label="polynomially reflexive space"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="52" end="64" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032198" start="138" end="153" title="reflexive space" label="reflexive space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952404" start="164" end="175" title="Multilinear map" label="multilinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q579600" start="176" end="186" title="functional (mathematics)" label="functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q189791" start="417" end="425" title="diagonal" label="diagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="722" end="732" title="dual space" label="dual space"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="943" end="957" title="quadratic form" label="quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q261527" start="1132" end="1149" title="linear functional" label="linear functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="1516" end="1529" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411166" start="1534" end="1545" title="orthonormal" label="orthonormal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1570" end="1579" title="Weak convergence (Hilbert space)#Weak convergence of orthonormal sequences" label="satisfies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977941" start="1857" end="1863" title="Weak convergence (Hilbert space)" label="weakly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1864" end="1887" title="Continuous function (topology)#Sequences and nets" label="sequentially continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032198" start="1909" end="1918" title="Reflexive space" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="1919" end="1931" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q621744" start="1941" end="1963" title="approximation property" label="approximation property"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="2327" end="2333" title="lp space" label="spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393796" start="2547" end="2561" title="quotient space (linear algebra)" label="quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849771" start="2649" end="2664" title="Tsirelson space" label="Tsirelson space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087031" start="2998" end="3027" title="Israel Journal of Mathematics" label="Israel Journal of Mathematics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629069" wikidata="Q7591263" url="?curid=629069" title="St. Paul Pioneer Press">
<text>The St. Paul Pioneer Press is a newspaper based in Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States. It serves the Minneapolis–Saint Paul metropolitan area. Circulation is heaviest in the east metro, including Ramsey, Dakota, and Washington counties, along with western Wisconsin, eastern Minnesota and Anoka County, Minnesota. The paper&#x27;s main rival is the &quot;Star Tribune&quot;, based in neighboring Minneapolis. The &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; is owned by MediaNews Group, controlled by Alden Global Capital. It no longer includes &quot;St. Paul&quot; as part of its name in either its print or online edition, but its owner still lists the paper&#x27;s name as the &quot;St. Paul Pioneer Press&quot; and the paper also calls itself the &quot;St. Paul Pioneer Press&quot; on its Facebook and Twitter pages. Its URL and digital presence is TwinCities.com.

==History==

The &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; traces its history to both the &quot;Minnesota Pioneer&quot;, Minnesota&#x27;s first daily newspaper (founded in 1849 by James M. Goodhue), and the &quot;Saint Paul Dispatch&quot; (launched in 1868). Ridder Publications acquired the &quot;Pioneer&quot; and the &quot;Dispatch&quot; in 1927. Ridder merged with Knight Publications to form Knight Ridder in 1974. The two papers were operated for many years as separate morning and evening papers, but in 1985 were merged into the all-day publication the &quot;St. Paul Pioneer Press and Dispatch&quot;, which later dropped the &quot;and&quot; from &quot;and Dispatch&quot; in 1986, simply becoming the &quot;St. Paul Pioneer Press Dispatch&quot;. The publication eventually made the transition to a morning-only paper, and on March 26, 1990, the word &quot;Dispatch&quot; was dropped. The paper is sometimes called the &quot;Pi Press&quot;, just as &quot;Strib&quot; is used for the &quot;Star Tribune&quot;.

During World War II the paper had war correspondents in the field. There were 30 correspondents from various papers at Iwo Jima, including A.J. Crocker of the Pioneer Press.

From 1947 to 1949, the newspaper printed the comic strip &quot;Li&#x27;l Folks&quot;, by Twin Cities native Charles M. Schulz. This comic introduced a number of characters who would later return in 1950 in the syndicated comic strip &quot;Peanuts&quot;, including Charlie Brown and a dog strongly resembling Snoopy.

In 1952, the &quot;Dispatch&quot; began sponsoring a treasure hunt as part of the Saint Paul Winter Carnival. Clues to finding a medallion are printed in the paper, and the first person to find and return it with the clues and a registered carnival button wins a sum of money. The prize started off at $1,000 and as of 2004 rose to $10,000.

The paper has won three Pulitzer Prizes: in 1986, 1988, and 2000.

On March 10, 1999, the day before the University of Minnesota men&#x27;s basketball team was to begin play in the NCAA Tournament, the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; published a story written by George Dohrmann with allegations that a staffer wrote coursework for many Minnesota basketball players within the past five years. Immediately, Minnesota suspended four players suspected of academic fraud, and in 2000, the NCAA vacated all postseason appearances by Minnesota from 1994 to 1998 and docked scholarships for four years, among other penalties. Dohrmann would win a Pulitzer Prize for beat reporting in 2000 for his reports on the scandal. Dohrmann and his editor prepared for hostile reactions to the newspaper from the local community. Minnesota governor Jesse Ventura accused the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; of timing the article to be published around NCAA Tournament time for the sake of &quot;sensationalism journalism&quot;, and the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; got many hostile calls and letters in response to the story.

In 2004 the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; made news itself. The great-great-grandson of George Thompson, a former owner/editor of the paper, took a 1914 pocket watch of his grandfather&#x27;s to the Antiques Roadshow when it came to St. Paul. There he learned it was not ordinary, with an estimated value of $250,000. Afterward, the grandson sent the watch to Sotheby&#x27;s, where it sold for $1.5 million. The &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; Patek Philippe is on display at the Patek Philippe Museum in Geneva. In 2020 the show updated its appraisal of the watch&#x27;s value to $2–3 million.

The McClatchy Company acquired the paper in June 2006 when it bought Knight Ridder. As owner of the &quot;Star Tribune,&quot; McClatchy had to sell the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; because of antitrust concerns. The &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; was subsequently sold by McClatchy to MediaNews Group later in the year.

The hedge fund Alden Global Capital now owns a controlling share of the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot;. In its operating year of 2017, &quot;The Pioneer Press&quot; under Alden announced a profit of $10 million with a 13% operating margin after Alden cut the newspaper&#x27;s workforce to around 60 people. Alden has faced notable criticism for this from editorial staff of &quot;The Denver Post&quot;.

In 2006 the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; had 206 reporters, copy-editors, and editors who were members of a union. By September 2023, that number had dropped to 29.

== Notable journalists ==
*Bob Shaw
*Joseph H. Ball, who was a columnist for the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; before becoming a Republican U.S. Senator for Minnesota
*Jacqui Banaszynski, writer, editor and winner of the 1988 Pulitzer Prize for Feature Writing.
*Jim Caple
*Nick Coleman
*George Dohrmann, winner of the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for beat reporting, for stories about the University of Minnesota basketball scandal.
*Dick Gordon
*Herb Greenberg
*Deborah Howell, executive editor and vice president who died in 2010.
*Mark Kellogg, the first Associated Press correspondent to die in the line of duty when he was killed at the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
*Katherine Lanpher, columnist and later co-host of &quot;The Al Franken Show&quot;
*James Lileks
*Robert Ridder, former reporter, later a director for Knight Ridder.
*Don Riley, sportswriter
*Jim Romenesko, Internet reporter for the &quot;Pioneer Press&quot; from 1996 to 1999, now blogger at JimRomenesko.com
*John Sandford/John Camp, author of the &quot;Prey&quot; series of crime novels and winner of the 1986 Pulitzer Prize for Feature Writing.
*Joe Soucheray, general columnist and host of the KSTP afternoon program, Garage Logic.
*Charley Walters, sports columnist

==Gallery==
==See also==

*List of newspapers in Minnesota
*Defunct newspapers of Minnesota

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="32" end="41" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="51" end="72" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="103" end="125" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis–Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q491201" start="198" end="204" title="Ramsey County, Minnesota" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q111694" start="206" end="212" title="Dakota County, Minnesota" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q485408" start="218" end="228" title="Washington County, Minnesota" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="258" end="267" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110495" start="291" end="314" title="Anoka County, Minnesota" label="Anoka County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q862148" start="357" end="369" title="Star Tribune" label="Star Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="398" end="409" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916145" start="453" end="468" title="MediaNews Group" label="MediaNews Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954123" start="484" end="504" title="Alden Global Capital" label="Alden Global Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="958" end="967" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q62018406" start="1017" end="1033" title="James M. Goodhue" label="James M. Goodhue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402042" start="1050" end="1069" title="Saint Paul Dispatch" label="Saint Paul Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198003" start="1234" end="1247" title="Knight Ridder" label="Knight Ridder"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="1888" end="1905" title="war correspondent" label="war correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q180182" start="1973" end="1981" title="Battle of Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q841287" start="2092" end="2107" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Folks" label="Li&amp;#x27;l Folks"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="2137" end="2154" title="Charles M. Schulz" label="Charles M. Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="2268" end="2275" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="2293" end="2306" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="2337" end="2343" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053933" start="2399" end="2412" title="Treasure hunt (game)" label="treasure hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402057" start="2428" end="2454" title="Saint Paul Winter Carnival" label="Saint Paul Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q131647" start="2475" end="2484" title="medallion" label="medallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="2712" end="2726" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583189" start="2732" end="2736" title="1986 Pulitzer Prize" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972057" start="2738" end="2742" title="1988 Pulitzer Prize" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597779" start="2748" end="2752" title="2000 Pulitzer Prize" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868278" start="2793" end="2843" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="University of Minnesota men&amp;#x27;s basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994975" start="2869" end="2884" title="1999 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament" label="NCAA Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204202" start="2945" end="2960" title="George Dohrmann" label="George Dohrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="3168" end="3172" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597779" start="3323" end="3337" title="2000 Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876981" start="3342" end="3356" title="beat reporting" label="beat reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q311161" start="3514" end="3527" title="Jesse Ventura" label="Jesse Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052933" start="3978" end="3995" title="Antiques Roadshow" label="Antiques Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="4139" end="4153" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q659096" start="4217" end="4231" title="Patek Philippe" label="Patek Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="4278" end="4284" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660027" start="4369" end="4390" title="The McClatchy Company" label="The McClatchy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198003" start="4438" end="4451" title="Knight Ridder" label="Knight Ridder"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="4558" end="4567" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916145" start="4646" end="4661" title="MediaNews Group" label="MediaNews Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954123" start="4697" end="4717" title="Alden Global Capital" label="Alden Global Capital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5057" end="5072" title="The Denver Post#Ownership" label="The Denver Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q649014" start="5271" end="5279" title="Bob Shaw" label="Bob Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672420" start="5281" end="5295" title="Joseph H. Ball" label="Joseph H. Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5369" end="5379" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="5380" end="5392" title="United States Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q60161903" start="5408" end="5426" title="Jacqui Banaszynski" label="Jacqui Banaszynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194038" start="5503" end="5512" title="Jim Caple" label="Jim Caple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026922" start="5514" end="5526" title="Nick Coleman (columnist)" label="Nick Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204202" start="5528" end="5543" title="George Dohrmann" label="George Dohrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597779" start="5559" end="5578" title="2000 Pulitzer Prize" label="2000 Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515757" start="5621" end="5663" title="University of Minnesota basketball scandal" label="University of Minnesota basketball scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272941" start="5666" end="5677" title="Dick Gordon (sportswriter)" label="Dick Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151741" start="5679" end="5693" title="Herb Greenberg" label="Herb Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993392" start="5695" end="5709" title="Deborah Howell" label="Deborah Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294126" start="5766" end="5778" title="Mark Kellogg (reporter)" label="Mark Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="5790" end="5806" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="5874" end="5902" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Battle of the Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376457" start="5905" end="5922" title="Katherine Lanpher" label="Katherine Lanpher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712954" start="5961" end="5980" title="The Al Franken Show" label="The Al Franken Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138060" start="5988" end="6000" title="James Lileks" label="James Lileks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260851" start="6002" end="6015" title="Robert Ridder" label="Robert Ridder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198003" start="6055" end="6068" title="Knight Ridder" label="Knight Ridder"/>
<link wikidata="Q128214145" start="6071" end="6080" title="Don Riley" label="Don Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197840" start="6096" end="6109" title="Jim Romenesko" label="Jim Romenesko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701679" start="6215" end="6238" title="John Sandford (novelist)" label="John Sandford/John Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212439" start="6354" end="6367" title="Joe Soucheray" label="Joe Soucheray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338258" start="6403" end="6407" title="KSTP (AM)" label="KSTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212439" start="6427" end="6439" title="Garage Logic" label="Garage Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084376" start="6442" end="6457" title="Charley Walters" label="Charley Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630516" start="6504" end="6535" title="List of newspapers in Minnesota" label="List of newspapers in Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756227" start="6537" end="6568" title="Defunct newspapers of Minnesota" label="Defunct newspapers of Minnesota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629072" wikidata="Q1752509" url="?curid=629072" title="Hard Eight (film)">
<text>Hard Eight (originally titled Sydney) is a 1996 American crime film written and directed by Paul Thomas Anderson in his feature directorial debut, and starring Philip Baker Hall, John C. Reilly, Gwyneth Paltrow and Samuel L. Jackson. It is the expansion of the short film &quot;Cigarettes &amp; Coffee&quot;. The film follows the life of a senior gambler and a homeless man. It premiered at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival.

==Plot==
Sydney Brown, a well-dressed senior gambler, finds John Finnegan, a homeless man, forlornly sitting outside a diner in Sparks, Nevada. Sydney offers John a cigarette and buys him a cup of coffee. John tells Sydney that he went bust in Las Vegas and needs $6,000 for his mother&#x27;s funeral. They travel to Vegas, where Sydney helps John win the money. Two years later, John becomes Sydney&#x27;s protégé. Calm and reserved, Sydney displays a fatherly care for John, who is unsophisticated. John has a new friend named Jimmy, who does security work, and is attracted to Clementine, a cocktail waitress in Reno. Sydney meets Clementine and learns that she moonlights as a prostitute. Although Clementine believes Sydney might want to use her services, he wants to build a connection between her and John. Sydney asks John to show Clementine around town.

After receiving a frantic phone call, Sydney finds John and Clementine holding an unconscious tourist hostage in a nearby motel because he did not pay Clementine for sex. He learns that John and Clementine have called the hostage&#x27;s wife, threatening to kill him if they do not get the money. After finding Jimmy&#x27;s gun, Sydney convinces John and Clementine to flee the motel, advising them to leave town for a honeymoon as they have recently been impulsively married. While leaving, Sydney removes the evidence from the motel room.

Sydney meets with Jimmy, who tells him that the couple did not call the police. However, Jimmy explains that he has heard stories of Sydney killing John&#x27;s father in Atlantic City. Jimmy pulls a gun on Sydney and threatens to tell John unless Sydney gives him $10,000. Sydney says that he does not have it, but he can give $6,000 cash. They go to Jimmy&#x27;s suite and down to the casino floor, where Sydney gets the money from the cashier and gives it to Jimmy. John calls Sydney from a roadside phone to update him on the honeymoon. During the call, Sydney tells John that he loves him like a son. After hearing that, John thanks him and says that he also loves him. Sydney sneaks into Jimmy&#x27;s house, kills him and retrieves what&#x27;s left of the money. The next day, Sydney returns to the diner where he met John and covers his bloodstained shirt cuff with a jacket sleeve.

==Cast==

* Philip Baker Hall as Sydney
* John C. Reilly as John
* Gwyneth Paltrow as Clementine
* Samuel L. Jackson as Jimmy

Some of Anderson&#x27;s collaborative actors appear in the film, including Philip Seymour Hoffman as a craps player and Melora Walters as Jimmy&#x27;s girlfriend.

==Production==
Originally titled &quot;Sydney&quot;, it was Anderson&#x27;s first feature film and the expansion of the short film &quot;Cigarettes &amp; Coffee&quot;. The main character Sydney was named after Hall&#x27;s previous role in &quot;Midnight Run&quot;. Hall, Walters, Reilly and Hoffman later starred in &quot;Boogie Nights&quot; and &quot;Magnolia&quot;.

Anderson said that he cast Hoffman in a supporting role after seeing him in &quot;Scent of a Woman&quot;. According to Hall, Hoffman improvised most of the dialogue his character says in his only scene in the film.

==Release==
The film premiered in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival. In 2018, Anderson said he was working on a Blu-ray release of the film. An Australian Blu-ray for the film was released by Viavision in October 2020.

==Reception==
Roger Ebert gave the film three and a half stars out of four, writing &quot;Movies like &quot;Hard Eight&quot; remind me of what original, compelling characters the movies can sometimes give us.&quot; Stephen Holden of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote &quot;&quot;Hard Eight&quot; is not a movie that wants to make a grand statement. It is really little more than a small resonant mood piece whose hard-bitten characters are difficult to like. But within its self-imposed limitations, it accomplishes most of what it sets out to do. And the acting is wonderfully understated, economical and unsentimental.&quot; On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 82% based on 49 reviews, with an average rating of 6.9/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;An absorbing showcase for Philip Baker Hall, Paul Thomas Anderson&#x27;s feature debut is a gamble that pays off handsomely.&quot; It is described by some authors as a neo-noir film.

==See also==
* List of films set in Las Vegas

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="57" end="67" title="crime film" label="crime film"/>
<link wikidata="Q25132" start="92" end="112" title="Paul Thomas Anderson" label="Paul Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q447669" start="160" end="177" title="Philip Baker Hall" label="Philip Baker Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="179" end="193" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="195" end="210" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172678" start="215" end="232" title="Samuel L. Jackson" label="Samuel L. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972361" start="278" end="301" title="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Coffee" label="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q386281" start="395" end="420" title="1996 Cannes Film Festival" label="1996 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q211629" start="551" end="565" title="Sparks, Nevada" label="Sparks, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="667" end="676" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="1038" end="1042" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q220161" start="1706" end="1715" title="honeymoon" label="honeymoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="1999" end="2012" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q447669" start="2731" end="2748" title="Philip Baker Hall" label="Philip Baker Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="2761" end="2775" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="2786" end="2801" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q172678" start="2818" end="2835" title="Samuel L. Jackson" label="Samuel L. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180560" start="2921" end="2943" title="Philip Seymour Hoffman" label="Philip Seymour Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q869499" start="2949" end="2954" title="craps" label="craps"/>
<link wikidata="Q242763" start="2966" end="2980" title="Melora Walters" label="Melora Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972361" start="3147" end="3170" title="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Coffee" label="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q847802" start="3255" end="3267" title="Midnight Run" label="Midnight Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q291170" start="3332" end="3345" title="Boogie Nights" label="Boogie Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q588420" start="3362" end="3370" title="Magnolia (film)" label="Magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q321561" start="3461" end="3477" title="Scent of a Woman (1992 film)" label="Scent of a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071326" start="3633" end="3650" title="Un Certain Regard" label="Un Certain Regard"/>
<link wikidata="Q386281" start="3666" end="3691" title="1996 Cannes Film Festival" label="1996 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="3858" end="3869" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4477" end="4492" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="4807" end="4815" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620055" start="4838" end="4868" title="List of films set in Las Vegas" label="List of films set in Las Vegas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="629077" wikidata="Q6850866" url="?curid=629077" title="Milchem">
<text>Milchem Inc. was formed in 1963 to manufacture and market drilling fluids and oilfield chemicals.
The company&#x27;s home office was located at 3920 Essex Lane in Houston, Texas. It had regional sales and service offices throughout North America and the world.

==Background==
In 1971, Milchem was acquired by Baker Oil Tools.

In 1985, Baker announced that it would combine its Houston-based Milchem Drilling Fluids subsidiary with competitor New Orleans–based Newpark Drilling Fluids forming Milpark, with Baker getting 64% of the merged company and Newpark Resources Inc. parent of Newpark Drilling Fluids taking 36%. Combined revenues at the time of the merger were estimated at $225 million per year.

In 1987, Baker merged with Hughes forming Baker Hughes and Hughes Drilling Fluids was merged into Milpark.

In 1993, Milpark became a product line within Baker Hughes INTEQ. 

In 2004, Baker Hughes Drilling Fluids was established as a stand-alone division of Baker Hughes.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6850866" start="0" end="12" title="Milchem" label="Milchem Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q890914" start="58" end="72" title="drilling fluid" label="drilling fluid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="552" end="574" title="Newpark Resources Inc." label="Newpark Resources Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="749" end="761" title="Baker Hughes" label="Baker Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="861" end="879" title="Baker Hughes INTEQ" label="Baker Hughes INTEQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="966" end="978" title="Baker Hughes" label="Baker Hughes"/>
</links>
</doc>
