<doc id="17556" wikidata="Q38867" url="?curid=17556" title="Laser">
<text>A laser is a device that emits light through a process of optical amplification based on the stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. The word &quot;laser&quot; originated as an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. The first laser was built in 1960 by Theodore Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratories, based on theoretical work by Charles H. Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow and the optical amplifier patented by Gordon Gould.

A laser differs from other sources of light in that it emits light that is &quot;coherent&quot;. Spatial coherence allows a laser to be focused to a tight spot, enabling uses such as optical communication, laser cutting, and lithography. It also allows a laser beam to stay narrow over great distances (collimation), used in laser pointers, lidar, and free-space optical communication. Lasers can also have high temporal coherence, which permits them to emit light with a very narrow frequency spectrum. Temporal coherence can also be used to produce ultrashort pulses of light with a broad spectrum but durations as short as an attosecond.

Lasers are used in fiber-optic and free-space optical communications, optical disc drives, laser printers, barcode scanners, semiconductor chip manufacturing (photolithography, etching), laser surgery and skin treatments, cutting and welding materials, military and law enforcement devices for marking targets and measuring range and speed, and in laser lighting displays for entertainment. The laser is regarded as one of the greatest inventions of the 20th century.

== Terminology ==
The first device using amplification by stimulated emission operated at microwave frequencies, and was called a &quot;maser&quot;, for &quot;microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation&quot;. When similar optical devices were developed they were first called &quot;optical masers&quot;, until &quot;microwave&quot; was replaced by &quot;light&quot; in the acronym, to become &quot;laser&quot;.

Today, all such devices operating at frequencies higher than microwaves (approximately above 300 GHz) are called lasers (e.g. &quot;infrared lasers&quot;, &quot;ultraviolet lasers&quot;, &quot;X-ray lasers&quot;, &quot;gamma-ray lasers&quot;), whereas devices operating at microwave or lower radio frequencies are called masers.

The back-formed verb &quot;&quot; is frequently used in the field, meaning &quot;to give off coherent light,&quot; especially about the gain medium of a laser; when a laser is operating, it is said to be &quot;&quot;. The terms &quot;laser&quot; and &quot;maser&quot; are also used for naturally occurring coherent emissions, as in &quot;astrophysical maser&quot; and &quot;atom laser&quot;.

A laser that produces light by itself is technically an optical oscillator rather than an optical amplifier as suggested by the acronym. It has been humorously noted that the acronym LOSER, for &quot;light oscillation by stimulated emission of radiation&quot;, would have been more correct. Some sources refer to the word laser as an anacronym, meaning an acronym so widely used as a noun that it is no longer considered an abbreviation.

== Fundamentals ==

Photons, the quanta of electromagnetic radiation, are released and absorbed from energy levels in atoms and molecules. In a lightbulb or a star, the energy is emitted from many different levels giving photons with a broad range of energies. This process is called thermal radiation.

The underlying physical process creating photons in a laser is the same as in thermal radiation, but the actual emission is not the result of random thermal processes. Instead, the release of a photon is triggered by the nearby passage of another photon. This is called stimulated emission. For this process to work, the passing photon must be similar in energy, and thus wavelength, to the one that could be released by the atom or molecule, and the atom or molecule must be in the suitable excited state.

The photon that is emitted by stimulated emission is identical to the photon that triggered its emission, and both photons can go on to trigger stimulated emission in other atoms, creating the possibility of a chain reaction. For this to happen, many of the atoms or molecules must be in the proper excited state so that the photons can trigger them. In most materials, atoms or molecules drop out of excited states fairly rapidly, making it difficult or impossible to produce a chain reaction. The materials chosen for lasers are the ones that have metastable states, which stay excited for a relatively long time. In laser physics, such a material is called an active laser medium. Combined with an energy source that continues to &quot;pump&quot; energy into the material, it is possible to have enough atoms or molecules in an excited state for a chain reaction to develop.

Lasers are distinguished from other light sources by their coherence. Spatial (or transverse) coherence is typically expressed through the output being a narrow beam, which is diffraction-limited. Laser beams can be focused to very tiny spots, achieving a very high irradiance, or they can have a very low divergence to concentrate their power at a great distance. Temporal (or longitudinal) coherence implies a polarized wave at a single frequency, whose phase is correlated over a relatively great distance (the coherence length) along the beam. A beam produced by a thermal or other incoherent light source has an instantaneous amplitude and phase that vary randomly with respect to time and position, thus having a short coherence length.

Lasers are characterized according to their wavelength in a vacuum. Most &quot;single wavelength&quot; lasers produce radiation in several &quot;modes&quot; with slightly different wavelengths. Although temporal coherence implies some degree of monochromaticity, some lasers emit a broad spectrum of light or emit different wavelengths of light simultaneously. Certain lasers are not single spatial mode and have light beams that diverge more than is required by the diffraction limit. All such devices are classified as &quot;lasers&quot; based on the method of producing light by stimulated emission. Lasers are employed where light of the required spatial or temporal coherence can not be produced using simpler technologies.

== Design ==
A laser consists of a gain medium, a mechanism to energize it, and something to provide optical feedback. The gain medium is a material with properties that allow it to amplify light by way of stimulated emission. Light of a specific wavelength that passes through the gain medium is amplified (power increases). Feedback enables stimulated emission to amplify predominantly the optical frequency at the peak of the gain-frequency curve. As stimulated emission grows, eventually one frequency dominates over all others, meaning that a coherent beam has been formed.

The process of stimulated emission is analogous to that of an audio oscillator with positive feedback which can occur, for example, when the speaker in a public-address system is placed in proximity to the microphone. The screech one hears is audio oscillation at the peak of the gain-frequency curve for the amplifier.

For the gain medium to amplify light, it needs to be supplied with energy in a process called pumping. The energy is typically supplied as an electric current or as light at a different wavelength. Pump light may be provided by a flash lamp or by another laser.

The most common type of laser uses feedback from an optical cavitya pair of mirrors on either end of the gain medium. Light bounces back and forth between the mirrors, passing through the gain medium and being amplified each time. Typically one of the two mirrors, the output coupler, is partially transparent. Some of the light escapes through this mirror. Depending on the design of the cavity (whether the mirrors are flat or curved), the light coming out of the laser may spread out or form a narrow beam. In analogy to electronic oscillators, this device is sometimes called a &quot;laser oscillator&quot;.

Most practical lasers contain additional elements that affect the properties of the emitted light, such as the polarization, wavelength, and shape of the beam.

== Laser physics ==

Electrons and how they interact with electromagnetic fields are important in our understanding of chemistry and physics.

=== Stimulated emission ===


In the classical view, the energy of an electron orbiting an atomic nucleus is larger for orbits further from the nucleus of an atom. However, quantum mechanical effects force electrons to take on discrete positions in orbitals. Thus, electrons are found in specific energy levels of an atom, two of which are shown below:

An electron in an atom can absorb energy from light (photons) or heat (phonons) only if there is a transition between energy levels that match the energy carried by the photon or phonon. For light, this means that any given transition will only absorb one particular wavelength of light. Photons with the correct wavelength can cause an electron to jump from the lower to the higher energy level. The photon is consumed in this process.

When an electron is excited from one state to that at a higher energy level with energy difference ΔE, it will not stay that way forever. Eventually, a photon will be spontaneously created from the vacuum having energy ΔE. Conserving energy, the electron transitions to a lower energy level that is not occupied, with transitions to different levels having different time constants. This process is called spontaneous emission. Spontaneous emission is a quantum-mechanical effect and a direct physical manifestation of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. The emitted photon has a random direction, but its wavelength matches the absorption wavelength of the transition. This is the mechanism of fluorescence and thermal emission.

A photon with the correct wavelength to be absorbed by a transition can also cause an electron to drop from the higher to the lower level, emitting a new photon. The emitted photon exactly matches the original photon in wavelength, phase, and direction. This process is called stimulated emission.

=== Gain medium and cavity ===

The gain medium is put into an excited state by an external source of energy. In most lasers, this medium consists of a population of atoms that have been excited into such a state using an outside light source, or an electrical field that supplies energy for atoms to absorb and be transformed into their excited states.

The gain medium of a laser is normally a material of controlled purity, size, concentration, and shape, which amplifies the beam by the process of stimulated emission described above. This material can be of any state: gas, liquid, solid, or plasma. The gain medium absorbs pump energy, which raises some electrons into higher energy (&quot;excited&quot;) quantum states. Particles can interact with light by either absorbing or emitting photons. Emission can be spontaneous or stimulated. In the latter case, the photon is emitted in the same direction as the light that is passing by. When the number of particles in one excited state exceeds the number of particles in some lower-energy state, population inversion is achieved. In this state, the rate of stimulated emission is larger than the rate of absorption of light in the medium, and therefore the light is amplified. A system with this property is called an optical amplifier. When an optical amplifier is placed inside a resonant optical cavity, one obtains a laser.

For lasing media with extremely high gain, so-called superluminescence, light can be sufficiently amplified in a single pass through the gain medium without requiring a resonator. Although often referred to as a laser (see, for example, nitrogen laser), the light output from such a device lacks the spatial and temporal coherence achievable with lasers. Such a device cannot be described as an oscillator but rather as a high-gain optical amplifier that amplifies its spontaneous emission. The same mechanism describes so-called astrophysical masers/lasers.

The optical resonator is sometimes referred to as an &quot;optical cavity&quot;, but this is a misnomer: lasers use open resonators as opposed to the literal cavity that would be employed at microwave frequencies in a maser.
The resonator typically consists of two mirrors between which a coherent beam of light travels in both directions, reflecting on itself so that an average photon will pass through the gain medium repeatedly before it is emitted from the output aperture or lost to diffraction or absorption.
If the gain (amplification) in the medium is larger than the resonator losses, then the power of the recirculating light can rise exponentially. But each stimulated emission event returns an atom from its excited state to the ground state, reducing the gain of the medium. With increasing beam power, the net gain (gain minus loss) reduces to unity and the gain medium is said to be saturated. In a continuous wave (CW) laser, the balance of pump power against gain saturation and cavity losses produces an equilibrium value of the laser power inside the cavity; this equilibrium determines the operating point of the laser. If the applied pump power is too small, the gain will never be sufficient to overcome the cavity losses, and laser light will not be produced. The minimum pump power needed to begin laser action is called the &quot;lasing threshold&quot;. The gain medium will amplify any photons passing through it, regardless of direction; but only the photons in a spatial mode supported by the resonator will pass more than once through the medium and receive substantial amplification.

=== The light emitted ===

In most lasers, lasing begins with spontaneous emission into the lasing mode. This initial light is then amplified by stimulated emission in the gain medium. Stimulated emission produces light that matches the input signal in direction, wavelength, and polarization, whereas the phase of the emitted light is 90 degrees in lead of the stimulating light. This, combined with the filtering effect of the optical resonator gives laser light its characteristic coherence, and may give it uniform polarization and monochromaticity, depending on the resonator&#x27;s design. The fundamental laser linewidth of light emitted from the lasing resonator can be orders of magnitude narrower than the linewidth of light emitted from the passive resonator. Some lasers use a separate injection seeder to start the process off with a beam that is already highly coherent. This can produce beams with a narrower spectrum than would otherwise be possible.

In 1963, Roy J. Glauber showed that coherent states are formed from combinations of photon number states, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics. A coherent beam of light is formed by single-frequency quantum photon states distributed according to a Poisson distribution. As a result, the arrival rate of photons in a laser beam is described by Poisson statistics.

Many lasers produce a beam that can be approximated as a Gaussian beam; such beams have the minimum divergence possible for a given beam diameter. Some lasers, particularly high-power ones, produce multimode beams, with the transverse modes often approximated using Hermite–Gaussian or Laguerre-Gaussian functions. Some high-power lasers use a flat-topped profile known as a &quot;tophat beam&quot;. Unstable laser resonators (not used in most lasers) produce fractal-shaped beams. Specialized optical systems can produce more complex beam geometries, such as Bessel beams and optical vortexes.

Near the &quot;waist&quot; (or focal region) of a laser beam, it is highly &quot;collimated&quot;: the wavefronts are planar, normal to the direction of propagation, with no beam divergence at that point. However, due to diffraction, that can only remain true well within the Rayleigh range. The beam of a single transverse mode (gaussian beam) laser eventually diverges at an angle that varies inversely with the beam diameter, as required by diffraction theory. Thus, the &quot;pencil beam&quot; directly generated by a common helium–neon laser would spread out to a size of perhaps 500 kilometers when shone on the Moon (from the distance of the Earth). On the other hand, the light from a semiconductor laser typically exits the tiny crystal with a large divergence: up to 50°. However even such a divergent beam can be transformed into a similarly collimated beam employing a lens system, as is always included, for instance, in a laser pointer whose light originates from a laser diode. That is possible due to the light being of a single spatial mode. This unique property of laser light, spatial coherence, cannot be replicated using standard light sources (except by discarding most of the light) as can be appreciated by comparing the beam from a flashlight (torch) or spotlight to that of almost any laser.

A laser beam profiler is used to measure the intensity profile, width, and divergence of laser beams.

Diffuse reflection of a laser beam from a matte surface produces a speckle pattern with interesting properties.

=== Quantum vs. classical emission processes ===

The mechanism of producing radiation in a laser relies on stimulated emission, where energy is extracted from a transition in an atom or molecule. This is a quantum phenomenon that was predicted by Albert Einstein, who derived the relationship between the &quot;A&quot; coefficient, describing spontaneous emission, and the &quot;B&quot; coefficient which applies to absorption and stimulated emission. In the case of the free-electron laser, atomic energy levels are not involved; it appears that the operation of this rather exotic device can be explained without reference to quantum mechanics.

== Modes of operation ==

A laser can be classified as operating in either continuous or pulsed mode, depending on whether the power output is essentially continuous over time or whether its output takes the form of pulses of light on one or another time scale. Of course, even a laser whose output is normally continuous can be intentionally turned on and off at some rate to create pulses of light. When the modulation rate is on time scales much slower than the cavity lifetime and the period over which energy can be stored in the lasing medium or pumping mechanism, then it is still classified as a &quot;modulated&quot; or &quot;pulsed&quot; continuous wave laser. Most laser diodes used in communication systems fall into that category.

=== Continuous-wave operation ===
Some applications of lasers depend on a beam whose output power is constant over time. Such a laser is known as a &quot;continuous-wave&quot; (&quot;CW&quot;) laser. Many types of lasers can be made to operate in continuous-wave mode to satisfy such an application. Many of these lasers lase in several longitudinal modes at the same time, and beats between the slightly different optical frequencies of those oscillations will produce amplitude variations on time scales shorter than the round-trip time (the reciprocal of the frequency spacing between modes), typically a few nanoseconds or less. In most cases, these lasers are still termed &quot;continuous-wave&quot; as their output power is steady when averaged over longer periods, with the very high-frequency power variations having little or no impact on the intended application. (However, the term is not applied to mode-locked lasers, where the &quot;intention&quot; is to create very short pulses at the rate of the round-trip time.)

For continuous-wave operation, the population inversion of the gain medium needs to be continually replenished by a steady pump source. In some lasing media, this is impossible. In some other lasers, it would require pumping the laser at a very high continuous power level, which would be impractical, or destroying the laser by producing excessive heat. Such lasers cannot be run in CW mode.

=== Pulsed operation ===
The pulsed operation of lasers refers to any laser not classified as a continuous wave so that the optical power appears in pulses of some duration at some repetition rate. This encompasses a wide range of technologies addressing many different motivations. Some lasers are pulsed simply because they cannot be run in continuous mode.

In other cases, the application requires the production of pulses having as large an energy as possible. Since the pulse energy is equal to the average power divided by the repetition rate, this goal can sometimes be satisfied by lowering the rate of pulses so that more energy can be built up between pulses. In laser ablation, for example, a small volume of material at the surface of a workpiece can be evaporated if it is heated in a very short time, while supplying the energy gradually would allow for the heat to be absorbed into the bulk of the piece, never attaining a sufficiently high temperature at a particular point.

Other applications rely on the peak pulse power (rather than the energy in the pulse), especially to obtain nonlinear optical effects. For a given pulse energy, this requires creating pulses of the shortest possible duration utilizing techniques such as Q-switching.

The optical bandwidth of a pulse cannot be narrower than the reciprocal of the pulse width. In the case of extremely short pulses, that implies lasing over a considerable bandwidth, quite contrary to the very narrow bandwidths typical of CW lasers. The lasing medium in some &quot;dye lasers&quot; and &quot;vibronic solid-state lasers&quot; produces optical gain over a wide bandwidth, making a laser possible that can thus generate pulses of light as short as a few femtoseconds (10−15 s).

==== Q-switching ====
In a Q-switched laser, the population inversion is allowed to build up by introducing loss inside the resonator which exceeds the gain of the medium; this can also be described as a reduction of the quality factor or &#x27;Q&#x27; of the cavity. Then, after the pump energy stored in the laser medium has approached the maximum possible level, the introduced loss mechanism (often an electro- or acousto-optical element) is rapidly removed (or that occurs by itself in a passive device), allowing lasing to begin which rapidly obtains the stored energy in the gain medium. This results in a short pulse incorporating that energy, and thus a high peak power.

==== Mode locking ====
A mode-locked laser is capable of emitting extremely short pulses on the order of tens of picoseconds down to less than 10 femtoseconds. These pulses repeat at the round-trip time, that is, the time that it takes light to complete one round trip between the mirrors comprising the resonator. Due to the Fourier limit (also known as energy–time uncertainty), a pulse of such short temporal length has a spectrum spread over a considerable bandwidth. Thus such a gain medium must have a gain bandwidth sufficiently broad to amplify those frequencies. An example of a suitable material is titanium-doped, artificially grown sapphire (Ti:sapphire), which has a very wide gain bandwidth and can thus produce pulses of only a few femtoseconds duration.

Such mode-locked lasers are a most versatile tool for researching processes occurring on extremely short time scales (known as femtosecond physics, femtosecond chemistry and ultrafast science), for maximizing the effect of nonlinearity in optical materials (e.g. in second-harmonic generation, parametric down-conversion, optical parametric oscillators and the like). Unlike the giant pulse of a Q-switched laser, consecutive pulses from a mode-locked laser are phase-coherent; that is, the pulses (and not just their envelopes) are identical and perfectly periodic. For this reason, and the extremely large peak powers attained by such short pulses, such lasers are invaluable in certain areas of research.

==== Pulsed pumping ====
Another method of achieving pulsed laser operation is to pump the laser material with a source that is itself pulsed, either through electronic charging in the case of flash lamps, or another laser that is already pulsed. Pulsed pumping was historically used with dye lasers where the inverted population lifetime of a dye molecule was so short that a high-energy, fast pump was needed. The way to overcome this problem was to charge up large capacitors which are then switched to discharge through flashlamps, producing an intense flash. Pulsed pumping is also required for three-level lasers in which the lower energy level rapidly becomes highly populated, preventing further lasing until those atoms relax to the ground state. These lasers, such as the excimer laser and the copper vapor laser, can never be operated in CW mode.

== History ==

=== Foundations ===

In 1917, Albert Einstein established the theoretical foundations for the laser and the maser in the paper &quot;Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung&quot; (&quot;On the Quantum Theory of Radiation&quot;) via a re-derivation of Max Planck&#x27;s law of radiation, conceptually based upon probability coefficients (Einstein coefficients) for the absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. In 1928, Rudolf W. Ladenburg confirmed the existence of the phenomena of stimulated emission and negative absorption. In 1939, Valentin A. Fabrikant predicted using stimulated emission to amplify &quot;short&quot; waves. In 1947, Willis E. Lamb and R.C.Retherford found apparent stimulated emission in hydrogen spectra and effected the first demonstration of stimulated emission. In 1950, Alfred Kastler (Nobel Prize for Physics 1966) proposed the method of optical pumping, which was experimentally demonstrated two years later by Brossel, Kastler, and Winter.

=== Maser ===


In 1951, Joseph Weber submitted a paper on using stimulated emissions to make a microwave amplifier to the June 1952 Institute of Radio Engineers Vacuum Tube Research Conference in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. After this presentation, RCA asked Weber to give a seminar on this idea, and Charles H. Townes asked him for a copy of the paper.

In 1953, Charles H. Townes and graduate students James P. Gordon and Herbert J. Zeiger produced the first microwave amplifier, a device operating on similar principles to the laser, but amplifying microwave radiation rather than infrared or visible radiation. Townes&#x27;s maser was incapable of continuous output. Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Nikolay Basov and Aleksandr Prokhorov were independently working on the quantum oscillator and solved the problem of continuous-output systems by using more than two energy levels. These gain media could release stimulated emissions between an excited state and a lower excited state, not the ground state, facilitating the maintenance of a population inversion. In 1955, Prokhorov and Basov suggested optical pumping of a multi-level system as a method for obtaining the population inversion, later a main method of laser pumping.

Townes reports that several eminent physicistsamong them Niels Bohr, John von Neumann, and Llewellyn Thomasargued the maser violated Heisenberg&#x27;s uncertainty principle and hence could not work. Others such as Isidor Rabi and Polykarp Kusch expected that it would be impractical and not worth the effort. In 1964, Charles H. Townes, Nikolay Basov, and Aleksandr Prokhorov shared the Nobel Prize in Physics, &quot;for fundamental work in the field of quantum electronics, which has led to the construction of oscillators and amplifiers based on the maser–laser principle&quot;.

=== Laser ===

In April 1957, Japanese engineer Jun-ichi Nishizawa proposed the concept of a &quot;semiconductor optical maser&quot; in a patent application. That same year, Charles H. Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow, then at Bell Labs, began a serious study of infrared &quot;optical masers&quot;. As ideas developed, they abandoned infrared radiation to instead concentrate on visible light.
Simultaneously, Columbia University graduate student Gordon Gould was working on a doctoral thesis about the energy levels of excited thallium. Gould and Townes met and talked about radiation emission as a general subject, but not the specific work they were pursuing. Later, in November 1957, Gould noted his ideas for how a &quot;laser&quot; could be made, including using an open resonator (an essential laser-device component). His notebook included a diagram of an optically pumped laser. It also contained the first recorded use of the term &quot;laser,&quot; an acronym for &quot;light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation,&quot; along with suggestions for potential applications of the coherent light beams described.

In 1958, Bell Labs filed a patent application for Schawlow and Townes&#x27;s proposed optical maser; and Schawlow and Townes published a paper with their theoretical calculations in the &quot;Physical Review&quot;. That same year, Prokhorov independently proposed using an open resonator, the first published appearance of this idea.

At a conference in 1959, Gordon Gould first published the acronym &quot;LASER&quot; in the paper &quot;The LASER, Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation&quot;. Gould&#x27;s intention was that different &quot;-ASER&quot; acronyms should be used for different parts of the spectrum: &quot;XASER&quot; for x-rays, &quot;UVASER&quot; for ultraviolet, &quot;RASER&quot; for radio-wave, etc. Instead, the term &quot;LASER&quot; ended up being used for all devices operating at wavelengths shorter than microwaves.

Gould&#x27;s notes included possible applications for a laser, such as optical telecommunications, spectrometry, interferometry, radar, and nuclear fusion. He continued developing the idea and filed a patent application in April 1959. The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) denied his application, and awarded a patent to Bell Labs, in 1960. That provoked a twenty-eight-year lawsuit, featuring scientific prestige and money as the stakes. Gould won his first minor patent in 1977, yet it was not until 1987 that he won the first significant patent lawsuit victory when a Federal judge ordered the USPTO to issue patents to Gould for the optically pumped and the gas discharge laser devices. The question of just how to assign credit for inventing the laser remains unresolved by historians.

On May 16, 1960, Theodore H. Maiman operated the first functioning laser at Hughes Research Laboratories, Malibu, California, ahead of several research teams, including those of Townes, at Columbia University, Arthur L. Schawlow, at Bell Labs, and Gould, at the TRG (Technical Research Group) company. Maiman&#x27;s functional laser used a flashlamp-pumped synthetic ruby crystal to produce red laser light at 694 nanometers wavelength. The device was only capable of pulsed operation, due to its three-level pumping design scheme. Later that year, the Iranian physicist Ali Javan, and William R. Bennett Jr., and Donald R. Herriott, constructed the first gas laser, using helium and neon that was capable of continuous operation in the infrared (U.S. Patent 3,149,290); later, Javan received the Albert Einstein World Award of Science in 1993. In 1962, Robert N. Hall demonstrated the first semiconductor laser, which was made of gallium arsenide and emitted in the near-infrared band of the spectrum at 850 nm. Later that year, Nick Holonyak Jr. demonstrated the first semiconductor laser with a visible emission. This first semiconductor laser could only be used in pulsed-beam operation, and when cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures (77 K). In 1970, Zhores Alferov, in the USSR, and Izuo Hayashi and Morton Panish of Bell Labs also independently developed room-temperature, continual-operation diode lasers, using the heterojunction structure.

=== Recent innovations ===
Since the early period of laser history, laser research has produced a variety of improved and specialized laser types, optimized for different performance goals, including:
* new wavelength bands
* maximum average output power
* maximum peak pulse energy
* maximum peak pulse power
* minimum output pulse duration
* minimum linewidth
* maximum power efficiency
* minimum cost

Research on improving these aspects of lasers continues to this day.

In 2015, researchers made a white laser, whose light is modulated by a synthetic nanosheet made out of zinc, cadmium, sulfur, and selenium that can emit red, green, and blue light in varying proportions, with each wavelength spanning 191 nm.

In 2017, researchers at the Delft University of Technology demonstrated an AC Josephson junction microwave laser. Since the laser operates in the superconducting regime, it is more stable than other semiconductor-based lasers. The device has the potential for applications in quantum computing. In 2017, researchers at the Technical University of Munich demonstrated the smallest mode locking laser capable of emitting pairs of phase-locked picosecond laser pulses with a repetition frequency up to 200 GHz.

In 2017, researchers from the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), together with US researchers from JILA, a joint institute of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the University of Colorado Boulder, established a new world record by developing an erbium-doped fiber laser with a linewidth of only 10millihertz.

== Types and operating principles ==


=== Gas lasers ===
Following the invention of the HeNe gas laser, many other gas discharges have been found to amplify light coherently.
Gas lasers using many different gases have been built and used for many purposes. The helium–neon laser (HeNe) can operate at many different wavelengths, however, the vast majority are engineered to lase at 633 nm; these relatively low-cost but highly coherent lasers are extremely common in optical research and educational laboratories. Commercial carbon dioxide (CO2) lasers can emit many hundreds of watts in a single spatial mode which can be concentrated into a tiny spot. This emission is in the thermal infrared at 10.6 μm; such lasers are regularly used in industry for cutting and welding. The efficiency of a CO2 laser is unusually high: over 30%. Argon-ion lasers can operate at several lasing transitions between 351 and 528.7 nm. Depending on the optical design one or more of these transitions can be lasing simultaneously; the most commonly used lines are 458 nm, 488 nm and 514.5 nm. A nitrogen transverse electrical discharge in gas at atmospheric pressure (TEA) laser is an inexpensive gas laser, often home-built by hobbyists, which produces rather incoherent UV light at 337.1 nm. Metal ion lasers are gas lasers that generate deep ultraviolet wavelengths. Helium-silver (HeAg) 224 nm and neon-copper (NeCu) 248 nm are two examples. Like all low-pressure gas lasers, the gain media of these lasers have quite narrow oscillation linewidths, less than 3 GHz (0.5 picometers), making them candidates for use in fluorescence suppressed Raman spectroscopy.

Lasing without maintaining the medium excited into a population inversion was demonstrated in 1992 in sodium gas and again in 1995 in rubidium gas by various international teams. This was accomplished by using an external maser to induce &quot;optical transparency&quot; in the medium by introducing and destructively interfering the ground electron transitions between two paths so that the likelihood for the ground electrons to absorb any energy has been canceled.

==== Chemical lasers ====

Chemical lasers are powered by a chemical reaction permitting a large amount of energy to be released quickly. Such very high-power lasers are especially of interest to the military; however continuous wave chemical lasers at very high power levels, fed by streams of gasses, have been developed and have some industrial applications. As examples, in the hydrogen fluoride laser (2700–2900 nm) and the deuterium fluoride laser (3800 nm) the reaction is the combination of hydrogen or deuterium gas with combustion products of ethylene in nitrogen trifluoride.

==== Excimer lasers ====

Excimer lasers are a special sort of gas laser powered by an electric discharge in which the lasing medium is an excimer, or more precisely an exciplex in existing designs. These are molecules that can only exist with one atom in an excited electronic state. Once the molecule transfers its excitation energy to a photon, its atoms are no longer bound to each other, and the molecule disintegrates. This drastically reduces the population of the lower energy state thus greatly facilitating a population inversion. Excimers currently used are all noble gas compounds; noble gasses are chemically inert and can only form compounds while in an excited state. Excimer lasers typically operate at ultraviolet wavelengths, with major applications including semiconductor photolithography and LASIK eye surgery. Commonly used excimer molecules include ArF (emission at 193 nm), KrCl (222 nm), KrF (248 nm), XeCl (308 nm), and XeF (351 nm).
The molecular fluorine laser, emitting at 157 nm in the vacuum ultraviolet, is sometimes referred to as an excimer laser; however, this appears to be a misnomer since F2 is a stable compound.

=== Solid-state lasers ===

Solid-state lasers use a crystalline or glass rod that is &quot;doped&quot; with ions that provide the required energy states. For example, the first working laser was a ruby laser, made from ruby (chromium-doped corundum). The population inversion is maintained in the dopant. These materials are pumped optically using a shorter wavelength than the lasing wavelength, often from a flash tube or another laser. The usage of the term &quot;solid-state&quot; in laser physics is narrower than in typical use. Semiconductor lasers (laser diodes) are typically &quot;not&quot; referred to as solid-state lasers.

Neodymium is a common dopant in various solid-state laser crystals, including yttrium orthovanadate (Nd:YVO4), yttrium lithium fluoride () and yttrium aluminium garnet (). All these lasers can produce high powers in the infrared spectrum at 1064 nm. They are used for cutting, welding, and marking of metals and other materials, and also in spectroscopy and for pumping dye lasers. These lasers are also commonly doubled, tripled or quadrupled in frequency to produce 532 nm (green, visible), 355 nm and 266 nm (UV) beams, respectively. Frequency-doubled diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers are used to make bright green laser pointers.

Ytterbium, holmium, thulium, and erbium are other common &quot;dopants&quot; in solid-state lasers. Ytterbium is used in crystals such as Yb:YAG, Yb:KGW, Yb:KYW, Yb:SYS, Yb:BOYS, Yb:CaF2, typically operating around 1020–1050 nm. They are potentially very efficient and high-powered due to a small quantum defect. Extremely high powers in ultrashort pulses can be achieved with Yb:YAG. Holmium-doped YAG crystals emit at 2097 nm and form an efficient laser operating at infrared wavelengths strongly absorbed by water-bearing tissues. The Ho-YAG is usually operated in a pulsed mode and passed through optical fiber surgical devices to resurface joints, remove rot from teeth, vaporize cancers, and pulverize kidney and gall stones.

Titanium-doped sapphire (Ti:sapphire) produces a highly tunable infrared laser, commonly used for spectroscopy. It is also notable for use as a mode-locked laser producing ultrashort pulses of extremely high peak power.

Thermal limitations in solid-state lasers arise from unconverted pump power that heats the medium. This heat, when coupled with a high thermo-optic coefficient (d&quot;n&quot;/d&quot;T&quot;) can cause thermal lensing and reduce the quantum efficiency. Diode-pumped thin disk lasers overcome these issues by having a gain medium that is much thinner than the diameter of the pump beam. This allows for a more uniform temperature in the material. Thin disk lasers have been shown to produce beams of up to one kilowatt.

=== Fiber lasers ===
Solid-state lasers or laser amplifiers where the light is guided due to the total internal reflection in a single mode optical fiber are instead called fiber lasers. Guiding of light allows extremely long gain regions, providing good cooling conditions; fibers have a high surface area to volume ratio which allows efficient cooling. In addition, the fiber&#x27;s waveguiding properties tend to reduce thermal distortion of the beam. Erbium and ytterbium ions are common active species in such lasers.

Quite often, the fiber laser is designed as a double-clad fiber. This type of fiber consists of a fiber core, an inner cladding, and an outer cladding. The index of the three concentric layers is chosen so that the fiber core acts as a single-mode fiber for the laser emission while the outer cladding acts as a highly multimode core for the pump laser. This lets the pump propagate a large amount of power into and through the active inner core region while still having a high numerical aperture (NA) to have easy launching conditions.

Pump light can be used more efficiently by creating a fiber disk laser, or a stack of such lasers.

Fiber lasers, like other optical media, can suffer from the effects of photodarkening when they are exposed to radiation of certain wavelengths. In particular, this can lead to degradation of the material and loss in laser functionality over time. The exact causes and effects of this phenomenon vary from material to material, although it often involves the formation of color centers.

=== Photonic crystal lasers ===

Photonic crystal lasers are lasers based on nano-structures that provide the mode confinement and the density of optical states (DOS) structure required for the feedback to take place. They are typical micrometer-sized and tunable on the bands of the photonic crystals.

=== Semiconductor lasers ===


Semiconductor lasers are diodes that are electrically pumped. Recombination of electrons and holes created by the applied current introduces optical gain. Reflection from the ends of the crystal forms an optical resonator, although the resonator can be external to the semiconductor in some designs.

Commercial laser diodes emit at wavelengths from 375 nm to 3500 nm. Low to medium power laser diodes are used in laser pointers, laser printers and CD/DVD players. Laser diodes are also frequently used to optically pump other lasers with high efficiency. The highest-power industrial laser diodes, with power of up to 20 kW, are used in industry for cutting and welding. External-cavity semiconductor lasers have a semiconductor active medium in a larger cavity. These devices can generate high power outputs with good beam quality, wavelength-tunable narrow-linewidth radiation, or ultrashort laser pulses.

In 2012, Nichia and OSRAM developed and manufactured commercial high-power green laser diodes (515/520 nm), which compete with traditional diode-pumped solid-state lasers.

Vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) are semiconductor lasers whose emission direction is perpendicular to the surface of the wafer. VCSEL devices typically have a more circular output beam than conventional laser diodes. As of 2005, only 850 nm VCSELs are widely available, with 1300 nm VCSELs beginning to be commercialized and 1550 nm devices being an area of research. VECSELs are external-cavity VCSELs. Quantum cascade lasers are semiconductor lasers that have an active transition between energy &quot;sub-bands&quot; of an electron in a structure containing several quantum wells.

The development of a silicon laser is important in the field of optical computing. Silicon is the material of choice for integrated circuits, and so electronic and silicon photonic components (such as optical interconnects) could be fabricated on the same chip. Unfortunately, silicon is a difficult lasing material to deal with, since it has certain properties which block lasing. However, recently teams have produced silicon lasers through methods such as fabricating the lasing material from silicon and other semiconductor materials, such as indium(III) phosphide or gallium(III) arsenide, materials that allow coherent light to be produced from silicon. These are called hybrid silicon lasers. Recent developments have also shown the use of monolithically integrated nanowire lasers directly on silicon for optical interconnects, paving the way for chip-level applications. These heterostructure nanowire lasers capable of optical interconnects in silicon are also capable of emitting pairs of phase-locked picosecond pulses with a repetition frequency up to 200 GHz, allowing for on-chip optical signal processing. Another type is a Raman laser, which takes advantage of Raman scattering to produce a laser from materials such as silicon.

=== Dye lasers ===
Dye lasers use an organic dye as the gain medium. The wide gain spectrum of available dyes, or mixtures of dyes, allows these lasers to be highly tunable, or to produce very short-duration pulses (on the order of a few femtoseconds). Although these tunable lasers are mainly known in their liquid form, researchers have also demonstrated narrow-linewidth tunable emission in dispersive oscillator configurations incorporating solid-state dye gain media. In their most prevalent form, these solid-state dye lasers use dye-doped polymers as laser media.

Bubble lasers are dye lasers that use a bubble as the optical resonator. Whispering gallery modes in the bubble produce an output spectrum composed of hundreds of evenly spaced peaks: a frequency comb. The spacing of the whispering gallery modes is directly related to the bubble circumference, allowing bubble lasers to be used as highly sensitive pressure sensors.

=== Free-electron lasers ===
Free-electron lasers (FEL) generate coherent, high-power radiation that is widely tunable, currently ranging in wavelength from microwaves through terahertz radiation and infrared to the visible spectrum, to soft X-rays. They have the widest frequency range of any laser type. While FEL beams share the same optical traits as other lasers, such as coherent radiation, FEL operation is quite different. Unlike gas, liquid, or solid-state lasers, which rely on bound atomic or molecular states, FELs use a relativistic electron beam as the lasing medium, hence the term &quot;free-electron&quot;.

=== Exotic media ===

The pursuit of a high-quantum-energy laser using transitions between isomeric states of an atomic nucleus has been the subject of wide-ranging academic research since the early 1970s. Much of this is summarized in three review articles. This research has been international in scope but mainly based in the former Soviet Union and the United States. While many scientists remain optimistic that a breakthrough is near, an operational gamma-ray laser is yet to be realized.

Some of the early studies were directed toward short pulses of neutrons exciting the upper isomer state in a solid so the gamma-ray transition could benefit from the line-narrowing of Mössbauer effect. In conjunction, several advantages were expected from two-stage pumping of a three-level system. It was conjectured that the nucleus of an atom embedded in the near field of a laser-driven coherently-oscillating electron cloud would experience a larger dipole field than that of the driving laser. Furthermore, the nonlinearity of the oscillating cloud would produce both spatial and temporal harmonics, so nuclear transitions of higher multipolarity could also be driven at multiples of the laser frequency.

In September 2007, the BBC News reported that there was speculation about the possibility of using positronium annihilation to drive a very powerful gamma ray laser. David Cassidy of the University of California, Riverside proposed that a single such laser could be used to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction, replacing the banks of hundreds of lasers currently employed in inertial confinement fusion experiments.

Space-based X-ray lasers pumped by nuclear explosions have also been proposed as antimissile weapons. Such devices would be one-shot weapons.

Living cells have been used to produce laser light. The cells were genetically engineered to produce green fluorescent protein, which served as the laser&#x27;s gain medium. The cells were then placed between two 20-micrometer-wide mirrors, which acted as the laser cavity. When the cell was illuminated with blue light, it emitted intensely directed green laser light.

=== Natural lasers ===

Like astrophysical masers, irradiated planetary or stellar gases may amplify light producing a natural laser. Mars, Venus, and MWC 349 exhibit this phenomenon.

== Uses ==

When the laser was first invented, it was called &quot;a solution looking for a problem&quot;, although Gould noted numerous possible applications in his notebook and patent applications. Since then, they have become ubiquitous, finding utility in thousands of highly varied applications in every section of modern society, including consumer electronics, information technology, science, medicine, industry, law enforcement, entertainment, and the military. Fiber-optic communication relies on multiplexed lasers in dense wave-division multiplexing (WDM) systems to transmit large amounts of data over long distances.

The first widely noticeable use of lasers was the supermarket barcode scanner, introduced in 1974. The laserdisc player, introduced in 1978, was the first successful consumer product to include a laser, but the compact disc player was the first laser-equipped device to become common, commercialized in 1982, followed shortly by laser printers.

Some other uses are:
* Communications: besides fiber-optic communication, lasers are used for free-space optical communication, including laser communication in space
* Medicine: see below
* Industry: cutting including converting thin materials, welding, material heat treatment, marking parts (engraving and bonding), additive manufacturing or 3D printing processes such as selective laser sintering and selective laser melting, laser metal deposition, and non-contact measurement of parts and 3D scanning, and laser cleaning.
* Military: marking targets, guiding munitions, missile defense, electro-optical countermeasures (EOCM), lidar, blinding troops, firearms sights. See below
* Law enforcement: LIDAR traffic enforcement. Lasers are used for latent fingerprint detection in the forensic identification field
* Research: spectroscopy, laser ablation, laser annealing, laser scattering, laser interferometry, lidar, laser capture microdissection, fluorescence microscopy, metrology, laser cooling
* Commercial products: laser printers, barcode scanners, thermometers, laser pointers, holograms, bubblegrams
* Entertainment: optical discs, laser lighting displays, laser turntables.
* Informational markings: Laser lighting display technology can be used to project informational markings onto surfaces such as playing fields, roads, runways, or warehouse floors.

In 2004, excluding diode lasers, approximately 131,000 lasers were sold ,with a value of  billion. In the same year, approximately 733 million diode lasers, valued at  billion, were sold. Global Industrial laser sales in 2023 reached $21.85 billion.

=== In medicine ===
Lasers have many uses in medicine, including laser surgery (particularly eye surgery), laser healing (photobiomodulation therapy), kidney stone treatment, ophthalmoscopy, and cosmetic skin treatments such as acne treatment, cellulite and striae reduction, and hair removal.

Lasers are used to treat cancer by shrinking or destroying tumors or precancerous growths. They are most commonly used to treat superficial cancers that are on the surface of the body or the lining of internal organs. They are used to treat basal cell skin cancer and the very early stages of others like cervical, penile, vaginal, vulvar, and non-small cell lung cancer. Laser therapy is often combined with other treatments, such as surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. Laser-induced interstitial thermotherapy (LITT), or interstitial laser photocoagulation, uses lasers to treat some cancers using hyperthermia, which uses heat to shrink tumors by damaging or killing cancer cells. Lasers are more precise than traditional surgery methods and cause less damage, pain, bleeding, swelling, and scarring. A disadvantage is that surgeons must acquire specialized training, and thus it will likely be more expensive than other treatments.

=== As weapons ===

A laser weapon is a type of directed-energy weapon that uses lasers to inflict damage. Whether they will be deployed as practical, high-performance military weapons remains to be seen. One of the major issues with laser weapons is atmospheric thermal blooming, which is still largely unsolved. This issue is exacerbated when there is fog, smoke, dust, rain, snow, smog, foam, or purposely dispersed obscurant chemicals present. The United States Navy has tested the very short range (1 mile), 30-kW Laser Weapon System or LaWS to be used against targets like small UAVs, rocket-propelled grenades, and visible motorboat or helicopter engines. It has been described as &quot;six welding lasers strapped together.&quot; A 60 kW system, HELIOS, is being developed for destroyer-class ships .
Lasers can be used as incapacitating non-lethal weapons. They can cause temporary or permanent vision loss when directed at the eyes. Even lasers with a power output of less than one watt can cause immediate and permanent vision loss under certain conditions, making them potentially non-lethal but incapacitating weapons. The use of such lasers is morally controversial due to the extreme handicap that laser-induced blindness represents. The Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons bans the use of weapons designed to cause permanent blindness. Weapons designed to cause temporary blindness, known as dazzlers, are used by military and sometimes law enforcement organizations.

=== Hobbies ===

In recent years, some hobbyists have taken an interest in lasers. Lasers used by hobbyists are generally of class IIIa or IIIb , although some have made their own class IV types. However, due to the cost and potential dangers, this is an uncommon hobby. Some hobbyists salvage laser diodes from broken DVD players (red), Blu-ray players (violet), or even higher power laser diodes from CD or DVD burners.

Hobbyists have also used surplus lasers taken from retired military applications and modified them for holography. Pulsed ruby and YAG lasers work well for this application.

=== Examples by power ===
Different applications need lasers with different output powers. Lasers that produce a continuous beam or a series of short pulses can be compared on the basis of their average power. Lasers that produce pulses can also be characterized based on the &quot;peak&quot; power of each pulse. The peak power of a pulsed laser is many orders of magnitude greater than its average power. The average output power is always less than the power consumed.

Examples of pulsed systems with high peak power:
* 700 TW (700×1012 W)National Ignition Facility, a 192-beam, 1.8-megajoule laser system adjoining a 10-meter-diameter target chamber
* 10 PW (10×1015 W)world&#x27;s most powerful laser as of 2019, located at the ELI-NP facility in Măgurele, Romania.

== Safety ==


Even the first laser was recognized as being potentially dangerous. Theodore Maiman characterized the first laser as having the power of one &quot;Gillette&quot;, as it could burn through one Gillette razor blade. Today, it is accepted that even low-power lasers with only a few milliwatts of output power can be hazardous to human eyesight when the beam hits the eye directly or after reflection from a shiny surface. At wavelengths which the cornea and the lens can focus well, the coherence and low divergence of laser light means that it can be focused by the eye into an extremely small spot on the retina, resulting in localized burning and permanent damage in seconds or even less time.

Lasers are usually labeled with a safety class number, which identifies how dangerous the laser is:
* Class 1 is inherently safe, usually because the light is contained in an enclosure, for example in CD players
* Class 2 is safe during normal use; the blink reflex of the eye will prevent damage. Usually up to 1 mW power, for example, laser pointers.
* Class 3R (formerly IIIa) lasers are usually up to 5 mW and involve a small risk of eye damage within the time of the blink reflex. Staring into such a beam for several seconds is likely to cause damage to a spot on the retina.
* Class 3B lasers (5–499 mW) can cause immediate eye damage upon exposure.
* Class 4 lasers (≥ 500 mW) can burn skin, and in some cases, even scattered light from these lasers can cause eye and/or skin damage. Many industrial and scientific lasers are in this class.
The indicated powers are for visible-light, continuous-wave lasers. For pulsed lasers and invisible wavelengths, other power limits apply. People working with class 3B and class 4 lasers can protect their eyes with safety goggles which are designed to absorb light of a particular wavelength.

Infrared lasers with wavelengths longer than about 1.4micrometers are often referred to as &quot;eye-safe&quot;, because the cornea tends to absorb light at these wavelengths, protecting the retina from damage. The label &quot;eye-safe&quot; can be misleading, however, as it applies only to relatively low-power continuous wave beams; a high-power or Q-switched laser at these wavelengths can burn the cornea, causing severe eye damage, and even moderate-power lasers can injure the eye.

Lasers can be a hazard to both civil and military aviation, due to the potential to temporarily distract or blind pilots. See Lasers and aviation safety for more on this topic.

Cameras based on charge-coupled devices may be more sensitive to laser damage than biological eyes.

== See also ==
* Coherent perfect absorber
* Homogeneous broadening
* Laser linewidth
* List of laser articles
* List of light sources
* Nanolaser
* Sound amplification by stimulated emission of radiation
* Spaser
* Fabry–Pérot interferometer
* Ultrashort pulse laser
== References ==
== Further reading ==
=== Books ===
* Bertolotti, Mario (1999, trans. 2004). &quot;The History of the Laser&quot;. Institute of Physics. .
* Bromberg, Joan Lisa (1991). &quot;The Laser in America, 1950–1970&quot;. MIT Press. .
* Csele, Mark (2004). &quot;Fundamentals of Light Sources and Lasers&quot;. Wiley. .
* Koechner, Walter (1992). &quot;Solid-State Laser Engineering&quot;. 3rd ed. Springer-Verlag. .
* Siegman, Anthony E. (1986). &quot;Lasers&quot;. University Science Books. .
* Silfvast, William T. (1996). &quot;Laser Fundamentals&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
* Svelto, Orazio (1998). &quot;Principles of Lasers&quot;. 4th ed. Trans. David Hanna. Springer. .
* 
* Wilson, J. &amp; Hawkes, J.F.B. (1987). &quot;Lasers: Principles and Applications&quot;. Prentice Hall International Series in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall. .
* Yariv, Amnon (1989). &quot;Quantum Electronics&quot;. 3rd ed. Wiley. .

=== Periodicals ===
* &quot;Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics&quot; ()
* &quot;IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology&quot; ()
* &quot;IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics&quot; ()
* &quot;IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics&quot; ()
* &quot;IEEE Photonics Technology Letters&quot; ()
* &quot;Journal of the Optical Society of America B: Optical Physics&quot; ()
* &quot;Laser Focus World&quot; ()
* &quot;Optics Letters&quot; ()
* &quot;Photonics Spectra&quot; ()

== External links ==
* Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology by Rüdiger Paschotta
* A Practical Guide to Lasers for Experimenters and Hobbyists by Samuel M. Goldwasser
* Homebuilt Lasers Page by Professor Mark Csele 
* Powerful laser is &#x27;brightest light in the universe&#x27;The world&#x27;s most powerful laser as of 2008 might create supernova-like shock waves and possibly even antimatter
* &quot;Laser Fundamentals&quot; an online course by F. Balembois and S. Forget.
* Northrop Grumman&#x27;s Press Release on the Firestrike 15 kW tactical laser product
* Website on Lasers 50th anniversary by APS, OSA, SPIE
* Advancing the Laser anniversary site by SPIE: Video interviews, open-access articles, posters, DVDs 
* Bright Idea: The First Lasers history of the invention, with audio interview clips.
* Free software for Simulation of random laser dynamics
* Video Demonstrations in Lasers and Optics Produced by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Real-time effects are demonstrated in a way that would be difficult to see in a classroom setting.
* MIT Video Lecture: Understanding Lasers and Fiberoptics
* Virtual Museum of Laser History, from the touring exhibit by SPIE
* website with animations, applications and research about laser and other quantum based phenomena Universite Paris Sud</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="2" end="7" title="Laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="31" end="36" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="58" end="79" title="optical amplification" label="optical amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="93" end="112" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="116" end="141" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="187" end="194" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="199" end="254" title="Laser" label="light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="293" end="308" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635801" start="312" end="340" title="Hughes Research Laboratories" label="Hughes Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="371" end="388" title="Charles H. Townes" label="Charles H. Townes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190503" start="393" end="416" title="Arthur Leonard Schawlow" label="Arthur Leonard Schawlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q546175" start="455" end="467" title="Gordon Gould" label="Gordon Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="545" end="565" title="coherence (physics)" label="&amp;quot;coherent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="567" end="584" title="Spatial coherence" label="Spatial coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q593053" start="676" end="689" title="laser cutting" label="laser cutting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="695" end="706" title="Photolithography#Light sources" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571347" start="773" end="784" title="collimated light" label="collimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365018" start="795" end="808" title="laser pointer" label="laser pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="811" end="816" title="lidar" label="lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027432" start="822" end="854" title="free-space optical communication" label="free-space optical communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="882" end="900" title="temporal coherence" label="temporal coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="954" end="972" title="frequency spectrum" label="frequency spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q844471" start="1021" end="1037" title="ultrashort pulse" label="ultrashort pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483628" start="1099" end="1109" title="attosecond" label="attosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="1131" end="1142" title="fiber-optic communication" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492" start="1182" end="1200" title="optical disc drive" label="optical disc drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="1203" end="1216" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q807980" start="1219" end="1234" title="barcode scanner" label="barcode scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q622938" start="1271" end="1287" title="photolithography" label="photolithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="1289" end="1296" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q847796" start="1299" end="1312" title="laser surgery" label="laser surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q937468" start="1346" end="1353" title="laser welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="1378" end="1393" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="1426" end="1441" title="Laser rangefinder" label="measuring range"/>
<link wikidata="Q380051" start="1460" end="1482" title="laser lighting display" label="laser lighting display"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1671" end="1680" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="1717" end="1722" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="1820" end="1827" title="Visible spectrum" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2107" end="2110" title="Hertz" label="GHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195048" start="2203" end="2214" title="X-ray laser" label="X-ray laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131656" start="2229" end="2244" title="gamma-ray laser" label="gamma-ray laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="2283" end="2292" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="2302" end="2319" title="Radio frequency" label="radio frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q989162" start="2344" end="2355" title="back-formation" label="back-formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806565" start="2476" end="2487" title="Active laser medium" label="gain medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341811" start="2678" end="2697" title="astrophysical maser" label="astrophysical maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q757626" start="2714" end="2724" title="atom laser" label="atom laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="2823" end="2840" title="optical amplifier" label="optical amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="3067" end="3076" title="anacronym" label="anacronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="3192" end="3199" title="Photons" label="Photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="3215" end="3240" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="3456" end="3473" title="thermal radiation" label="thermal radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="3746" end="3765" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160121" start="4194" end="4208" title="chain reaction" label="chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="4534" end="4551" title="Metastability" label="metastable states"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252992" start="4603" end="4616" title="Laser science" label="laser physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806565" start="4647" end="4666" title="active laser medium" label="active laser medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="4922" end="4931" title="coherence (physics)" label="coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q944873" start="5039" end="5058" title="Gaussian beam" label="diffraction-limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="5129" end="5139" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="5275" end="5284" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778793" start="5377" end="5393" title="coherence length" label="coherence length"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="5508" end="5513" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="5651" end="5661" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="5667" end="5673" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q910519" start="5852" end="5868" title="Monochromatic radiation" label="monochromaticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230543" start="6037" end="6044" title="Beam divergence" label="diverge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707396" start="6074" end="6091" title="diffraction limit" label="diffraction limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806565" start="6372" end="6383" title="Active laser medium" label="gain medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="6446" end="6454" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="6519" end="6526" title="optical amplifier" label="amplify"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493090" start="7332" end="7339" title="laser pumping" label="pumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405580" start="7468" end="7478" title="Xenon flash lamp" label="flash lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856168" start="7553" end="7567" title="optical cavity" label="optical cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125851" start="7770" end="7784" title="output coupler" label="output coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506584" start="7930" end="7936" title="curved mirror" label="curved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493660" start="8005" end="8009" title="light beam" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="8025" end="8046" title="electronic oscillator" label="electronic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="8296" end="8304" title="Electron" label="Electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="8333" end="8354" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="8394" end="8403" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="8408" end="8415" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q377930" start="8455" end="8469" title="Classical electromagnetism" label="classical view"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="8562" end="8569" title="atomic nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="8576" end="8580" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="8667" end="8675" title="Atomic orbital" label="orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="8825" end="8831" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="8843" end="8849" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="9017" end="9023" title="Absorption (electromagnetic radiation)" label="absorb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="9039" end="9049" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="9230" end="9237" title="excited state" label="excited"/>
<link wikidata="Q923545" start="9616" end="9636" title="spontaneous emission" label="spontaneous emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="9744" end="9765" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="9907" end="9919" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="9924" end="9940" title="thermal emission" label="thermal emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="10305" end="10318" title="excited state" label="excited state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="10809" end="10814" title="state of matter" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="10839" end="10845" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="10938" end="10945" title="excited state" label="excited"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="10953" end="10966" title="quantum state" label="quantum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q126904" start="11294" end="11314" title="population inversion" label="population inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="11516" end="11533" title="optical amplifier" label="optical amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367841" start="11680" end="11697" title="superluminescence" label="superluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296457" start="11864" end="11878" title="nitrogen laser" label="nitrogen laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341811" start="12157" end="12176" title="astrophysical maser" label="astrophysical maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="12199" end="12208" title="resonator" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="12405" end="12410" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="12833" end="12846" title="exponential growth" label="exponentially"/>
<link wikidata="Q676237" start="13543" end="13559" title="lasing threshold" label="lasing threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q597069" start="13679" end="13691" title="spatial mode" label="spatial mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="14109" end="14114" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493080" start="14415" end="14430" title="laser linewidth" label="laser linewidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034302" start="14601" end="14617" title="injection seeder" label="injection seeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q64188" start="14780" end="14794" title="Roy J. Glauber" label="Roy J. Glauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q678317" start="14855" end="14868" title="photon number" label="photon number"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="14906" end="14928" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="15034" end="15054" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q944873" start="15207" end="15220" title="Gaussian beam" label="Gaussian beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q597069" start="15374" end="15389" title="transverse mode" label="transverse mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q658574" start="15416" end="15423" title="Hermite polynomials" label="Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="15424" end="15432" title="Gaussian function" label="Gaussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124546" start="15436" end="15444" title="Laguerre polynomials" label="Laguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824838" start="15531" end="15542" title="tophat beam" label="tophat beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q830111" start="15710" end="15721" title="Bessel beam" label="Bessel beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077002" start="15727" end="15741" title="optical vortex" label="optical vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="15777" end="15789" title="focus (optics)" label="focal region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571347" start="15827" end="15837" title="collimated light" label="collimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230543" start="15920" end="15935" title="beam divergence" label="beam divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="15967" end="15978" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511211" start="16022" end="16036" title="Rayleigh range" label="Rayleigh range"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="16190" end="16201" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q663088" start="16275" end="16292" title="helium–neon laser" label="helium–neon laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="16439" end="16458" title="semiconductor laser" label="semiconductor laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="16627" end="16631" title="lens (optics)" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365018" start="16682" end="16695" title="laser pointer" label="laser pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="16726" end="16737" title="laser diode" label="laser diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="16842" end="16859" title="spatial coherence" label="spatial coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493037" start="17067" end="17086" title="laser beam profiler" label="laser beam profiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154504" start="17168" end="17186" title="Diffuse reflection" label="Diffuse reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575045" start="17235" end="17250" title="speckle pattern" label="speckle pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="17389" end="17408" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="17529" end="17544" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17587" end="17612" title="Spontaneous emission#Rate of spontaneous emission" label="&amp;quot;A&amp;quot; coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17655" end="17680" title="Stimulated emission#Mathematical model" label="&amp;quot;B&amp;quot; coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q586386" start="17753" end="17772" title="free-electron laser" label="free-electron laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="17910" end="17927" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18395" end="18410" title="Q factor#Optical systems" label="cavity lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129003" start="18829" end="18844" title="continuous-wave" label="continuous-wave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19237" end="19254" title="Free spectral range#Fabry–Pérot interferometer" label="frequency spacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166583" start="19587" end="19598" title="Mode locking" label="mode-locked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20445" end="20455" title="#Continuous-wave operation" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806547" start="20776" end="20790" title="laser ablation" label="laser ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="21203" end="21220" title="nonlinear optical" label="nonlinear optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541709" start="21349" end="21360" title="Q-switching" label="Q-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777507" start="21831" end="21843" title="femtoseconds" label="femtoseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902709" start="22650" end="22660" title="picosecond" label="picosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777507" start="22683" end="22695" title="femtoseconds" label="femtoseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="22863" end="22876" title="Fourier uncertainty principle" label="Fourier limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="22904" end="22915" title="Uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="23146" end="23154" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="23181" end="23189" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166376" start="23191" end="23202" title="Ti-sapphire laser" label="Ti:sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q910223" start="23456" end="23477" title="femtosecond chemistry" label="femtosecond chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844471" start="23482" end="23499" title="ultrafast science" label="ultrafast science"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="23531" end="23543" title="nonlinear optics" label="nonlinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="23574" end="23600" title="second-harmonic generation" label="second-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689728" start="23602" end="23628" title="parametric down-conversion" label="parametric down-conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q834512" start="23630" end="23659" title="optical parametric oscillator" label="optical parametric oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380913" start="23826" end="23835" title="Envelope (waves)" label="envelopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="24485" end="24495" title="capacitors" label="capacitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="24921" end="24936" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="24999" end="25004" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="25135" end="25145" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309303" start="25221" end="25242" title="Einstein coefficients" label="Einstein coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q87502" start="25349" end="25368" title="Rudolf W. Ladenburg" label="Rudolf W. Ladenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480325" start="25467" end="25488" title="Valentin A. Fabrikant" label="Valentin A. Fabrikant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25570" end="25584" title="Willis E. Lamb" label="Willis E. Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q71023" start="25729" end="25743" title="Alfred Kastler" label="Alfred Kastler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027473" start="25798" end="25813" title="optical pumping" label="optical pumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708214" start="25928" end="25940" title="Joseph Weber" label="Joseph Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="26100" end="26106" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="26150" end="26153" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26202" end="26219" title="Charles H. Townes" label="Charles H. Townes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26305" end="26320" title="James P. Gordon" label="James P. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26325" end="26342" title="Herbert J. Zeiger" label="Herbert J. Zeiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="26453" end="26462" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q83557" start="26604" end="26617" title="Nikolay Basov" label="Nikolay Basov"/>
<link wikidata="Q83552" start="26622" end="26641" title="Aleksandr Mikhailovich Prokhorov" label="Aleksandr Prokhorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q677864" start="26676" end="26694" title="Quantum harmonic oscillator" label="quantum oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="26816" end="26835" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q126904" start="26945" end="26965" title="population inversion" label="population inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="27194" end="27204" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="27206" end="27222" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q93002" start="27228" end="27244" title="Llewellyn Thomas" label="Llewellyn Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="27288" end="27309" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="27351" end="27362" title="Isidor Rabi" label="Isidor Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184571" start="27367" end="27381" title="Polykarp Kusch" label="Polykarp Kusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="27524" end="27546" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311413" start="27767" end="27785" title="Jun-ichi Nishizawa" label="Jun-ichi Nishizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="27818" end="27845" title="semiconductor laser" label="semiconductor optical maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="27948" end="27957" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="28056" end="28064" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="28101" end="28114" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="28132" end="28151" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q546175" start="28169" end="28181" title="Gordon Gould" label="Gordon Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="28199" end="28214" title="doctoral thesis" label="doctoral thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="28250" end="28258" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="28308" end="28316" title="Emission (electromagnetic radiation)" label="emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="28499" end="28508" title="resonator" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q869847" start="29048" end="29063" title="Physical Review" label="Physical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="29816" end="29828" title="Spectroscopy" label="spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="29830" end="29844" title="interferometry" label="interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="29846" end="29851" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="29857" end="29871" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022019" start="29918" end="29936" title="patent application" label="patent application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="29956" end="29997" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="30054" end="30063" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="30108" end="30115" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495118" start="30395" end="30408" title="gas discharge" label="gas discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635801" start="30601" end="30629" title="Hughes Research Laboratories" label="Hughes Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="30714" end="30733" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30735" end="30753" title="Arthur L. Schawlow" label="Arthur L. Schawlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="30758" end="30767" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405580" start="30865" end="30874" title="flashlamp" label="flashlamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="30892" end="30896" title="ruby" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="30897" end="30904" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="31078" end="31082" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q120216" start="31096" end="31105" title="Ali Javan" label="Ali Javan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31111" end="31133" title="William R. Bennett Jr." label="William R. Bennett Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31139" end="31157" title="Donald R. Herriott" label="Donald R. Herriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635447" start="31181" end="31190" title="gas laser" label="gas laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="31198" end="31204" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="31209" end="31213" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287930" start="31322" end="31360" title="Albert Einstein World Award of Science" label="Albert Einstein World Award of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31379" end="31393" title="Robert N. Hall" label="Robert N. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="31417" end="31436" title="semiconductor laser" label="semiconductor laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="31456" end="31472" title="gallium arsenide" label="gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="31492" end="31505" title="near-infrared" label="near-infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q360445" start="31555" end="31572" title="Nick Holonyak Jr." label="Nick Holonyak Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="31736" end="31751" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183279" start="31782" end="31796" title="Zhores Ivanovich Alferov" label="Zhores Alferov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616270" start="31950" end="31964" title="heterojunction" label="heterojunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="32253" end="32259" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25342" start="32281" end="32286" title="power (physics)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q752663" start="32723" end="32753" title="Delft University of Technology" label="Delft University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32770" end="32791" title="Josephson effect#The AC Josephson effect" label="AC Josephson junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="32971" end="32988" title="quantum computing" label="quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="33018" end="33048" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166583" start="33075" end="33087" title="mode locking" label="mode locking"/>
<link wikidata="Q470438" start="33234" end="33271" title="Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt" label="Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586184" start="33313" end="33317" title="JILA" label="JILA"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="33406" end="33436" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q663088" start="33813" end="33830" title="helium–neon laser" label="helium–neon laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362150" start="34077" end="34104" title="Carbon dioxide laser" label="carbon dioxide (CO2) lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q648376" start="34386" end="34395" title="Ion laser" label="Argon-ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669931" start="34639" end="34701" title="TEA laser" label="transverse electrical discharge in gas at atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="34875" end="34891" title="deep ultraviolet" label="deep ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="34905" end="34911" title="Helium" label="Helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="34937" end="34941" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="35076" end="35085" title="linewidth" label="linewidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="35100" end="35103" title="GHz" label="GHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="35109" end="35119" title="picometers" label="picometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="35156" end="35168" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="35180" end="35198" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345294" start="35201" end="35274" title="Lasing without inversion" label="Lasing without maintaining the medium excited into a population inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="35303" end="35309" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="35335" end="35343" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090472" start="35697" end="35711" title="Chemical laser" label="Chemical laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080617" start="36052" end="36075" title="hydrogen fluoride laser" label="hydrogen fluoride laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080617" start="36099" end="36123" title="deuterium fluoride laser" label="deuterium fluoride laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="36223" end="36231" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q413835" start="36235" end="36255" title="nitrogen trifluoride" label="nitrogen trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q241056" start="36284" end="36297" title="Excimer laser" label="Excimer laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q901723" start="36397" end="36404" title="excimer" label="excimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q901723" start="36427" end="36435" title="exciplex" label="exciplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="36517" end="36541" title="excited state" label="excited electronic state"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36831" end="36850" title=":Category:Noble gas compounds" label="noble gas compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="36977" end="36988" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q622938" start="37050" end="37066" title="photolithography" label="photolithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q278846" start="37071" end="37076" title="LASIK" label="LASIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="37232" end="37240" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q650257" start="37439" end="37456" title="Solid-state laser" label="Solid-state laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q933263" start="37609" end="37619" title="ruby laser" label="ruby laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="37631" end="37635" title="ruby" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="37637" end="37645" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="37652" end="37660" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q126904" start="37667" end="37687" title="population inversion" label="population inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388" start="38049" end="38058" title="Neodymium" label="Neodymium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059852" start="38127" end="38148" title="yttrium orthovanadate" label="yttrium orthovanadate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6992763" start="38150" end="38157" title="Neodymium-doped yttrium orthovanadate" label="Nd:YVO4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059854" start="38160" end="38184" title="yttrium lithium fluoride" label="yttrium lithium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q421189" start="38192" end="38216" title="yttrium aluminium garnet" label="yttrium aluminium garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="38269" end="38277" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="38390" end="38402" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929925" start="38419" end="38428" title="dye laser" label="dye laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="38462" end="38469" title="second-harmonic generation" label="doubled"/>
<link wikidata="Q79463705" start="38471" end="38478" title="third-harmonic generation" label="tripled"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="38561" end="38563" title="ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q448612" start="38604" end="38628" title="diode-pumped solid-state" label="diode-pumped solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855" start="38690" end="38699" title="Ytterbium" label="Ytterbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846" start="38701" end="38708" title="holmium" label="holmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853" start="38710" end="38717" title="thulium" label="thulium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849" start="38723" end="38729" title="erbium" label="erbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846" start="39075" end="39082" title="Holmium" label="Holmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="39159" end="39167" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="39423" end="39431" title="Titanium" label="Titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="39438" end="39446" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166376" start="39448" end="39459" title="Ti-sapphire laser" label="Ti:sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753940" start="39479" end="39486" title="tunable laser" label="tunable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="39487" end="39495" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="39521" end="39533" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844471" start="39595" end="39611" title="ultrashort pulse" label="ultrashort pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q370593" start="39915" end="39925" title="disk laser" label="disk laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q234943" start="40261" end="40286" title="total internal reflection" label="total internal reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="40304" end="40317" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q390528" start="40337" end="40348" title="fiber laser" label="fiber laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849" start="40619" end="40625" title="Erbium" label="Erbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855" start="40630" end="40639" title="ytterbium" label="ytterbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335523" start="40734" end="40751" title="double-clad fiber" label="double-clad fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446359" start="41281" end="41297" title="fiber disk laser" label="fiber disk laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187733" start="41398" end="41412" title="photodarkening" label="photodarkening"/>
<link wikidata="Q905180" start="41699" end="41712" title="Color center (crystallography)" label="color centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q900150" start="41748" end="41764" title="Photonic crystal" label="Photonic crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230895" start="41850" end="41875" title="Density of states" label="density of optical states"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="42075" end="42080" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="42362" end="42373" title="laser diode" label="laser diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365018" start="42464" end="42477" title="laser pointer" label="laser pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="42480" end="42493" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493090" start="42566" end="42570" title="laser pumping" label="pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="42910" end="42919" title="linewidth" label="linewidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926489" start="42969" end="42975" title="Nichia" label="Nichia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310481" start="42980" end="42985" title="OSRAM" label="OSRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009618" start="43174" end="43179" title="VCSEL" label="VCSEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922791" start="43518" end="43524" title="VECSEL" label="VECSEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407411" start="43554" end="43575" title="Quantum cascade laser" label="Quantum cascade laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q521166" start="43719" end="43731" title="quantum well" label="quantum well"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="43756" end="43763" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q176541" start="43799" end="43816" title="optical computing" label="optical computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="43856" end="43875" title="integrated circuits" label="integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749103" start="43899" end="43915" title="silicon photonic" label="silicon photonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098860" start="43936" end="43956" title="optical interconnect" label="optical interconnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q416291" start="44282" end="44303" title="indium(III) phosphide" label="indium(III) phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="44307" end="44328" title="gallium(III) arsenide" label="gallium(III) arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953298" start="44412" end="44432" title="hybrid silicon laser" label="hybrid silicon laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42307702" start="44508" end="44523" title="nanowire lasers" label="nanowire lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076193" start="44875" end="44886" title="Raman laser" label="Raman laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="44913" end="44929" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929925" start="45001" end="45010" title="Dye laser" label="Dye laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="45198" end="45213" title="on the order of" label="on the order of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777507" start="45220" end="45231" title="femtosecond" label="femtosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753940" start="45250" end="45263" title="tunable laser" label="tunable laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557931" start="45491" end="45513" title="solid-state dye lasers" label="solid-state dye lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503834" start="45554" end="45566" title="Bubble laser" label="Bubble laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q75794" start="45594" end="45600" title="Bubble (physics)" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993947" start="45627" end="45650" title="Whispering gallery mode" label="Whispering gallery mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455602" start="45740" end="45754" title="frequency comb" label="frequency comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q586386" start="45951" end="45970" title="Free-electron laser" label="Free-electron laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q647887" start="46098" end="46117" title="terahertz radiation" label="terahertz radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="46638" end="46653" title="Nuclear isomer" label="isomeric states"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="46660" end="46674" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131656" start="47003" end="47018" title="gamma-ray laser" label="gamma-ray laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q918552" start="47227" end="47243" title="Mössbauer effect" label="Mössbauer effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="47778" end="47786" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q624990" start="47854" end="47865" title="positronium" label="positronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188721" start="47866" end="47878" title="annihilation" label="annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="47904" end="47913" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075148" start="47942" end="47977" title="University of California, Riverside" label="University of California, Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="48038" end="48052" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364409" start="48127" end="48154" title="inertial confinement fusion" label="inertial confinement fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195048" start="48181" end="48192" title="X-ray laser" label="X-ray laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q272983" start="48413" end="48438" title="green fluorescent protein" label="green fluorescent protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341811" start="48712" end="48731" title="astrophysical maser" label="astrophysical maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="48817" end="48821" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="48823" end="48828" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180421" start="48834" end="48841" title="MWC 349" label="MWC 349"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="49214" end="49234" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="49289" end="49304" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49329" end="49337" title="Laser applications#Military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="49339" end="49364" title="Fiber-optic communication" label="Fiber-optic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="49403" end="49429" title="wave-division multiplexing" label="wave-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q807980" start="49562" end="49577" title="barcode scanner" label="barcode scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="49603" end="49612" title="laserdisc" label="laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="49829" end="49842" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="49893" end="49918" title="fiber-optic communication" label="fiber-optic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027432" start="49940" end="49972" title="free-space optical communication" label="free-space optical communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844817" start="49984" end="50012" title="laser communication in space" label="laser communication in space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50029" end="50034" title="#In medicine" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q593053" start="50047" end="50054" title="Laser cutting" label="cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493050" start="50065" end="50075" title="Laser converting" label="converting"/>
<link wikidata="Q937468" start="50092" end="50099" title="laser welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="50110" end="50124" title="heat treatment" label="heat treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q902936" start="50126" end="50139" title="laser marking" label="marking parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q902936" start="50141" end="50150" title="Laser engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493042" start="50155" end="50162" title="Laser bonding" label="bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="50165" end="50187" title="additive manufacturing" label="additive manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="50191" end="50202" title="3D printing" label="3D printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q428412" start="50221" end="50246" title="selective laser sintering" label="selective laser sintering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267983" start="50251" end="50274" title="selective laser melting" label="selective laser melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q123384372" start="50276" end="50298" title="laser metal deposition" label="laser metal deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q94701573" start="50341" end="50352" title="3D scanning" label="3D scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806547" start="50358" end="50372" title="laser cleaning" label="laser cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="50411" end="50419" title="munition" label="munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055827" start="50422" end="50437" title="Airborne Laser" label="missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945239" start="50439" end="50477" title="DIRCM" label="electro-optical countermeasures (EOCM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="50479" end="50484" title="lidar" label="lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874764" start="50503" end="50518" title="Laser sight (firearms)" label="firearms sights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50524" end="50529" title="#As weapons" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="50532" end="50547" title="Law enforcement agency" label="Law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458616" start="50549" end="50574" title="LIDAR traffic enforcement" label="LIDAR traffic enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q178022" start="50603" end="50614" title="fingerprint" label="fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314618" start="50632" end="50655" title="forensic identification" label="forensic identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="50674" end="50686" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806547" start="50688" end="50702" title="laser ablation" label="laser ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="50710" end="50719" title="annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210028" start="50727" end="50737" title="scattering" label="scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="50745" end="50759" title="interferometry" label="interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="50761" end="50766" title="lidar" label="lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516595" start="50768" end="50797" title="laser capture microdissection" label="laser capture microdissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q840211" start="50799" end="50822" title="fluorescence microscopy" label="fluorescence microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q394" start="50824" end="50833" title="metrology" label="metrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="50835" end="50848" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="50872" end="50885" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q807980" start="50888" end="50903" title="barcode scanner" label="barcode scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="50906" end="50917" title="thermometer" label="thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365018" start="50920" end="50933" title="laser pointer" label="laser pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="50936" end="50945" title="holograms" label="holograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529623" start="50947" end="50957" title="bubblegram" label="bubblegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="50976" end="50989" title="optical discs" label="optical discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q380051" start="50991" end="51013" title="laser lighting display" label="laser lighting display"/>
<link wikidata="Q477485" start="51016" end="51031" title="laser turntable" label="laser turntable"/>
<link wikidata="Q847796" start="51532" end="51545" title="laser surgery" label="laser surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q760348" start="51560" end="51571" title="Laser eye surgery" label="eye surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="51618" end="51630" title="kidney stone" label="kidney stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430070" start="51642" end="51656" title="Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy" label="ophthalmoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="51695" end="51699" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q242510" start="51711" end="51720" title="cellulite" label="cellulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q596942" start="51725" end="51731" title="striae" label="striae"/>
<link wikidata="Q783007" start="51747" end="51759" title="Laser hair removal" label="hair removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="51787" end="51793" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="51821" end="51827" title="Neoplasm" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="52067" end="52075" title="cervical cancer" label="cervical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342955" start="52077" end="52083" title="penile cancer" label="penile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807522" start="52085" end="52092" title="vaginal cancer" label="vaginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908194" start="52094" end="52100" title="vulvar cancer" label="vulvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658562" start="52106" end="52132" title="non-small cell lung cancer" label="non-small cell lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="52197" end="52204" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="52206" end="52218" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="52223" end="52240" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806547" start="52242" end="52282" title="Laser ablation" label="Laser-induced interstitial thermotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490257" start="52313" end="52329" title="Laser coagulation" label="photocoagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="52541" end="52549" title="bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074906" start="52730" end="52742" title="laser weapon" label="laser weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341528" start="52756" end="52778" title="directed-energy weapon" label="directed-energy weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="52789" end="52795" title="lasers" label="lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783031" start="52971" end="52987" title="thermal blooming" label="thermal blooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="53160" end="53178" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="53224" end="53226" title="kilowatt" label="kW"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264190" start="53227" end="53246" title="Laser Weapon System" label="Laser Weapon System"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="53293" end="53296" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="UAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="53299" end="53323" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q622416" start="53338" end="53347" title="motorboat" label="motorboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="53351" end="53361" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q937468" start="53406" end="53420" title="Laser beam welding" label="welding lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124391478" start="53462" end="53468" title="HELIOS" label="HELIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q911881" start="53554" end="53572" title="non-lethal weapons" label="non-lethal weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251938" start="53961" end="53995" title="Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons" label="Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q771256" start="54115" end="54123" title="Dazzler (weapon)" label="dazzlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="54530" end="54537" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414962" start="54601" end="54611" title="DVD burner" label="DVD burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="54718" end="54728" title="holography" label="holography"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="55145" end="55164" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="55318" end="55320" title="terawatt" label="TW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431014" start="55333" end="55359" title="National Ignition Facility" label="National Ignition Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="55450" end="55452" title="petawatt" label="PW"/>
<link wikidata="Q753269" start="55524" end="55530" title="Extreme Light Infrastructure" label="ELI-NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198771" start="55543" end="55551" title="Măgurele" label="Măgurele"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="55646" end="55661" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q503592" start="55770" end="55778" title="Global Gillette" label="Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422881" start="55779" end="55784" title="razor" label="razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="56022" end="56028" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="56142" end="56145" title="human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="56182" end="56188" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785965" start="56526" end="56538" title="blink reflex" label="blink reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541709" start="57768" end="57778" title="Q-switched" label="Q-switched"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681111" start="58032" end="58058" title="Lasers and aviation safety" label="Lasers and aviation safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="58101" end="58122" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581801" start="58202" end="58227" title="Coherent perfect absorber" label="Coherent perfect absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891321" start="58230" end="58252" title="Homogeneous broadening" label="Homogeneous broadening"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493080" start="58255" end="58270" title="Laser linewidth" label="Laser linewidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625052" start="58273" end="58295" title="List of laser articles" label="List of laser articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q65037198" start="58298" end="58319" title="List of light sources" label="List of light sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964064" start="58322" end="58331" title="Nanolaser" label="Nanolaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972615" start="58334" end="58389" title="Sound amplification by stimulated emission of radiation" label="Sound amplification by stimulated emission of radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966061" start="58392" end="58398" title="Spaser" label="Spaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359945" start="58401" end="58427" title="Fabry–Pérot interferometer" label="Fabry–Pérot interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880627" start="58430" end="58452" title="Ultrashort pulse laser" label="Ultrashort pulse laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019123" start="58959" end="58979" title="William T. Silfvast" label="Silfvast, William T."/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="59298" end="59311" title="Prentice Hall" label="Prentice Hall"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59417" end="59453" title="Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics" label="Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59471" end="59507" title="IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology" label="IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677303" start="59525" end="59560" title="IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics" label="IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844082" start="59578" end="59632" title="IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics" label="IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144679" start="59650" end="59683" title="IEEE Photonics Technology Letters" label="IEEE Photonics Technology Letters"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59701" end="59761" title="Journal of the Optical Society of America B: Optical Physics" label="Journal of the Optical Society of America B: Optical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578724" start="59779" end="59796" title="Laser Focus World" label="Laser Focus World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098918" start="59814" end="59828" title="Optics Letters" label="Optics Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187872" start="59846" end="59863" title="Photonics Spectra" label="Photonics Spectra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17560" wikidata="Q216749" url="?curid=17560" title="Live action role-playing game">
<text>A live action role-playing game (LARP) is a form of role-playing game where the participants physically portray their characters. The players pursue goals within a fictional setting represented by real-world environments while interacting with each other in character. The outcome of player actions may be mediated by game rules or determined by consensus among players. Event arrangers called gamemasters decide the setting and rules to be used and facilitate play.

The first LARPs were run in the late 1970s, inspired by tabletop role-playing games and genre fiction. The activity spread internationally during the 1980s and has diversified into a wide variety of styles. Play may be very game-like or may be more concerned with dramatic or artistic expression. Events can also be designed to achieve educational or political goals. The fictional genres used vary greatly, from realistic modern or historical settings to fantastic or futuristic eras. Production values are sometimes minimal, but can involve elaborate venues and costumes. LARPs range in size from small private events lasting a few hours, to large public events with thousands of players lasting for days.

==Terminology==
LARP has also been referred to as &quot;live role-playing&quot; (&quot;LRP&quot;), &quot;interactive literature&quot;, and &quot;free form role-playing&quot;. Some of these terms are still in common use; however, LARP has become the most commonly accepted term. It is sometimes written in lowercase, as &quot;larp&quot;.

==Play overview==
The participants in a LARP physically portray characters in a fictional setting, improvising their characters&#x27; speech and movements somewhat like actors in improvisational theatre. This is distinct from tabletop role-playing games, where character actions are described verbally. LARPs may be played in a public or private area and may last for hours or days. There is usually no audience. Players may dress as their character and carry appropriate equipment, and the environment is sometimes decorated to resemble the setting. LARPs can be one-off events or a series of events in the same setting, and events can vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand.

Arrangers called &quot;gamemasters&quot; (&quot;GMs&quot;) determine the rules and setting of a LARP, and may also influence an event and act as referees while it is taking place. The GMs may also do the logistical work, or there may be other arrangers who handle details such as advertising the event, booking a venue, and financial management. Unlike the GM in a tabletop role-playing game, a LARP GM seldom has an overview of everything that is happening during play because numerous participants may be interacting at once. For this reason, a LARP GM&#x27;s role is often less concerned with tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players, and more with arranging the structure of the LARP before play begins and facilitating the players and crew to maintain the fictional environment during play.

Participants sometimes known as the &quot;crew&quot; may help the GMs to set up and maintain the environment of the LARP during play by acting as stagehands or playing &quot;non-player characters&quot; (&quot;NPCs&quot;) who fill out the setting. Crew typically receive more information about the setting and more direction from the GMs than players do. In a tabletop role-playing game, a GM usually plays all the NPCs, whereas in a LARP, each NPC is typically played by a separate crew member.

Much of play consists of interactions between characters. Some LARP scenarios primarily feature interaction between PCs. Other scenarios focus on interaction between PCs and aspects of the setting, including NPCs, that are under the direction of the GMs.

==History==
LARP does not have a single point of origin, but was invented independently by groups in North America, Europe, and Australia. These groups shared an experience with genre fiction or tabletop role-playing games, and a desire to physically experience such settings. In addition to tabletop role-playing, LARP is rooted in childhood games of make believe, play fighting, costume parties, roleplay simulations, Commedia dell&#x27;arte, improvisational theatre, psychodrama, military simulations, and historical reenactment groups such as the Society for Creative Anachronism.

The earliest recorded LARP group is &quot;Dagorhir&quot;, which was founded in 1977 in the United States and focuses on fantasy battles. Soon after the release of the movie &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot; in 1976, rudimentary live role-playing games based on the movie were run at US science fiction conventions. In 1981, the &quot;International Fantasy Gaming Society&quot; (IFGS) started, with rules influenced by &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. IFGS was named after a fictional group in the 1981 novel &quot;Dream Park&quot;, which described futuristic LARPs. In 1982, the &quot;Society for Interactive Literature&quot;, a predecessor of the &quot;Live Action Roleplayers Association&quot; (LARPA), formed as the first recorded theatre-style LARP group in the US.

&quot;Treasure Trap&quot;, formed in 1982 at Peckforton Castle, was the first recorded LARP game in the UK and influenced the fantasy LARPs that followed there. The first recorded LARP in Australia was run in 1983, using the science fiction &quot;Traveller&quot; setting. In 1993, White Wolf Publishing released &quot;Mind&#x27;s Eye Theatre,&quot; which is played internationally and is the most commercially successful published LARP. The first German events were in the early 1990s, with fantasy LARP in particular growing quickly there, so that since 2001, two major German events have been run annually that have between 3000 and 7000 players each and attract players from around Europe.

Today, LARP is a widespread activity internationally. Games with thousands of participants are run by for-profit companies, and a small industry exists to sell costume, armour and foam weapons intended primarily for LARP. In 2023, &quot;Dicebreaker&quot; reported that &quot;China has developed its own LARP phenomenon in recent years. Jubensha is far more commercially successful and influential than anything we have seen before even in Nordic countries – and there is a good chance it might change our perception of what live-action roleplaying games are capable of in the future&quot;.

==Purpose==
Most LARPs are intended as games for entertainment. Enjoyable aspects can include the collaborative creation of a story, the attempt to overcome challenges in pursuit of a character&#x27;s objectives, and a sense of immersion in a fictional setting. LARPs may also include other game-like aspects such as intellectual puzzles, and sport-like aspects such as fighting with simulated weapons.

Some LARPs stress artistic considerations such as dramatic interaction or challenging subject matter. Avant-garde or &quot;arthaus&quot; events have especially experimental approaches and high culture aspirations and are occasionally held in fine art contexts such as festivals or art museums. The themes of avant-garde events often include politics, culture, religion, sexuality and the human condition. Such LARPs are common in the Nordic countries but also present elsewhere.

In addition to entertainment and artistic merit, LARP events may be designed for educational or political purposes. For example, the Danish secondary school uses LARP to teach most of its classes. Language classes can be taught by immersing students in a role-playing scenario in which they are forced to improvise speech or writing in the language they are learning. Politically-themed LARP events may attempt to awaken or shape political thinking within a culture.

Because LARP involves a controlled artificial environment within which people interact, it has sometimes been used as a research tool to test theories in social fields such as economics or law. For example, LARP has been used to study the application of game theory to the development of criminal law.

==Fiction and reality==
During a LARP, player actions in the real world represent character actions in an imaginary setting. Game rules, physical symbols and theatrical improvisation are used to bridge differences between the real world and the setting. For example, a rope could signify an imaginary wall. Realistic-looking weapon props and risky physical activity are sometimes discouraged or forbidden for safety reasons. While the fictional timeline in a tabletop RPG often progresses in &quot;game-time&quot;, which may be much faster or slower than the time passing for players, LARPs are different in that they usually run in real-time, with game-time only being used in special circumstances.

There is a distinction between when a player is &quot;in character&quot;, meaning they are actively representing their character, and when the player is &quot;out-of-character&quot;, meaning they are being themselves. Some LARPs encourage players to stay consistently in character except in emergencies, while others accept players being out-of-character at times. In a LARP, it is usually assumed that players are speaking and acting in character unless otherwise noted, which is the opposite of normal practice in tabletop role-playing games.

While most LARPs maintain a clear distinction between the real world and the fictional setting, &quot;pervasive&quot; LARPs mingle fiction with modern reality in a fashion similar to alternate reality games. Bystanders who are unaware that a game is taking place may be treated as part of the fictional setting, and in-character materials may be incorporated into the real world.

==Rules==
Many LARPs have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting. The rules may be defined in a publication or created by the gamemasters. Some LARP rules call for the use of simulated weapons such as foam weapons or airsoft guns to determine whether characters succeed in hitting one another in combat situations. In Russian LARP events, weapons made of hard plastic, metal or wood are used. The alternative to using simulated weapons is to pause role-play and determine the outcome of an action symbolically, for example by rolling dice, playing rock paper scissors or comparing character attributes.

There are also LARPs that do without rules, instead relying on players to use their common sense or feel for dramatic appropriateness to cooperatively decide what the outcome of their actions will be.

==Genres==
LARPs can have any genre, although many use themes and settings derived from genre fiction. Some LARPs borrow a setting from an established work in another medium (e.g., &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; or the &quot;World of Darkness&quot;), while others use settings based on the real world or designed specifically for the LARP.

Fantasy is one of the most common LARP genres internationally and is the genre that the largest events use. Fantasy LARPs are set in pseudo-historical worlds inspired by fantasy literature and fantasy role-playing games such as &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. These settings typically have magic, fantasy races, and limited technology. Many fantasy LARPs focus on adventure or on conflict between character factions. In contrast, science fiction LARPs take place in futuristic settings with high technology and sometimes with extraterrestrial life. This describes a broad array of LARPs, including politically themed LARPs depicting dystopian or utopian societies and settings inspired by cyberpunk, space opera and post-apocalyptic fiction.

Horror LARPs are inspired by horror fiction. Popular subgenres include zombie apocalypse and Cthulhu Mythos, sometimes using the published &quot;Cthulhu Live&quot; rules. The World of Darkness, published by White Wolf Publishing, is a widely used goth–punk horror setting in which players usually portray secretive supernatural creatures such as vampires and werewolves.

==Styles==
LARP events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap. Simple distinctions can be made regarding the genre used, the presence of simulated weapons or abstract rules, and whether players create their own characters or have them assigned by gamemasters. There is also a distinction between scenarios that are only run once and those that are designed to be repeatable. While some LARPs are open to participants of all ages, others have a minimum age requirement. There are also youth LARPs, specifically intended for children and young people. Some are run through institutions such as schools, churches, or the Scouts. Denmark has an especially high number of youth LARPs.

=== Fests ===

Some very large events known as fests (short for &quot;festival&quot;) have hundreds or thousands of participants who are usually split into competing character factions camped separately around a large venue. There are only a few fests in the world, all based in Europe and Canada; however, their size means that they have a significant influence on local LARP culture and design. At the other end of the size scale, some small events known as &quot;linear&quot; or &quot;line-course&quot; LARPs feature a small group of PCs facing a series of challenges from NPCs and are often more tightly planned and controlled by GMs than other styles of LARP.

=== Nordic LARP ===

Nordic larp emphasises a collaborative &quot;play to lose&quot; strategy, keeping rules unobtrusive, and often explores emotionally complex issues. The style emerged in Finland and Scandinavia during the 1990s with a focus on &quot;collaborative storytelling around intense human experiences&quot;. &quot;Wired&quot; commented that this style adds &quot;distinct challenges, including the possibility of real emotional harm. To work out issues of how to keep players safe and push the limits of the form, the community gathers at Knutepunkt, an annual meeting that is as much hardcore game jam as academic conference&quot;.

=== Script murder games ===

Script murder games, also known as &quot;jubensha&quot; (), are murder mystery LARP games that emerged in China. Typically, script murder games can be experienced in a tabletop game format or a format which combines larping and escape rooms. Players are given different script options and are assigned characters to play through the murder mystery; these games often occur at dedicated gaming stores where players pay to participate. The style become popularized in 2015 &quot;when reality shows with names like &#x27;Lying Man,&#x27; &#x27;Dinner Party Seduction,&#x27; and later &#x27;Who&#x27;s The Murderer,&#x27; showed celebrities playing whodunits&quot; which led to the development of jubensha clubs that run games in this style.

==Cultural significance==

Roleplaying may be seen as part of a movement in Western culture towards participatory arts, as opposed to traditional spectator arts. Participants in a LARP cast off the role of passive observer and take on new roles that are often outside of their daily life and contrary to their culture. The arrangers of a LARP and the other participants act as co-creators of the game. This collaborative process of creating shared fictional worlds may be associated with a broader burgeoning &quot;geek&quot; culture in developed societies that is in turn associated with prolonged education, high uptake of information technology and increased leisure time. In comparison to the mainstream video-game industry, which is highly commercialized and often marketed towards a male audience, LARP is less commoditized, and women actively contribute as authors and participants.

LARP is not well known in most countries and is sometimes confused with other role-playing, reenactment, costuming, or dramatic activities. While fan and gamer culture in general has become increasingly mainstream in developed countries, LARP has often not achieved the same degree of cultural acceptability. This may be due to intolerance of the resemblance to childhood games of pretend, a perceived risk of over-identification with the characters, and the absence of mass marketing. In US films such as the 2006 documentary &quot;Darkon&quot;, the 2007 documentary &quot;Monster Camp&quot;, and the 2008 comedy &quot;Role Models&quot;, fantasy LARP is depicted as somewhat ridiculous and escapist, but also treated affectionately as a &quot;constructive social outlet&quot;. In the Nordic countries, LARP has achieved a high level of public recognition and popularity. It is often shown in a positive light in mainstream media, with an emphasis on the dramatic and creative aspects. However, even in Norway, where LARP has greater recognition than in most other countries, it has still not achieved full recognition as a cultural activity by government bodies.

Communities have formed around the creation, play and discussion of LARP. These communities have developed a subculture that crosses over with role-playing, fan, reenactment, and drama subcultures. Early LARP subculture focused on Tolkien-like fantasy, but it later broadened to include appreciation of other genres, especially the horror genre with the rapid uptake of the &quot;World of Darkness&quot; setting in the 1990s. Like many subcultures, LARP groups often have a common context of shared experience, language, humour, and clothing that can be regarded by some as a lifestyle.

LARP has been a subject of academic research and theory. Much of this research originates from role-players, especially from the publications of the Nordic Knutepunkt role-playing conventions. The broader academic community has recently begun to study LARP as well, both to compare it to other media and other varieties of interactive gaming, and also to evaluate it in its own right. In 2010, William Bainbridge speculated that LARP may one day evolve into a major industry in the form of location-based games using ubiquitous computing.

In Denmark, Østerskov Efterskole uses LARP as an educational method of teaching subjects to high school boarding students through interactivity and simulation. LARP groups are also using simulations of current and historical events and topics like refugees and the AIDS crisis to roleplay and explore these subjects.

In China, the script murder game industry (jubensha) has continued to grow since 2015. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that in 2021 &quot;the number of scripted murder enterprises registered in China totaled about 6,500, a more than 60 percent increase from the prior year, according to state-run media&quot;. The &quot;Agence France-Presse&quot; reported that &quot;the live action murder mystery market appears to have captured the imagination of China&#x27;s urban youth before the Covid-19 pandemic emerged&quot;. During the COVID-19 pandemic, &quot;Murder Mystery Game&quot; (MMG) apps allowed people to play jubensha digitally and were &quot;available to millions of people across&quot; China. &quot;Dicebreaker&quot; reported that following the easing of pandemic restrictions in China, &quot;more than 45,000 [jubensha] shops&quot; opened with &quot;nearly 10 million active players. It is estimated that soon the Jubensha market will reach 23.89 billion Chinese Yuan&quot;. Voice of America commented that, per the Chinese market research firm iResearch, script murder games are &quot;the third most popular form of entertainment for Chinese people, after watching movies and participating in sports&quot;.

The popularization of script murder games and industry growth in China has led to both national and governmental attention with the Chinese government considering formal regulation of the industry. In September 2020, the &quot;Agence France-Presse&quot; commented that &quot;a report on China National Radio last month voiced fears that too many of the scripts relied on murders, violent plots and sexual content, but others see the games as a way to get young people off their smartphones and back interacting with each other in real life&quot;. In October 2021, the &quot;South China Morning Post&quot; reported that &quot;advertisements for script-killing are prominent in China. [...] The fact that it is a new industry is precisely the problem in the eyes of the authorities. Since the Covid-19 case that brought &#x27;script-killing&#x27; to national attention, the game has been getting mainstream traction, inviting official concerns and possible future regulations&quot;. In October 2022, &quot;Polygon&quot; commented that Chinese &quot;regulators are beginning to take notice of the genre&#x27;s mature content. A story published Wednesday indicates that municipal and provincial authorities have now begun regulating content and demanding that some retailers remove certain materials from sale. [...] As a result, some store owners are now curating their selection to fall in line with government regulation&quot;. &quot;China Daily&quot;, a publication owned by the Chinese Communist Party, reported in April 2023 that China&#x27;s Ministry of Culture and Tourism was beginning to draft regulations for script murder games and &quot;soliciting public opinions&quot;. The draft regulations state that &quot;the contents of such games must not smear the traditional Chinese culture or contain inappropriate materials involving obscenity, gambling, drugs, and other elements that could go against moral standards&quot;. The regulations also include additional rules for minors such as not allowing &quot;underage customers on school days&quot; and that &quot;children under the age of 14 must be accompanied by their parents or other guardians&quot;.

==See also==
* Cosplay
* List of live action role-playing groups
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* The Nordic Larp Wiki has extensive documentation of this style of playing, and of specific larps.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="2" end="31" title="Live action role-playing game" label="live action role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="33" end="37" title="Live action role-playing game" label="LARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="52" end="69" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="118" end="127" title="character (arts)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q617332" start="174" end="181" title="setting (narrative)" label="setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="394" end="404" title="gamemaster" label="gamemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="524" end="551" title="tabletop role-playing games" label="tabletop role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194480" start="556" end="569" title="genre fiction" label="genre fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="1694" end="1717" title="improvisational theatre" label="improvisational theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328828" start="3184" end="3193" title="stagehand" label="stagehand"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="3212" end="3232" title="non-player character" label="non-player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739181" start="4142" end="4154" title="make believe" label="make believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759320" start="4171" end="4186" title="costume party" label="costume parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360661" start="4188" end="4207" title="roleplay simulation" label="roleplay simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="4210" end="4233" title="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q466952" start="4260" end="4271" title="psychodrama" label="psychodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508200" start="4273" end="4292" title="military simulation" label="military simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="4299" end="4321" title="historical reenactment" label="historical reenactment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414697" start="4341" end="4373" title="Society for Creative Anachronism" label="Society for Creative Anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460788" start="4418" end="4426" title="Dagorhir" label="Dagorhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="4496" end="4503" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503018" start="4555" end="4571" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run (1976 film)" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="4795" end="4817" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306426" start="4888" end="4898" title="Dream Park" label="Dream Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="5108" end="5121" title="Theatre-style live action role-playing" label="theatre-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836725" start="5151" end="5164" title="Treasure Trap" label="Treasure Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160653" start="5190" end="5207" title="Peckforton Castle" label="Peckforton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="5392" end="5401" title="Traveller (role-playing game)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433597" start="5426" end="5447" title="White Wolf Publishing" label="White Wolf Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q617505" start="5463" end="5486" title="Mind&amp;#x27;s Eye Theatre" label="Mind&amp;#x27;s Eye Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="6076" end="6087" title="Dicebreaker" label="Dicebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6175" end="6183" title="#Jubensha" label="Jubensha"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="6936" end="6947" title="Avant-garde" label="Avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479257" start="7022" end="7034" title="high culture" label="high culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="7076" end="7084" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="7222" end="7237" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="7268" end="7284" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="8036" end="8047" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q438419" start="9516" end="9538" title="alternate reality game" label="alternate reality game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102716" start="9955" end="9966" title="foam weapon" label="foam weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142497" start="9971" end="9982" title="airsoft gun" label="airsoft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q106631" start="10302" end="10321" title="rock paper scissors" label="rock paper scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="10747" end="10768" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506136" start="10788" end="10805" title="World of Darkness" label="World of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057172" start="11074" end="11092" title="fantasy literature" label="fantasy literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023989" start="11205" end="11218" title="Race (fantasy)" label="fantasy races"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="11338" end="11353" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="11434" end="11455" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="11541" end="11549" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="11554" end="11560" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="11597" end="11606" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="11608" end="11619" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="11624" end="11640" title="apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="11680" end="11694" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633346" start="11722" end="11739" title="zombie apocalypse" label="zombie apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q621596" start="11744" end="11758" title="Cthulhu Mythos" label="Cthulhu Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191765" start="11796" end="11808" title="Cthulhu Live" label="Cthulhu Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433597" start="11858" end="11879" title="White Wolf Publishing" label="White Wolf Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212954" start="11898" end="11902" title="Goth subculture" label="goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131285" start="11903" end="11907" title="Punk ideology" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="11997" end="12004" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="12010" end="12020" title="werewolf" label="werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="12651" end="12657" title="Scouts" label="Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="12659" end="12666" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="13706" end="13711" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040457" start="13931" end="13941" title="Knutepunkt" label="Knutepunkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015069" start="14283" end="14294" title="escape room" label="escape room"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581293" start="14894" end="14911" title="participatory art" label="participatory art"/>
<link wikidata="Q243697" start="15309" end="15313" title="geek" label="geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="15331" end="15350" title="developed country" label="developed societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193432" start="15831" end="15834" title="fan (person)" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276395" start="15839" end="15844" title="gamer" label="gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223777" start="16218" end="16224" title="Darkon (film)" label="Darkon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902701" start="16259" end="16271" title="Monster Camp" label="Monster Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q706858" start="16305" end="16316" title="Role Models" label="Role Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q898449" start="16376" end="16384" title="escapism" label="escapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="16959" end="16969" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="17081" end="17088" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040457" start="17594" end="17604" title="Knutepunkt" label="Knutepunkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q819122" start="17928" end="17947" title="location-based game" label="location-based game"/>
<link wikidata="Q541265" start="17955" end="17975" title="ubiquitous computing" label="ubiquitous computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="17981" end="17988" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q123412080" start="18339" end="18347" title="jubensha" label="jubensha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18389" end="18407" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q40464" start="18624" end="18644" title="Agence France-Presse" label="Agence France-Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="18833" end="18850" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="19010" end="19021" title="Dicebreaker" label="Dicebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="19287" end="19303" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973655" start="19357" end="19366" title="IResearch Consulting Group" label="iResearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198574" start="20095" end="20119" title="South China Morning Post" label="South China Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226423" start="20525" end="20532" title="Polygon (website)" label="Polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q851422" start="20954" end="20965" title="China Daily" label="China Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="21000" end="21023" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q50484620" start="21066" end="21097" title="Ministry of Culture and Tourism of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Culture and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="21698" end="21705" title="Cosplay" label="Cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626622" start="21708" end="21747" title="List of live action role-playing groups" label="List of live action role-playing groups"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17561" wikidata="Q568" url="?curid=17561" title="Lithium">
<text>Lithium () is a chemical element; it has symbol Li and atomic number 3. It is a soft, silvery-white alkali metal. Under standard conditions, it is the least dense metal and the least dense solid element. Like all alkali metals, lithium is highly reactive and flammable, and must be stored in vacuum, inert atmosphere, or inert liquid such as purified kerosene or mineral oil. It exhibits a metallic luster. It corrodes quickly in air to a dull silvery gray, then black tarnish. It does not occur freely in nature, but occurs mainly as pegmatitic minerals, which were once the main source of lithium. Due to its solubility as an ion, it is present in ocean water and is commonly obtained from brines. Lithium metal is isolated electrolytically from a mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.
The nucleus of the lithium atom verges on instability, since the two stable lithium isotopes found in nature have among the lowest binding energies per nucleon of all stable nuclides. Because of its relative nuclear instability, lithium is less common in the solar system than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements even though its nuclei are very light: it is an exception to the trend that heavier nuclei are less common. For related reasons, lithium has important uses in nuclear physics. The transmutation of lithium atoms to helium in 1932 was the first fully human-made nuclear reaction, and lithium deuteride serves as a fusion fuel in staged thermonuclear weapons.
Lithium and its compounds have several industrial applications, including heat-resistant glass and ceramics, lithium grease lubricants, flux additives for iron, steel and aluminium production, lithium metal batteries, and lithium-ion batteries. These uses consume more than three-quarters of lithium production.
Lithium is present in biological systems in trace amounts. It has no established metabolic function in humans. Lithium-based drugs are useful as a mood stabilizer and antidepressant in the treatment of mental illness such as bipolar disorder.
==Properties==
===Atomic and physical===

The alkali metals are also called the lithium family, after its leading element. Like the other alkali metals (which are sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs), and francium (Fr)), lithium has a single valence electron that, in the presence of solvents, is easily released to form Li+. Because of this, lithium is a good conductor of heat and electricity as well as a highly reactive element, though it is the least reactive of the alkali metals. Lithium&#x27;s lower reactivity is due to the proximity of its valence electron to its nucleus (the remaining two electrons are in the 1s orbital, much lower in energy, and do not participate in chemical bonds). Molten lithium is significantly more reactive than its solid form.
Lithium metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife. It is silvery-white. In air it oxidizes to lithium oxide. Its melting point of and its boiling point of are each the highest of all the alkali metals while its density of 0.534 g/cm3 is the lowest.
Lithium has a very low density (0.534 g/cm3), comparable with pine wood. It is the least dense of all elements that are solids at room temperature; the next lightest solid element (potassium, at 0.862 g/cm3) is more than 60% denser. Apart from helium and hydrogen, as a solid it is less dense than any other element as a liquid, being only two-thirds as dense as liquid nitrogen (0.808 g/cm3). Lithium can float on the lightest hydrocarbon oils and is one of only three metals that can float on water, the other two being sodium and potassium.

Lithium&#x27;s coefficient of thermal expansion is twice that of aluminium and almost four times that of iron. Lithium is superconductive below 400 μK at standard pressure and at higher temperatures (more than 9 K) at very high pressures (&gt;20 GPa). At temperatures below 70 K, lithium, like sodium, undergoes diffusionless phase change transformations. At 4.2 K it has a rhombohedral crystal system (with a nine-layer repeat spacing); at higher temperatures it transforms to face-centered cubic and then body-centered cubic. At liquid-helium temperatures (4 K) the rhombohedral structure is prevalent. Multiple allotropic forms have been identified for lithium at high pressures.
Lithium has a mass specific heat capacity of 3.58 kilojoules per kilogram-kelvin, the highest of all solids. Because of this, lithium metal is often used in coolants for heat transfer applications.

=== Isotopes ===

Naturally occurring lithium is composed of two stable isotopes, 6Li and 7Li, the latter being the more abundant (95.15% natural abundance). Both natural isotopes have anomalously low nuclear binding energy per nucleon (compared to the neighboring elements on the periodic table, helium and beryllium); lithium is the only low numbered element that can produce net energy through nuclear fission. The two lithium nuclei have lower binding energies per nucleon than any other stable nuclides other than hydrogen-1, deuterium and helium-3. As a result of this, though very light in atomic weight, lithium is less common in the Solar System than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements. Seven radioisotopes have been characterized, the most stable being 8Li with a half-life of 838 ms and 9Li with a half-life of 178 ms. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are shorter than 8.6 ms. The shortest-lived isotope of lithium is 4Li, which decays through proton emission and has a half-life of 7.6 × 10−23 s. The 6Li isotope is one of only five stable nuclides to have both an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutrons, the other four stable odd-odd nuclides being hydrogen-2, boron-10, nitrogen-14, and tantalum-180m.
7Li is one of the primordial elements (or, more properly, primordial nuclides) produced in Big Bang nucleosynthesis. A small amount of both 6Li and 7Li are produced in stars during stellar nucleosynthesis, but it is further &quot;burned&quot; as fast as produced. 7Li can also be generated in carbon stars. Additional small amounts of both 6Li and 7Li may be generated from solar wind, cosmic rays hitting heavier atoms, and from early solar system 7Be radioactive decay.
Lithium isotopes fractionate substantially during a wide variety of natural processes, including mineral formation (chemical precipitation), metabolism, and ion exchange. Lithium ions substitute for magnesium and iron in octahedral sites in clay minerals, where 6Li is preferred to 7Li, resulting in enrichment of the light isotope in processes of hyperfiltration and rock alteration. The exotic 11Li is known to exhibit a neutron halo, with 2 neutrons orbiting around its nucleus of 3 protons and 6 neutrons. The process known as laser isotope separation can be used to separate lithium isotopes, in particular 7Li from 6Li.
Nuclear weapons manufacture and other nuclear physics applications are a major source of artificial lithium fractionation, with the light isotope 6Li being retained by industry and military stockpiles to such an extent that it has caused slight but measurable change in the 6Li to 7Li ratios in natural sources, such as rivers. This has led to unusual uncertainty in the standardized atomic weight of lithium, since this quantity depends on the natural abundance ratios of these naturally-occurring stable lithium isotopes, as they are available in commercial lithium mineral sources.

Both stable isotopes of lithium can be laser cooled and were used to produce the first quantum degenerate Bose–Fermi mixture.

==Occurrence==
===Astronomical===

Although it was synthesized in the Big Bang, lithium (together with beryllium and boron) is markedly less abundant in the universe than other elements. This is a result of the comparatively low stellar temperatures necessary to destroy lithium, along with a lack of common processes to produce it.
According to modern cosmological theory, lithium—in both stable isotopes (lithium-6 and lithium-7)—was one of the three elements synthesized in the Big Bang. Though the amount of lithium generated in Big Bang nucleosynthesis is dependent upon the number of photons per baryon, for accepted values the lithium abundance can be calculated, and there is a &quot;cosmological lithium discrepancy&quot; in the universe: older stars seem to have less lithium than they should, and some younger stars have much more. The lack of lithium in older stars is apparently caused by the &quot;mixing&quot; of lithium into the interior of stars, where it is destroyed, while lithium is produced in younger stars. Although it transmutes into two atoms of helium due to collision with a proton at temperatures above 2.4 million degrees Celsius (most stars easily attain this temperature in their interiors), lithium is more abundant than computations would predict in later-generation stars.
Lithium is also found in brown dwarf substellar objects and certain anomalous orange stars. Because lithium is present in cooler, less-massive brown dwarfs, but is destroyed in hotter red dwarf stars, its presence in the stars&#x27; spectra can be used in the &quot;lithium test&quot; to differentiate the two, as both are smaller than the Sun. Certain orange stars can also contain a high concentration of lithium. Those orange stars found to have a higher than usual concentration of lithium (such as Centaurus X-4) orbit massive objects—neutron stars or black holes—whose gravity evidently pulls heavier lithium to the surface of a hydrogen-helium star, causing more lithium to be observed.
On 27 May 2020, astronomers reported that classical nova explosions are galactic producers of lithium-7.
===Terrestrial===

Although lithium is widely distributed on Earth, it does not naturally occur in elemental form due to its high reactivity. The total lithium content of seawater is very large and is estimated as 230 billion tonnes, where the element exists at a relatively constant concentration of 0.14 to 0.25 parts per million (ppm), or 25 micromolar; higher concentrations approaching 7 ppm are found near hydrothermal vents.
Estimates for the Earth&#x27;s crustal content range from 20 to 70 ppm by weight. In keeping with its name, lithium forms a minor part of igneous rocks, with the largest concentrations in granites. Granitic pegmatites also provide the greatest abundance of lithium-containing minerals, with spodumene and petalite being the most commercially viable sources. Another significant mineral of lithium is lepidolite which is now an obsolete name for a series formed by polylithionite and trilithionite. Another source for lithium is hectorite clay, the only active development of which is through the Western Lithium Corporation in the United States. At 20 mg lithium per kg of Earth&#x27;s crust, lithium is the 31st most abundant element.
According to the &quot;Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium&quot;, &quot;Lithium is a comparatively rare element, although it is found in many rocks and some brines, but always in very low concentrations. There are a fairly large number of both lithium mineral and brine deposits but only comparatively few of them are of actual or potential commercial value. Many are very small, others are too low in grade.&quot;
Chile is estimated (2020) to have the largest reserves by far (9.2 million tonnes), and Australia the highest annual production (40,000 tonnes). One of the largest &quot;reserve bases&quot; of lithium is in the Salar de Uyuni area of Bolivia, which has 5.4 million tonnes. Other major suppliers include Australia, Argentina and China. As of 2015, the Czech Geological Survey considered the entire Ore Mountains in the Czech Republic as lithium province. Five deposits are registered, one near is considered as a potentially economical deposit, with 160 000 tonnes of lithium. In December 2019, Finnish mining company Keliber Oy reported its Rapasaari lithium deposit has estimated proven and probable ore reserves of 5.280 million tonnes.
In June 2010, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that American geologists were conducting ground surveys on dry salt lakes in western Afghanistan believing that large deposits of lithium are located there. These estimates are &quot;based principally on old data, which was gathered mainly by the Soviets during their occupation of Afghanistan from 1979–1989&quot;. The Department of Defense estimated the lithium reserves in Afghanistan to amount to the ones in Bolivia and dubbed it as a potential &quot;Saudi-Arabia of lithium&quot;. In Cornwall, England, the presence of brine rich in lithium was well known due to the region&#x27;s historic mining industry, and private investors have conducted tests to investigate potential lithium extraction in this area.

===Biological===

Lithium is found in trace amount in numerous plants, plankton, and invertebrates, at concentrations of 69 to 5,760 parts per billion (ppb). In vertebrates the concentration is slightly lower, and nearly all vertebrate tissue and body fluids contain lithium ranging from 21 to 763 ppb. Marine organisms tend to bioaccumulate lithium more than terrestrial organisms. Whether lithium has a physiological role in any of these organisms is unknown.
Lithium concentrations in human tissue averages about 24 ppb (4 ppb in blood, and 1.3 ppm in bone).
Lithium is easily absorbed by plants and lithium concentration in plant tissue is typically around 1 ppm. Some plant families bioaccumulate more lithium than others. Dry weight lithium concentrations for members of the family Solanaceae (which includes potatoes and tomatoes), for instance, can be as high as 30 ppm while this can be as low as 0.05 ppb for corn grains.
Studies of lithium concentrations in mineral-rich soil give ranges between around 0.1 and 50−100 ppm, with some concentrations as high as 100−400 ppm, although it is unlikely that all of it is available for uptake by plants.
Lithium accumulation does not appear to affect the essential nutrient composition of plants. Tolerance to lithium varies by plant species and typically parallels sodium tolerance; maize and Rhodes grass, for example, are highly tolerant to lithium injury while avocado and soybean are very sensitive. Similarly, lithium at concentrations of 5 ppm reduces seed germination in some species (e.g. Asian rice and chickpea) but not in others (e.g. barley and wheat).
Many of lithium&#x27;s major biological effects can be explained by its competition with other ions.
The monovalent lithium ion competes with other ions such as sodium (immediately below lithium on the periodic table), which like lithium is also a monovalent alkali metal.
Lithium also competes with bivalent magnesium ions, whose ionic radius (86 pm) is approximately that of the lithium ion (90 pm).
Mechanisms that transport sodium across cellular membranes also transport lithium.
For instance, sodium channels (both voltage-gated and epithelial) are particularly major pathways of entry for lithium.
Lithium ions can also permeate through ligand-gated ion channels as well as cross both nuclear and mitochondrial membranes.
Like sodium, lithium can enter and partially block (although not permeate) potassium channels and calcium channels.
The biological effects of lithium are many and varied but its mechanisms of action are only partially understood.
For instance, studies of lithium-treated patients with bipolar disorder show that, among many other effects, lithium partially reverses telomere shortening in these patients and also increases mitochondrial function, although how lithium produces these pharmacological effects is not understood.
Even the exact mechanisms involved in lithium toxicity are not fully understood.

==History==

Petalite (LiAlSi4O10) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist and statesman José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva in a mine on the island of Utö, Sweden. However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then working in the laboratory of the chemist Jöns Jakob Berzelius, detected the presence of a new element while analyzing petalite ore. This element formed compounds similar to those of sodium and potassium, though its carbonate and hydroxide were less soluble in water and less alkaline. Berzelius gave the alkaline material the name &quot;&quot;lithion&quot;/&quot;lithina&quot;&quot;, from the Greek word &quot;λιθoς&quot; (transliterated as &quot;lithos&quot;, meaning &quot;stone&quot;), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in plant ashes, and sodium, which was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood. He named the new element &quot;lithium&quot;.
Arfwedson later showed that this same element was present in the minerals spodumene and lepidolite. In 1818, Christian Gmelin was the first to observe that lithium salts give a bright red color to flame. However, both Arfwedson and Gmelin tried and failed to isolate the pure element from its salts. It was not isolated until 1821, when William Thomas Brande obtained it by electrolysis of lithium oxide, a process that had previously been employed by the chemist Sir Humphry Davy to isolate the alkali metals potassium and sodium. Brande also described some pure salts of lithium, such as the chloride, and, estimating that lithia (lithium oxide) contained about 55% metal, estimated the atomic weight of lithium to be around 9.8 g/mol (modern value ~6.94 g/mol). In 1855, larger quantities of lithium were produced through the electrolysis of lithium chloride by Robert Bunsen and Augustus Matthiessen. The discovery of this procedure led to commercial production of lithium in 1923 by the German company Metallgesellschaft AG, which performed an electrolysis of a liquid mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.
Australian psychiatrist John Cade is credited with reintroducing and popularizing the use of lithium to treat mania in 1949. Shortly after, throughout the mid 20th century, lithium&#x27;s mood stabilizing applicability for mania and depression took off in Europe and the United States.
The production and use of lithium underwent several drastic changes in history. The first major application of lithium was in high-temperature lithium greases for aircraft engines and similar applications in World War II and shortly after. This use was supported by the fact that lithium-based soaps have a higher melting point than other alkali soaps, and are less corrosive than calcium based soaps. The small demand for lithium soaps and lubricating greases was supported by several small mining operations, mostly in the US.
The demand for lithium increased dramatically during the Cold War with the production of nuclear fusion weapons. Both lithium-6 and lithium-7 produce tritium when irradiated by neutrons, and are thus useful for the production of tritium by itself, as well as a form of solid fusion fuel used inside hydrogen bombs in the form of lithium deuteride. The US became the prime producer of lithium between the late 1950s and the mid-1980s. At the end, the stockpile of lithium was roughly 42,000 tonnes of lithium hydroxide. The stockpiled lithium was depleted in lithium-6 by 75%, which was enough to affect the measured atomic weight of lithium in many standardized chemicals, and even the atomic weight of lithium in some &quot;natural sources&quot; of lithium ion which had been &quot;contaminated&quot; by lithium salts discharged from isotope separation facilities, which had found its way into ground water. 

Lithium is used to decrease the melting temperature of glass and to improve the melting behavior of aluminium oxide in the Hall-Héroult process. These two uses dominated the market until the middle of the 1990s. After the end of the nuclear arms race, the demand for lithium decreased and the sale of department of energy stockpiles on the open market further reduced prices. In the mid-1990s, several companies started to isolate lithium from brine which proved to be a less expensive option than underground or open-pit mining. Most of the mines closed or shifted their focus to other materials because only the ore from zoned pegmatites could be mined for a competitive price. For example, the US mines near Kings Mountain, North Carolina, closed before the beginning of the 21st century.
The development of lithium-ion batteries increased the demand for lithium and became the dominant use in 2007. With the surge of lithium demand in batteries in the 2000s, new companies have expanded brine isolation efforts to meet the rising demand.

==Chemistry==

===Of lithium metal===
Lithium reacts with water easily, but with noticeably less vigor than other alkali metals. The reaction forms hydrogen gas and lithium hydroxide. When placed over a flame, lithium compounds give off a striking crimson color, but when the metal burns strongly, the flame becomes a brilliant silver. Lithium will ignite and burn in oxygen when exposed to water or water vapor. In moist air, lithium rapidly tarnishes to form a black coating of lithium hydroxide (LiOH and LiOH·H2O), lithium nitride (Li3N) and lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, the result of a secondary reaction between LiOH and CO2). Lithium is one of the few metals that react with nitrogen gas.
Because of its reactivity with water, and especially nitrogen, lithium metal is usually stored in a hydrocarbon sealant, often petroleum jelly. Although the heavier alkali metals can be stored under mineral oil, lithium is not dense enough to fully submerge itself in these liquids.
Lithium has a diagonal relationship with magnesium, an element of similar atomic and ionic radius. Chemical resemblances between the two metals include the formation of a nitride by reaction with N2, the formation of an oxide () and peroxide () when burnt in O2, salts with similar solubilities, and thermal instability of the carbonates and nitrides. The metal reacts with hydrogen gas at high temperatures to produce lithium hydride (LiH).
Lithium forms a variety of binary and ternary materials by direct reaction with the main group elements. These Zintl phases, although highly covalent, can be viewed as salts of polyatomic anions such as Si44-, P73-, and Te52-. With graphite, lithium forms a variety of intercalation compounds.
It dissolves in ammonia (and amines) to give [Li(NH3)4]+ and the solvated electron.
===Inorganic compounds===
Lithium forms salt-like derivatives with all halides and pseudohalides. Some examples include the halides LiF, LiCl, LiBr, LiI, as well as the pseudohalides and related anions. Lithium carbonate has been described as the most important compound of lithium. This white solid is the principal product of beneficiation of lithium ores. It is a precursor to other salts including ceramics and materials for lithium batteries.
The compounds  and  are useful reagents. These salts and many other lithium salts exhibit distinctively high solubility in ethers, in contrast with salts of heavier alkali metals.
In aqueous solution, the coordination complex [Li(H2O)4]+ predominates for many lithium salts. Related complexes are known with amines and ethers.
===Organic chemistry===
Organolithium compounds are numerous and useful. They are defined by the presence of a bond between carbon and lithium. They serve as metal-stabilized carbanions, although their solution and solid-state structures are more complex than this simplistic view. Thus, these are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles. They have also been applied in asymmetric synthesis in the pharmaceutical industry. For laboratory organic synthesis, many organolithium reagents are commercially available in solution form. These reagents are highly reactive, and are sometimes pyrophoric.
Like its inorganic compounds, almost all organic compounds of lithium formally follow the duet rule (e.g., BuLi, MeLi). However, it is important to note that in the absence of coordinating solvents or ligands, organolithium compounds form dimeric, tetrameric, and hexameric clusters (e.g., BuLi is actually [BuLi]6 and MeLi is actually [MeLi]4) which feature multi-center bonding and increase the coordination number around lithium. These clusters are broken down into smaller or monomeric units in the presence of solvents like dimethoxyethane (DME) or ligands like tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA). As an exception to the duet rule, a two-coordinate lithate complex with four electrons around lithium, [Li(thf)4]+[((Me3Si)3C)2Li]–, has been characterized crystallographically.

==Production==
 
Lithium production has greatly increased since the end of World War II. The main sources of lithium are brines and ores.
Lithium metal is produced through electrolysis applied to a mixture of fused 55% lithium chloride and 45% potassium chloride at about 450 °C.
Lithium is one of the elements critical in a world running on renewable energy and dependent on batteries. This suggests that lithium will be one of the main objects of geopolitical competition, but this perspective has also been criticised for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production.

=== Reserves and occurrence ===

The small ionic size makes it difficult for lithium to be included in early stages of mineral crystallization. As a result, lithium remains in the molten phases, where it gets enriched, until it gets solidified in the final stages. Such lithium enrichment is responsible for all commercially promising lithium ore deposits. Brines (and dry salt) are another important source of Li+. Although the number of known lithium-containing deposits and brines is large, most of them are either small or have too low Li+ concentrations. Thus, only a few appear to be of commercial value. 

The US Geological Survey (USGS) estimated worldwide identified lithium reserves in 2022 and 2023 to be 26 million and 28 million tonnes, respectively. An accurate estimate of world lithium reserves is difficult. One reason for this is that most lithium classification schemes are developed for solid ore deposits, whereas brine is a fluid that is problematic to treat with the same classification scheme due to varying concentrations and pumping effects.

In 2019, world production of lithium from spodumene was around 80,000t per annum, primarily from the Greenbushes pegmatite and from some Chinese and Chilean sources. The Talison mine in Greenbushes is reported to be the largest and to have the highest grade of ore at 2.4% Li2O (2012 figures).
==== Lithium triangle and other brine sources====
The world&#x27;s top four lithium-producing countries from 2019, as reported by the US Geological Survey, are Australia, Chile, China and Argentina.
The three countries of Chile, Bolivia, and Argentina contain a region known as the Lithium Triangle. The Lithium Triangle is known for its high-quality salt flats, which include Bolivia&#x27;s Salar de Uyuni, Chile&#x27;s Salar de Atacama, and Argentina&#x27;s Salar de Arizaro. The Lithium Triangle is believed to contain over 75% of existing known lithium reserves. Deposits are also found in South America throughout the Andes mountain chain. Chile is the leading producer, followed by Argentina. Both countries recover lithium from brine pools. According to USGS, Bolivia&#x27;s Uyuni Desert has 5.4 million tonnes of lithium. Half the world&#x27;s known reserves are located in Bolivia along the central eastern slope of the Andes. The Bolivian government has invested US$900 million in lithium production and in 2021 successfully produced 540 tons. The brines in the salt pans of the Lithium Triangle vary widely in lithium content. Concentrations can also vary in time as brines are fluids that are changeable and mobile.

In the US, lithium is recovered from brine pools in Nevada. Projects are also under development in Lithium Valley in California.

====Hard-rock deposits==== 
Since 2018 the Democratic Republic of Congo is known to have the largest lithium spodumene hard-rock deposit in the world. The deposit located in Manono, DRC, may hold up to 1.5 billion tons of lithium spodumene hard-rock. The two largest pegmatites (known as the Carriere de l&#x27;Este Pegmatite and the Roche Dure Pegmatite) are each of similar size or larger than the famous Greenbushes Pegmatite in Western Australia. Thus, the Democratic Republic of Congo is expected to be a significant supplier of lithium to the world with its high grade and low impurities.
On 16 July 2018 2.5 million tonnes of high-grade lithium resources and 124 million pounds of uranium resources were found in the Falchani hard rock deposit in the region Puno, Peru.
In 2020, Australia granted Major Project Status (MPS) to the Finniss Lithium Project for a strategically important lithium deposit: an estimated 3.45 million tonnes (Mt) of mineral resource at 1.4 percent lithium oxide. Operational mining began in 2022.

A deposit discovered in 2013 in Wyoming&#x27;s Rock Springs Uplift is estimated to contain 228,000 tons. Additional deposits in the same formation were estimated to be as much as 18 million tons. Similarly in Nevada, the McDermitt Caldera hosts lithium-bearing volcanic muds that consist of the largest known deposits of lithium within the United States.
The Pampean Pegmatite Province in Argentina is known to have a total of at least 200,000 tons of spodumene with lithium oxide (Li2O) grades varying between 5 and 8 wt %.

In Russia the largest lithium deposit Kolmozerskoye is located in Murmansk region. In 2023, Polar Lithium, a joint venture between Nornickel and Rosatom, has been granted the right to develop the deposit. The project aims to produce 45,000 tonnes of lithium carbonate and hydroxide per year and plans to reach full design capacity by 2030.

=== Sources ===
Another potential source of lithium was identified as the leachates of geothermal wells, which are carried to the surface. Recovery of this type of lithium has been demonstrated in the field; the lithium is separated by simple filtration. Reserves are more limited than those of brine reservoirs and hard rock.
=== Pricing ===

In 1998, the price of lithium metal was about (or US$43/lb). After the 2007 financial crisis, major suppliers, such as Sociedad Química y Minera (SQM), dropped lithium carbonate pricing by 20%. Prices rose in 2012. A 2012 Business Week article outlined an oligopoly in the lithium space: &quot;SQM, controlled by billionaire Julio Ponce, is the second-largest, followed by Rockwood, which is backed by Henry Kravis&#x27;s KKR &amp; Co., and Philadelphia-based FMC&quot;, with Talison mentioned as the biggest producer. Global consumption may jump to 300,000 metric tons a year by 2020 from about 150,000 tons in 2012, to match the demand for lithium batteries that has been growing at about 25% a year, outpacing the 4% to 5% overall gain in lithium production.
The price information service ISE - Institute of Rare Earths Elements and Strategic Metals - gives for various lithium substances in the average of March to August 2022 the following kilo prices stable in the course: Lithium carbonate, purity 99.5% min, from various producers between 63 and 72 EUR/kg. Lithium hydroxide monohydrate LiOH 56.5% min, China, at 66 to 72 EUR/kg; delivered South Korea - 73 EUR/kg. Lithium metal 99.9% min, delivered China - 42 EUR/kg.

=== Extraction ===

Lithium and its compounds were historically isolated and extracted from hard rock but by the 1990s mineral springs, brine pools, and brine deposits had become the dominant source. Most of these were in Chile, Argentina and Bolivia. Large lithium-clay deposits under development in the McDermitt caldera (Nevada, United States) require concentrated sulfuric acid to leach lithium from the clay ore.
By early 2021, much of the lithium mined globally comes from either &quot;spodumene, the mineral contained in hard rocks found in places such as Australia and North Carolina&quot; or from the salty brine pumped directly out of the ground, as it is in locations in Chile. In Chile&#x27;s Salar de Atacama, the lithium concentration in the brine is raised by solar evaporation in a system of ponds. The enrichment by evaporation process may require up to one-and-a-half years, when the brine reaches a lithium content of 6%. The final processing in this example is done near the city of Antofagasta on the coast where pure lithium carbonate, lithium hydroxide, and lithium chloride are produced from the brine.
Low-cobalt cathodes for lithium batteries are expected to require lithium hydroxide rather than lithium carbonate as a feedstock, and this trend favors rock as a source.
One method for lithium extraction, as well as other valuable minerals, is to process geothermal brine water through an electrolytic cell, located within a membrane.
The use of electrodialysis and electrochemical intercalation has been proposed to extract lithium compounds from seawater (which contains lithium at 0.2 parts per million). Ion-selective cells within a membrane in principle could collect lithium either by use of electric field or a concentration difference. In 2024, a redox/electrodialysis system was claimed to offer enormous cost savings, shorter timelines, and less environmental damage than traditional evaporation-based systems.

=== Environmental issues ===

The manufacturing processes of lithium, including the solvent and mining waste, presents significant environmental and health hazards.
Lithium extraction can be fatal to aquatic life due to water pollution. It is known to cause surface water contamination, drinking water contamination, respiratory problems, ecosystem degradation and landscape damage. It also leads to unsustainable water consumption in arid regions (1.9 million liters per ton of lithium). Massive byproduct generation of lithium extraction also presents unsolved problems, such as large amounts of magnesium and lime waste.
In the United States, open-pit mining and mountaintop removal mining compete with brine extraction mining. Environmental concerns include wildlife habitat degradation, potable water pollution including arsenic and antimony contamination, unsustainable water table reduction, and massive mining waste, including radioactive uranium byproduct and sulfuric acid discharge.

=== Human rights issues ===
A study of relationships between lithium extraction companies and indigenous peoples in Argentina indicated that the state may not have protected indigenous peoples&#x27; right to free prior and informed consent, and that extraction companies generally controlled community access to information and set the terms for discussion of the projects and benefit sharing.
Development of the Thacker Pass lithium mine in Nevada, United States, has met with protests and lawsuits from several indigenous tribes who have said they were not provided free prior and informed consent and that the project threatens cultural and sacred sites. They have also expressed concerns that development of the project will create risks to indigenous women, because resource extraction is linked to missing and murdered indigenous women. Protestors have been occupying the site of the proposed mine since January 2021.

== Applications ==
===Batteries===
In 2021, most lithium is used to make lithium-ion batteries for electric cars and mobile devices.
===Ceramics and glass===
Lithium oxide is widely used as a flux for processing silica, reducing the melting point and viscosity of the material and leading to glazes with improved physical properties including low coefficients of thermal expansion. Worldwide, this is one of the largest use for lithium compounds. Glazes containing lithium oxides are used for ovenware. Lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) is generally used in this application because it converts to the oxide upon heating.
===Electrical and electronic===

Late in the 20th century, lithium became an important component of battery electrolytes and electrodes, because of its high electrode potential. Because of its low atomic mass, it has a high charge- and power-to-weight ratio. A typical lithium-ion battery can generate approximately 3 volts per cell, compared with 2.1 volts for lead-acid and 1.5 volts for zinc-carbon. Lithium-ion batteries, which are rechargeable and have a high energy density, differ from lithium metal batteries, which are disposable (primary) batteries with lithium or its compounds as the anode. Other rechargeable batteries that use lithium include the lithium-ion polymer battery, lithium iron phosphate battery, and the nanowire battery.
Over the years opinions have been differing about potential growth. A 2008 study concluded that &quot;realistically achievable lithium carbonate production would be sufficient for only a small fraction of future PHEV and EV global market requirements&quot;, that &quot;demand from the portable electronics sector will absorb much of the planned production increases in the next decade&quot;, and that &quot;mass production of lithium carbonate is not environmentally sound, it will cause irreparable ecological damage to ecosystems that should be protected and that LiIon propulsion is incompatible with the notion of the &#x27;Green Car&#x27;&quot;.
===Lubricating greases===

The third most common use of lithium is in greases. Lithium hydroxide is a strong base, and when heated with a fat, it produces a soap, such as lithium stearate from stearic acid. Lithium soap has the ability to thicken oils, and it is used to manufacture all-purpose, high-temperature lubricating greases.

===Metallurgy===
Lithium (e.g. as lithium carbonate) is used as an additive to continuous casting mould flux slags where it increases fluidity, a use which accounts for 5% of global lithium use (2011). Lithium compounds are also used as additives (fluxes) to foundry sand for iron casting to reduce veining.
Lithium (as lithium fluoride) is used as an additive to aluminium smelters (Hall–Héroult process), reducing melting temperature and increasing electrical resistance, a use which accounts for 3% of production (2011).
When used as a flux for welding or soldering, metallic lithium promotes the fusing of metals during the process and eliminates the formation of oxides by absorbing impurities. Alloys of the metal with aluminium, cadmium, copper and manganese are used to make high-performance, low density aircraft parts (see also Lithium-aluminium alloys).
=== Silicon nano-welding ===
Lithium has been found effective in assisting the perfection of silicon nano-welds in electronic components for electric batteries and other devices.

===Pyrotechnics===
Lithium compounds are used as pyrotechnic colorants and oxidizers in red fireworks and flares.
===Air purification===
Lithium chloride and lithium bromide are hygroscopic and are used as desiccants for gas streams. Lithium hydroxide and lithium peroxide are the salts most commonly used in confined areas, such as aboard spacecraft and submarines, for carbon dioxide removal and air purification. Lithium hydroxide absorbs carbon dioxide from the air by forming lithium carbonate, and is preferred over other alkaline hydroxides for its low weight.
Lithium peroxide (Li2O2) in presence of moisture not only reacts with carbon dioxide to form lithium carbonate, but also releases oxygen. The reaction is as follows:
:2 Li2O2 + 2 CO2 → 2 Li2CO3 + O2
Some of the aforementioned compounds, as well as lithium perchlorate, are used in oxygen candles that supply submarines with oxygen. These can also include small amounts of boron, magnesium, aluminium, silicon, titanium, manganese, and iron.

===Optics===
Lithium fluoride, artificially grown as crystal, is clear and transparent and often used in specialist optics for IR, UV and VUV (vacuum UV) applications. It has one of the lowest refractive indices and the furthest transmission range in the deep UV of most common materials. Finely divided lithium fluoride powder has been used for thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry (TLD): when a sample of such is exposed to radiation, it accumulates crystal defects which, when heated, resolve via a release of bluish light whose intensity is proportional to the absorbed dose, thus allowing this to be quantified. Lithium fluoride is sometimes used in focal lenses of telescopes.
The high non-linearity of lithium niobate also makes it useful in non-linear optics applications. It is used extensively in telecommunication products such as mobile phones and optical modulators, for such components as resonant crystals. Lithium applications are used in more than 60% of mobile phones.

===Organic and polymer chemistry===
Organolithium compounds are widely used in the production of polymer and fine-chemicals. In the polymer industry, which is the dominant consumer of these reagents, alkyl lithium compounds are catalysts/initiators in anionic polymerization of unfunctionalized olefins. For the production of fine chemicals, organolithium compounds function as strong bases and as reagents for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds. Organolithium compounds are prepared from lithium metal and alkyl halides.
Many other lithium compounds are used as reagents to prepare organic compounds. Some popular compounds include lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), lithium triethylborohydride, &quot;n&quot;-butyllithium and &quot;tert&quot;-butyllithium.


===Military===
Metallic lithium and its complex hydrides, such as lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), are used as high-energy additives to rocket propellants. LiAlH4 can also be used by itself as a solid fuel.
The Mark 50 torpedo stored chemical energy propulsion system (SCEPS) uses a small tank of sulfur hexafluoride, which is sprayed over a block of solid lithium. The reaction generates heat, creating steam to propel the torpedo in a closed Rankine cycle.
Lithium hydride containing lithium-6 is used in thermonuclear weapons, where it serves as fuel for the fusion stage of the bomb.

===Nuclear===
Lithium-6 is valued as a source material for tritium production and as a neutron absorber in nuclear fusion. Natural lithium contains about 7.5% lithium-6 from which large amounts of lithium-6 have been produced by isotope separation for use in nuclear weapons. Lithium-7 gained interest for use in nuclear reactor coolants.

Lithium deuteride was the fusion fuel of choice in early versions of the hydrogen bomb. When bombarded by neutrons, both 6Li and 7Li produce tritium — this reaction, which was not fully understood when hydrogen bombs were first tested, was responsible for the runaway yield of the Castle Bravo nuclear test. Tritium fuses with deuterium in a fusion reaction that is relatively easy to achieve. Although details remain secret, lithium-6 deuteride apparently still plays a role in modern nuclear weapons as a fusion material.
Lithium fluoride, when highly enriched in the lithium-7 isotope, forms the basic constituent of the fluoride salt mixture LiF-BeF2 used in liquid fluoride nuclear reactors. Lithium fluoride is exceptionally chemically stable and LiF-BeF2 mixtures have low melting points. In addition, 7Li, Be, and F are among the few nuclides with low enough thermal neutron capture cross-sections not to poison the fission reactions inside a nuclear fission reactor.
In conceptualized (hypothetical) nuclear fusion power plants, lithium will be used to produce tritium in magnetically confined reactors using deuterium and tritium as the fuel. Naturally occurring tritium is extremely rare and must be synthetically produced by surrounding the reacting plasma with a &#x27;blanket&#x27; containing lithium, where neutrons from the deuterium-tritium reaction in the plasma will fission the lithium to produce more tritium:
:6Li + n → 4He + 3H.
Lithium is also used as a source for alpha particles, or helium nuclei. When 7Li is bombarded by accelerated protons 8Be is formed, which almost immediately undergoes fission to form two alpha particles. This feat, called &quot;splitting the atom&quot; at the time, was the first fully human-made nuclear reaction. It was produced by Cockroft and Walton in 1932. Injection of lithium powders is used in fusion reactors to manipulate plasma-material interactions and dissipate energy in the hot thermo-nuclear fusion plasma boundary.
In 2013, the US Government Accountability Office said a shortage of lithium-7 critical to the operation of 65 out of 100 American nuclear reactors &quot;places their ability to continue to provide electricity at some risk.&quot; The problem stems from the decline of US nuclear infrastructure. The equipment needed to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7 is mostly a cold war leftover. The US shut down most of this machinery in 1963, when it had a huge surplus of separated lithium, mostly consumed during the twentieth century. The report said it would take five years and $10 million to $12 million to reestablish the ability to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7.
Reactors that use lithium-7 heat water under high pressure and transfer heat through heat exchangers that are prone to corrosion. The reactors use lithium to counteract the corrosive effects of boric acid, which is added to the water to absorb excess neutrons.

===Medicine===

Lithium is useful in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Lithium salts may also be helpful for related diagnoses, such as schizoaffective disorder and cyclic major depressive disorder. The active part of these salts is the lithium ion Li+. Lithium may increase the risk of developing Ebstein&#x27;s cardiac anomaly in infants born to women who take lithium during the first trimester of pregnancy.

==Precautions==
Lithium metal is corrosive and requires special handling to avoid skin contact. Breathing lithium dust or lithium compounds (which are often alkaline) initially irritate the nose and throat, while higher exposure can cause a buildup of fluid in the lungs, leading to pulmonary edema. The metal itself is a handling hazard because contact with moisture produces the caustic lithium hydroxide. Lithium is safely stored in non-reactive compounds such as naphtha.
== See also ==
* Cosmological lithium problem
* Dilithium
* Halo nucleus
* Isotopes of lithium
* List of countries by lithium production
* Lithia water
* Lithium–air battery
* Lithium burning
* Lithium compounds (category)
* Lithium-ion battery
* Lithium Tokamak Experiment
== Notes ==

==References==
==External links==
* McKinsey review of 2018 (PDF)
* Lithium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* International Lithium Alliance (archived, August 2009)
* USGS: Lithium Statistics and Information 
* Lithium Supply &amp; Markets 2009 IM Conference 2009 Sustainable lithium supplies through 2020 in the face of sustainable market growth 
* University of Southampton, Mountbatten Centre for International Studies, Nuclear History Working Paper No5. (PDF) (archived February 26 February 2008)
* Lithium preserves by Country at investingnews.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="0" end="7" title="Lithium" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="16" end="32" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="41" end="47" title="chemical symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="48" end="50" title="Lithium" label="Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="55" end="68" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="100" end="112" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="120" end="139" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q778774" start="246" end="254" title="reactivity (chemistry)" label="reactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="399" end="405" title="luster (mineralogy)" label="luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="410" end="418" title="corrosion" label="corrodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105630" start="535" end="545" title="pegmatite" label="pegmatitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="692" end="697" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="726" end="742" title="electrolysis" label="electrolytically"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="761" end="777" title="lithium chloride" label="lithium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="782" end="800" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="806" end="813" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="886" end="893" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750062" start="933" end="949" title="Nuclear binding energy" label="binding energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="954" end="961" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="976" end="983" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="1275" end="1290" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="1296" end="1309" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1330" end="1336" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="1376" end="1392" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q79583" start="1398" end="1415" title="lithium deuteride" label="lithium deuteride"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="1428" end="1434" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870502" start="1443" end="1471" title="Teller-Ulam design" label="staged thermonuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="1572" end="1579" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653120" start="1582" end="1596" title="lithium grease" label="lithium grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q107086890" start="1666" end="1689" title="Lithium metal battery" label="lithium metal batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="1695" end="1716" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="1896" end="1915" title="Lithium (medication)" label="Lithium-based drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="1952" end="1966" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="2010" end="2026" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="2074" end="2086" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="2191" end="2197" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="2204" end="2213" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="2219" end="2227" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="2234" end="2241" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q671" start="2252" end="2260" title="francium" label="francium"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="2289" end="2305" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="2621" end="2628" title="atomic nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858705" start="2644" end="2657" title="Two-electron atom" label="two electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="2669" end="2679" title="s-orbital" label="1s orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q385662" start="2909" end="2922" title="lithium oxide" label="lithium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2928" end="2941" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="2953" end="2966" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="3026" end="3033" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3043" end="3048" title="Density#Unit" label="g/cm3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="3126" end="3135" title="pine wood" label="pine wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="3308" end="3314" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3319" end="3327" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="3427" end="3442" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="3586" end="3592" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="3597" end="3606" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="3624" end="3656" title="coefficient of thermal expansion" label="coefficient of thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="3674" end="3683" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3714" end="3718" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="3731" end="3746" title="superconductive" label="superconductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q182460" start="3757" end="3759" title="microkelvin" label="μK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977001" start="3921" end="3963" title="diffusionless transformations" label="diffusionless phase change transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="3983" end="4010" title="rhombohedral crystal system" label="rhombohedral crystal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="4087" end="4106" title="face-centered cubic" label="face-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="4116" end="4135" title="body-centered cubic" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="4311" end="4333" title="specific heat capacity" label="specific heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056832" start="4449" end="4456" title="coolant" label="coolant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="4462" end="4475" title="heat transfer" label="heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="4563" end="4570" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="4629" end="4646" title="natural abundance" label="natural abundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750062" start="4692" end="4714" title="nuclear binding energy" label="nuclear binding energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="4772" end="4786" title="Periodic chart of the elements" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="4788" end="4794" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="4799" end="4808" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="4888" end="4903" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q466603" start="5010" end="5020" title="hydrogen-1" label="hydrogen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="5022" end="5031" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q533498" start="5036" end="5044" title="helium-3" label="helium-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5195" end="5207" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="5267" end="5276" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="5284" end="5286" title="millisecond" label="ms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="5344" end="5355" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q902157" start="5478" end="5493" title="proton emission" label="proton emission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5563" end="5582" title="Stable nuclide#Odd and even proton and neutron count" label="five stable nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5675" end="5691" title="Even and odd atomic nuclei#Odd proton, odd neutron" label="odd-odd nuclides"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="5698" end="5708" title="deuterium" label="hydrogen-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="5710" end="5718" title="boron-10" label="boron-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q470479" start="5720" end="5731" title="nitrogen-14" label="nitrogen-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500708" start="5737" end="5750" title="tantalum-180m" label="tantalum-180m"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="5770" end="5789" title="primordial elements" label="primordial elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="5821" end="5828" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="5843" end="5867" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="5933" end="5956" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117877" start="5982" end="5988" title="Lithium burning" label="burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q130019" start="6045" end="6056" title="carbon star" label="carbon star"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="6202" end="6204" title="Beryllium" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="6365" end="6375" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q389137" start="6381" end="6393" title="ion exchange" label="ion exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="6423" end="6432" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="6465" end="6469" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128608" start="6647" end="6659" title="Halo nucleus" label="neutron halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q300155" start="6755" end="6779" title="atomic vapor laser isotope separation" label="laser isotope separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="7234" end="7247" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="7475" end="7487" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="7542" end="7546" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q898383" start="7547" end="7552" title="Fermionic condensate" label="Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="7633" end="7641" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="8096" end="8120" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="8153" end="8159" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="8165" end="8171" title="baryon" label="baryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085478" start="8255" end="8287" title="cosmological lithium problem" label="cosmological lithium discrepancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117877" start="8606" end="8616" title="lithium burning" label="transmutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="8635" end="8641" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="8666" end="8672" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="8896" end="8907" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="9055" end="9064" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9374" end="9387" title="Centaurus X-4" label="Centaurus X-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="9607" end="9621" title="classical nova" label="classical nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="10015" end="10025" title="micromolar" label="micromolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="10082" end="10100" title="hydrothermal vents" label="hydrothermal vents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="10133" end="10140" title="crust (geology)" label="crustal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="10240" end="10252" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="10290" end="10297" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105630" start="10309" end="10318" title="pegmatite" label="pegmatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q120547" start="10393" end="10402" title="spodumene" label="spodumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q422823" start="10407" end="10415" title="petalite" label="petalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q429926" start="10502" end="10512" title="lepidolite" label="lepidolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129310" start="10630" end="10639" title="hectorite" label="hectorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q76122" start="11468" end="11482" title="Salar de Uyuni" label="Salar de Uyuni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11608" end="11631" title="Czech Geological Survey" label="Czech Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="11654" end="11667" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12016" end="12034" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497768" start="12109" end="12112" title="Dry lake" label="dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="12113" end="12122" title="salt lake" label="salt lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12135" end="12146" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12297" end="12304" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="12318" end="12343" title="Soviet occupation of Afghanistan" label="occupation of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="12370" end="12391" title="The Pentagon" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="12540" end="12548" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="12646" end="12661" title="Mining in Cornwall and Devon" label="mining industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="12898" end="12915" title="parts per billion" label="parts per billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523981" start="13235" end="13265" title="Composition of the human body" label="concentrations in human tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="13284" end="13287" title="Parts per billion" label="ppb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="13298" end="13303" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="13313" end="13316" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="13320" end="13324" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="13357" end="13362" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="13428" end="13431" title="Part per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="13444" end="13452" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="13453" end="13466" title="Bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870826" start="13493" end="13503" title="Dry weight" label="Dry weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="13546" end="13552" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="13553" end="13563" title="Solanaceae" label="Solanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="13580" end="13588" title="Potato" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="13593" end="13601" title="Tomato" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="13684" end="13694" title="Corn (grain)" label="corn grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="13794" end="13797" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="13914" end="13919" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="13973" end="13991" title="essential nutrient" label="essential nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529024" start="14084" end="14100" title="Halotolerance" label="sodium tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="14102" end="14107" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133411" start="14112" end="14124" title="Rhodes grass" label="Rhodes grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="14183" end="14190" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="14195" end="14202" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="14277" end="14293" title="seed germination" label="seed germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q161426" start="14316" end="14326" title="Oryza sativa" label="Asian rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="14331" end="14339" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="14365" end="14371" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="14376" end="14381" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="14489" end="14499" title="Monovalent ion" label="monovalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="14508" end="14511" title="Cation" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="14545" end="14551" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="14586" end="14600" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="14643" end="14655" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="14684" end="14692" title="Bivalent (chemistry)" label="bivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="14693" end="14702" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="14715" end="14727" title="ionic radius" label="ionic radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="14732" end="14734" title="Picometre" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q424960" start="14883" end="14897" title="sodium channel" label="sodium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70444589" start="14905" end="14918" title="Voltage-gated sodium channel" label="voltage-gated"/>
<link wikidata="Q424948" start="14923" end="14933" title="Epithelial sodium channel" label="epithelial"/>
<link wikidata="Q907651" start="15011" end="15019" title="permeate" label="permeate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418536" start="15028" end="15052" title="ligand-gated ion channel" label="ligand-gated ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q465608" start="15076" end="15083" title="Nuclear membrane" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="15088" end="15101" title="Mitochondrion" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q176088" start="15102" end="15110" title="membrane" label="membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q907651" start="15178" end="15186" title="permeate" label="permeate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423778" start="15188" end="15205" title="potassium channel" label="potassium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322916" start="15211" end="15226" title="calcium channel" label="calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271540" start="15291" end="15311" title="Mechanism of action" label="mechanisms of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="15368" end="15383" title="Lithium (medication)" label="lithium-treated"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="15398" end="15414" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="15479" end="15487" title="telomere" label="telomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="15488" end="15498" title="Telomere shortening" label="shortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q864491" start="15596" end="15618" title="pharmacological effect" label="pharmacological effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002488" start="15677" end="15693" title="lithium toxicity" label="lithium toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q422823" start="15734" end="15742" title="Petalite" label="Petalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q379631" start="15818" end="15851" title="José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva" label="José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q56804997" start="15879" end="15882" title="Utö, Sweden" label="Utö"/>
<link wikidata="Q313568" start="15928" end="15950" title="Johan August Arfwedson" label="Johan August Arfwedson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="15998" end="16018" title="Jöns Jakob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jakob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="16020" end="16028" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="detected"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="16139" end="16145" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="16150" end="16159" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q410174" start="16172" end="16181" title="lithium carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="16186" end="16195" title="lithium hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="16206" end="16222" title="solubility" label="soluble in water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="16232" end="16240" title="Base (chemistry)" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q120547" start="16753" end="16762" title="spodumene" label="spodumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q429926" start="16767" end="16777" title="lepidolite" label="lepidolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q63334" start="16788" end="16804" title="Christian Gmelin" label="Christian Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q999118" start="17016" end="17037" title="William Thomas Brande" label="William Thomas Brande"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="17053" end="17065" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q385662" start="17069" end="17082" title="lithium oxide" label="lithium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="17147" end="17159" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q385662" start="17312" end="17325" title="lithium oxide" label="lithium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="17524" end="17540" title="lithium chloride" label="lithium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="17544" end="17557" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q345814" start="17562" end="17582" title="Augustus Matthiessen" label="Augustus Matthiessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604310" start="17686" end="17707" title="Metallgesellschaft AG" label="Metallgesellschaft AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="17785" end="17803" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181170" start="17829" end="17838" title="John Cade" label="John Cade"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="17915" end="17920" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="18038" end="18048" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653120" start="18234" end="18248" title="lithium grease" label="lithium grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18299" end="18311" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="18677" end="18685" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="18709" end="18731" title="Nuclear weapon design" label="nuclear fusion weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="18770" end="18777" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79583" start="18949" end="18966" title="lithium deuteride" label="lithium deuteride"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="19236" end="19249" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="19631" end="19646" title="aluminium oxide" label="aluminium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898555" start="19654" end="19674" title="Hall-Héroult process" label="Hall-Héroult process"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="19764" end="19781" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="19975" end="19980" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742139" start="20242" end="20256" title="Kings Mountain, North Carolina" label="Kings Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="20722" end="20730" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="20739" end="20756" title="lithium hydroxide" label="lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="21054" end="21071" title="lithium hydroxide" label="lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q413407" start="21093" end="21108" title="lithium nitride" label="lithium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q410174" start="21120" end="21137" title="lithium carbonate" label="lithium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="21199" end="21202" title="carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="21254" end="21262" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q457239" start="21395" end="21410" title="petroleum jelly" label="petroleum jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="21467" end="21478" title="mineral oil" label="mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q386039" start="21565" end="21586" title="diagonal relationship" label="diagonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="21592" end="21601" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="21636" end="21648" title="ionic radius" label="ionic radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q410851" start="21722" end="21729" title="nitride" label="nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q385662" start="21771" end="21776" title="lithium oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="21814" end="21819" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="21833" end="21845" title="solubility" label="solubilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="21878" end="21887" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79583" start="21970" end="21985" title="lithium hydride" label="lithium hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q128575" start="22104" end="22115" title="Zintl phase" label="Zintl phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q175562" start="22262" end="22284" title="intercalation compound" label="intercalation compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q901106" start="22352" end="22369" title="solvated electron" label="solvated electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="22442" end="22448" title="halide" label="halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409319" start="22503" end="22506" title="lithium fluoride" label="LiF"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="22508" end="22512" title="lithium chloride" label="LiCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q409701" start="22514" end="22518" title="lithium bromide" label="LiBr"/>
<link wikidata="Q79566" start="22520" end="22523" title="Lithium iodide" label="LiI"/>
<link wikidata="Q419067" start="22540" end="22552" title="pseudohalide" label="pseudohalide"/>
<link wikidata="Q427027" start="22833" end="22833" title="Lithium borohydride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q409574" start="22838" end="22838" title="Lithium aluminium hydride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="22850" end="22857" title="reagent" label="reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="23024" end="23044" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q420460" start="23170" end="23192" title="Organolithium compound" label="Organolithium compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="23257" end="23261" title="covalent bond" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="23270" end="23276" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q898552" start="23321" end="23330" title="carbanion" label="carbanion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="23463" end="23468" title="base (chemistry)" label="bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="23473" end="23485" title="carbon nucleophile" label="nucleophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q912400" start="23732" end="23742" title="pyrophoricity" label="pyrophoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q208348" start="23834" end="23843" title="duet rule" label="duet rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q410875" start="23851" end="23855" title="N-Butyllithium" label="BuLi"/>
<link wikidata="Q413849" start="23857" end="23861" title="Methyllithium" label="MeLi"/>
<link wikidata="Q416271" start="24273" end="24288" title="dimethoxyethane" label="dimethoxyethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q99977133" start="24311" end="24337" title="tetramethylethylenediamine" label="tetramethylethylenediamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24601" end="24613" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="24647" end="24652" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="24658" end="24661" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="24698" end="24710" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="24745" end="24761" title="lithium chloride" label="lithium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="24770" end="24788" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="24975" end="24987" title="geopolitical" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="25469" end="25472" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="25483" end="25489" title="Brines" label="Brines"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="25743" end="25763" title="US Geological Survey" label="US Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="25868" end="25873" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="26072" end="26077" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826852" start="26296" end="26307" title="Greenbushes, Western Australia" label="Greenbushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26332" end="26339" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="26344" end="26349" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843085" start="26649" end="26658" title="lithium mining in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="26660" end="26665" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="26667" end="26672" title="Economy of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133618" start="26677" end="26686" title="Economy of Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="26711" end="26716" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="26718" end="26725" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="26731" end="26740" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602076" start="26771" end="26787" title="Lithium Triangle" label="Lithium Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76122" start="26881" end="26895" title="Salar de Uyuni" label="Salar de Uyuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142015" start="26910" end="26926" title="Salar de Atacama" label="Salar de Atacama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469637" start="26949" end="26965" title="Salar de Arizaro" label="Salar de Arizaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="27112" end="27117" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014511" start="27271" end="27276" title="Uyuni" label="Uyuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="27371" end="27378" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="27770" end="27776" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q124613722" start="27817" end="27831" title="Lithium Valley" label="Lithium Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865632" start="27891" end="27919" title="Mining industry of the Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q120547" start="27957" end="27966" title="spodumene" label="spodumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286489" start="28022" end="28028" title="Manono, Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Manono"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="28030" end="28033" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="DRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="28280" end="28297" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865632" start="28309" end="28337" title="Mining industry of the Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517307" start="28686" end="28709" title="Finniss Lithium Project" label="Finniss Lithium Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q385662" start="28830" end="28843" title="lithium oxide" label="lithium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714831" start="28927" end="28946" title="Rock Springs Uplift" label="Rock Springs Uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010127" start="29101" end="29118" title="McDermitt Caldera" label="McDermitt Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29239" end="29265" title="Pampean Pegmatite Province" label="Pampean Pegmatite Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q120547" start="29332" end="29341" title="spodumene" label="spodumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q385662" start="29347" end="29360" title="lithium oxide" label="lithium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="29368" end="29374" title="ore grade" label="grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="29472" end="29480" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="29834" end="29850" title="Geothermal electricity" label="geothermal wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q100995" start="30147" end="30149" title="Pound (mass)" label="lb"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="30162" end="30183" title="Financial crisis of 2007–08" label="2007 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067064" start="30210" end="30235" title="Sociedad Química y Minera" label="Sociedad Química y Minera"/>
<link wikidata="Q410174" start="30251" end="30268" title="lithium carbonate" label="lithium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="30313" end="30326" title="Bloomberg Businessweek" label="Business Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q103639" start="30347" end="30356" title="oligopoly" label="oligopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16585798" start="30416" end="30427" title="Julio Ponce Lerou" label="Julio Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30464" end="30472" title="Albemarle Corporation#Acquisition of Rockwood Holdings" label="Rockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q933721" start="30493" end="30512" title="Henry Kravis" label="Henry Kravis&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679577" start="30567" end="30574" title="Talison Minerals" label="Talison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365924" start="31438" end="31453" title="mineral springs" label="mineral springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="31455" end="31460" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120547" start="31811" end="31820" title="spodumene" label="spodumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142015" start="32024" end="32040" title="Salar de Atacama" label="Salar de Atacama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612" start="32322" end="32333" title="Antofagasta" label="Antofagasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q410174" start="32358" end="32375" title="lithium carbonate" label="lithium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="32377" end="32394" title="lithium hydroxide" label="lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="32400" end="32416" title="lithium chloride" label="lithium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q22668727" start="32450" end="32487" title="Lithium nickel manganese cobalt oxides" label="cobalt cathodes for lithium batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="32512" end="32529" title="lithium hydroxide" label="lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="32677" end="32685" title="Mineral" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290646" start="32792" end="32807" title="electrodialysis" label="electrodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="32934" end="32951" title="parts per million" label="parts per million"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="33044" end="33058" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784525" start="33364" end="33376" title="mining waste" label="mining waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="33488" end="33503" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="33866" end="33875" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="33880" end="33884" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104297" start="33914" end="33929" title="open-pit mining" label="open-pit mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950906" start="33934" end="33960" title="mountaintop removal mining" label="mountaintop removal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q23070439" start="33974" end="33997" title="Brine mining" label="brine extraction mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="34094" end="34101" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="34106" end="34114" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="34144" end="34155" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784525" start="34179" end="34191" title="mining waste" label="mining waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="34215" end="34222" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="34237" end="34250" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014731" start="34471" end="34502" title="Free, prior and informed consent" label="free prior and informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977681" start="34676" end="34701" title="Thacker Pass Lithium Mine" label="Thacker Pass lithium mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907837" start="35067" end="35104" title="Missing and murdered Indigenous women" label="missing and murdered indigenous women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="35261" end="35282" title="lithium-ion batteries" label="lithium-ion batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="35287" end="35299" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="35305" end="35318" title="mobile device" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134475" start="35380" end="35384" title="Flux (metallurgy)" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="35400" end="35406" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="35421" end="35434" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="35439" end="35448" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q335404" start="35480" end="35486" title="ceramic glaze" label="glazes"/>
<link wikidata="Q410174" start="35691" end="35708" title="Lithium carbonate" label="Lithium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025104" start="35960" end="35979" title="electrode potential" label="electrode potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="36000" end="36011" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642768" start="36039" end="36060" title="power-to-weight ratio" label="power-to-weight ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="36072" end="36091" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="36121" end="36125" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q337724" start="36165" end="36174" title="lead–acid battery" label="lead-acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28765" start="36193" end="36204" title="zinc-carbon cell" label="zinc-carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="36268" end="36282" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q107086890" start="36296" end="36319" title="lithium metal batteries" label="lithium metal batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194058" start="36331" end="36341" title="disposable" label="disposable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378887" start="36343" end="36350" title="primary cell" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="36352" end="36361" title="Battery (electricity)" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="36399" end="36404" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q898512" start="36464" end="36491" title="lithium-ion polymer battery" label="lithium-ion polymer battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q901551" start="36493" end="36523" title="lithium iron phosphate battery" label="lithium iron phosphate battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566515" start="36533" end="36549" title="nanowire battery" label="nanowire battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="36763" end="36767" title="PHEV" label="PHEV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="36772" end="36774" title="electric vehicle" label="EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="37117" end="37122" title="LiIon" label="LiIon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="37311" end="37315" title="base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q420096" start="37373" end="37389" title="lithium stearate" label="lithium stearate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209685" start="37395" end="37407" title="stearic acid" label="stearic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q911138" start="37441" end="37448" title="thickening agent" label="thicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q629823" start="37515" end="37534" title="grease (lubricant)" label="lubricating greases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506832" start="37616" end="37634" title="continuous casting" label="continuous casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460603" start="37796" end="37808" title="foundry sand" label="foundry sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q409319" start="37857" end="37873" title="lithium fluoride" label="lithium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q898555" start="37921" end="37941" title="Hall–Héroult process" label="Hall–Héroult process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134475" start="38076" end="38080" title="flux (metallurgy)" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="38085" end="38092" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q211387" start="38096" end="38105" title="soldering" label="soldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="38205" end="38210" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="38237" end="38242" title="Alloy" label="Alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="38273" end="38280" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="38293" end="38302" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q447440" start="38375" end="38399" title="Al-Li" label="Lithium-aluminium alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263719" start="38631" end="38651" title="pyrotechnic colorant" label="pyrotechnic colorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="38674" end="38683" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q628261" start="38688" end="38694" title="Flare (pyrotechnic)" label="flares"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="38719" end="38735" title="Lithium chloride" label="Lithium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q409701" start="38740" end="38755" title="lithium bromide" label="lithium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="38760" end="38771" title="hygroscopic" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221746" start="38788" end="38797" title="desiccant" label="desiccant"/>
<link wikidata="Q411763" start="38838" end="38854" title="lithium peroxide" label="lithium peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="38922" end="38932" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="38937" end="38946" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="39024" end="39038" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412015" start="39398" end="39417" title="lithium perchlorate" label="lithium perchlorate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39431" end="39445" title="Chemical oxygen generator#Oxygen candle" label="oxygen candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="39458" end="39467" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="39474" end="39480" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="39522" end="39527" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="39529" end="39538" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="39540" end="39549" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="39551" end="39558" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="39560" end="39568" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="39570" end="39579" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="39585" end="39589" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q409319" start="39605" end="39621" title="Lithium fluoride" label="Lithium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="39645" end="39652" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="39719" end="39721" title="infrared" label="IR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="39723" end="39725" title="ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="39735" end="39744" title="vacuum UV" label="vacuum UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="39785" end="39803" title="refractive index" label="refractive indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412702" start="39938" end="39975" title="Thermoluminescent Dosimeter" label="thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="40045" end="40059" title="crystal defect" label="crystal defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q215313" start="40158" end="40171" title="absorbed dose" label="absorbed dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="40264" end="40273" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q424481" start="40302" end="40317" title="lithium niobate" label="lithium niobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="40342" end="40372" title="nonlinear optics" label="non-linear optics applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q906767" start="40453" end="40470" title="optical modulator" label="optical modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q877055" start="40496" end="40513" title="crystal oscillator" label="resonant crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q420460" start="40617" end="40639" title="Organolithium compound" label="Organolithium compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="40809" end="40817" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q466403" start="40819" end="40829" title="radical initiator" label="initiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081822" start="40833" end="40855" title="Anionic addition polymerization" label="anionic polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="40859" end="40875" title="functional group" label="unfunctionalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="40876" end="40882" title="olefin" label="olefin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821552" start="41009" end="41027" title="carbon-carbon bond" label="carbon-carbon bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q271026" start="41090" end="41102" title="alkyl halide" label="alkyl halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409574" start="41216" end="41241" title="lithium aluminium hydride" label="lithium aluminium hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804043" start="41252" end="41279" title="lithium triethylborohydride" label="lithium triethylborohydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q410875" start="41281" end="41307" title="N-Butyllithium" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-butyllithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q287745" start="41312" end="41341" title="Tert-Butyllithium" label="&amp;quot;tert&amp;quot;-butyllithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520" start="41393" end="41400" title="hydride" label="hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q287464" start="41484" end="41501" title="rocket propellant" label="rocket propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408429" start="41543" end="41553" title="solid fuel" label="solid fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899856" start="41559" end="41574" title="Mark 50 torpedo" label="Mark 50 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q279055" start="41645" end="41664" title="sulfur hexafluoride" label="sulfur hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251738" start="41752" end="41757" title="steam" label="steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q215612" start="41792" end="41805" title="Rankine cycle" label="Rankine cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79583" start="41807" end="41822" title="Lithium hydride" label="Lithium hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="41855" end="41875" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="41996" end="42003" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q221033" start="42024" end="42040" title="neutron absorber" label="neutron absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="42044" end="42058" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q920846" start="42166" end="42184" title="isotope separation" label="isotope separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="42196" end="42210" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="42250" end="42265" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056832" start="42266" end="42273" title="coolant" label="coolant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79583" start="42277" end="42294" title="Lithium deuteride" label="Lithium deuteride"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="42303" end="42314" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="42350" end="42363" title="Nuclear weapon" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="42383" end="42390" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="42418" end="42425" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870502" start="42479" end="42493" title="Teller-Ulam design" label="hydrogen bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="42558" end="42570" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="42571" end="42583" title="nuclear test" label="nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="42604" end="42613" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="42619" end="42625" title="Nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="42763" end="42778" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q409319" start="42801" end="42817" title="Lithium fluoride" label="Lithium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q416310" start="42927" end="42931" title="beryllium fluoride" label="BeF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q373950" start="42940" end="42972" title="molten salt reactor" label="liquid fluoride nuclear reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="43119" end="43126" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q751259" start="43144" end="43182" title="neutron cross-section" label="thermal neutron capture cross-sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="43294" end="43306" title="fusion power" label="fusion power"/>
<link wikidata="Q939954" start="43358" end="43388" title="Magnetic confinement fusion" label="magnetically confined reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="43395" end="43404" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="43409" end="43416" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="43539" end="43545" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="43766" end="43780" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="43786" end="43792" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="43838" end="43844" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="43847" end="43849" title="beryllium" label="Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="44026" end="44042" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q62897" start="44063" end="44071" title="John Douglas Cockcroft" label="Cockroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q183631" start="44076" end="44082" title="Ernest Walton" label="Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="44278" end="44310" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="45120" end="45130" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="45242" end="45258" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q834047" start="45325" end="45349" title="schizoaffective disorder" label="schizoaffective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="45361" end="45386" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q277452" start="45487" end="45517" title="Ebstein&amp;#x27;s anomaly" label="Ebstein&amp;#x27;s cardiac anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="45635" end="45644" title="corrosive" label="corrosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="45759" end="45765" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q77776" start="45779" end="45787" title="irritation" label="irritate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673594" start="45792" end="45796" title="human nose" label="nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="45867" end="45871" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="45885" end="45900" title="pulmonary edema" label="pulmonary edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="45983" end="45990" title="Corrosive substance" label="caustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="45991" end="46008" title="lithium hydroxide" label="lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898983" start="46069" end="46076" title="naphtha" label="naphtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085478" start="46095" end="46123" title="Cosmological lithium problem" label="Cosmological lithium problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189242" start="46126" end="46135" title="Dilithium" label="Dilithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128608" start="46138" end="46150" title="Halo nucleus" label="Halo nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q468718" start="46153" end="46172" title="Isotopes of lithium" label="Isotopes of lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682799" start="46175" end="46214" title="List of countries by lithium production" label="List of countries by lithium production"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067578" start="46217" end="46229" title="Lithia water" label="Lithia water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126452" start="46232" end="46251" title="Lithium–air battery" label="Lithium–air battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117877" start="46254" end="46269" title="Lithium burning" label="Lithium burning"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46272" end="46300" title=":Category:Lithium compounds" label="Lithium compounds (category)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="46303" end="46322" title="Lithium-ion battery" label="Lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647940" start="46325" end="46351" title="Lithium Tokamak Experiment" label="Lithium Tokamak Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="46450" end="46478" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17562" wikidata="Q55415" url="?curid=17562" title="Leni Riefenstahl">
<text>Helene Bertha Amalie &quot;Leni&quot; Riefenstahl (; 22 August 1902 – 8 September 2003) was a German film director, producer, writer, editor, photographer and actress. She is considered one of the most controversial personalities in film history. Regarded by many critics as an &quot;innovative filmmaker and creative aesthete&quot;, she is also criticized for her works in the service of propaganda during the Nazi era.

A talented swimmer and an artist, Riefenstahl became interested in dancing during her childhood, taking lessons and performing across all Europe. After seeing a promotional poster for the 1924 film &quot;Mountain of Destiny&quot;, she was inspired to move into acting and between 1925 and 1929 starred in five successful motion pictures. Riefenstahl became one of the few women in Germany to direct a film during the Weimar era when, in 1932, she decided to try directing with her own film, &quot;The Blue Light&quot;.

In the latter half of the 1930s, she directed the Nazi propaganda films &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot; (1935) and &quot;Olympia&quot; (1938), resulting in worldwide attention and acclaim. The films are widely considered two of the most effective and technically innovative propaganda films ever made. Her involvement in &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot;, however, significantly damaged her career and reputation after World War II. Adolf Hitler closely collaborated with Riefenstahl during the production of at least three important Nazi films, and they formed a friendly relationship.

After the war, Riefenstahl was arrested and found to be a Nazi &quot;fellow traveller&quot; but was not charged with war crimes. Throughout her later life, she denied having known about the Holocaust, and was criticized as the &quot;voice of the &#x27;how could we have known?&#x27;&quot; defense.&quot; Riefenstahl&#x27;s postwar work included an autobiography book and two photography books on the Nuba peoples of southern Sudan.

==Early life==
Helene Bertha Amalie Riefenstahl was born in Berlin on 22 August 1902. Her father, Alfred Theodor Paul Riefenstahl, owned a successful heating and ventilation company and wanted his daughter to follow him into the business world. Since Riefenstahl was the only child for several years, Alfred wanted her to carry on the family name and secure the family fortune. However, her mother, Bertha Ida (Scherlach), who had been a part-time seamstress before her marriage, had faith in Riefenstahl and believed that her daughter&#x27;s future was in show business. Riefenstahl had a younger brother, Heinz, who was killed at the age of 39 on the Eastern Front in Nazi Germany&#x27;s war against the Soviet Union.

Riefenstahl fell in love with the arts in her childhood. She began to paint and write poetry at the age of four. She was also athletic, and at the age of twelve joined a gymnastics and swimming club called &quot;Nixe&quot;. Her mother was confident her daughter would grow up to be successful in the field of art and therefore gave her full support, unlike Riefenstahl&#x27;s father, who was not interested in his daughter&#x27;s artistic inclinations. In 1918, when she was 16, Riefenstahl attended a presentation of Snow White which interested her deeply; it led her to want to be a dancer. Her father instead wanted to provide his daughter with an education that could lead to a more dignified occupation. His wife, however, continued to support her daughter&#x27;s passion. Without her husband&#x27;s knowledge, she enrolled Riefenstahl in dance and ballet classes at the Grimm-Reiter Dance School in Berlin, where she quickly became a star pupil.

==Dancing and acting careers==

Riefenstahl attended dancing academies and became well known for her self-styled interpretive dancing skills, traveling across Europe with Max Reinhardt in a show funded by Jewish producer Harry Sokal. Riefenstahl often made almost for each performance and was so dedicated to dancing that she gave filmmaking no thought. She began to suffer a series of foot injuries, which led to knee surgery that threatened her dancing career. It was while going to a doctor&#x27;s appointment that she first saw a poster for the 1924 film &quot;Mountain of Destiny&quot;. She became inspired to go into movie making, and began visiting the cinema to see films and also attended film shows.

On one of her adventures, Riefenstahl met Luis Trenker, an actor who had appeared in &quot;Mountain of Destiny&quot;. At a meeting arranged by her friend Gunther Rahn, she met Arnold Fanck, the director of &quot;Mountain of Destiny&quot; and a pioneer of the mountain film genre. Fanck was working on a film in Berlin. After Riefenstahl told him how much she admired his work, she also convinced him of her acting skill. She persuaded him to feature her in one of his films. Riefenstahl later received a package from Fanck containing the script of the 1926 film &quot;The Holy Mountain&quot;. She made a series of films for Fanck, where she learned from him acting and film editing techniques. One of Fanck&#x27;s films that brought Riefenstahl into the limelight was &quot;The White Hell of Pitz Palu&quot; of 1929, co-directed by G. W. Pabst. She had to undergo many physical challenges that would probably be deemed unethical in today&#x27;s standards. Some of the torments included: being engulfed in small avalanches, jumping into mountain lakes and icy streams, climbing rocky pinnacles while barefoot, letting herself be pulled up a rock face being pelted by snow and ice, balancing on a ladder above a deep glacial crevasse, and enduring obscene jokes from her exclusively male colleagues. Her fame spread to countries outside Germany.

Riefenstahl produced and directed her own work called &quot;Das Blaue Licht&quot; (&quot;The Blue Light&quot;) in 1932, co-written by Carl Mayer and Béla Balázs. This film won the silver medal at the Venice Film Festival, but was not universally well-received, for which Riefenstahl blamed the critics, many of whom were Jewish. Upon its 1938 re-release, the names of Balázs and Sokal, both Jewish, were removed from the credits; some reports say this was at Riefenstahl&#x27;s behest. In the film, Riefenstahl played an innocent peasant girl who is hated by the villagers because they think she is diabolical and cast out. She is protected by a glowing mountain grotto. According to herself, Riefenstahl received invitations to travel to Hollywood to create films, but she refused them in favor of remaining in Germany with a boyfriend. Hitler was a fan of the film, and thought Riefenstahl epitomized the perfect German female. He saw talent in Riefenstahl and arranged a meeting.

In 1933, Riefenstahl appeared in the U.S.-German co-productions of the Arnold Fanck-directed, German-language &quot;SOS Eisberg&quot; and the Tay Garnett-directed, English-language &quot;S.O.S. Iceberg&quot;. The films were filmed simultaneously in English and German and produced and distributed by Universal Studios. Her role as an actress in &quot;S.O.S. Iceberg&quot; was her only English language role in film.

==Directing career==
===Propaganda films===
Riefenstahl heard Nazi Party (NSDAP) leader Adolf Hitler speak at a rally in 1932 and was mesmerized by his talent as a public speaker. Describing the experience in her memoir, Riefenstahl wrote, &quot;I had an almost apocalyptic vision that I was never able to forget. It seemed as if the Earth&#x27;s surface were spreading out in front of me, like a hemisphere that suddenly splits apart in the middle, spewing out an enormous jet of water, so powerful that it touched the sky and shook the earth&quot;.

Hitler was immediately captivated by Riefenstahl&#x27;s work. She is described as fitting in with Hitler&#x27;s ideal of Aryan womanhood, a feature he had noted when he saw her starring performance in &quot;Das Blaue Licht&quot;. In May 1933, Hitler asked Riefenstahl to make a film about Horst Wessel, but she declined. Riefenstahl was offered the opportunity to direct &quot;Der Sieg des Glaubens&quot;, an hour-long propaganda film about the fifth Nuremberg Rally in 1933. The opportunity that was offered was a huge surprise to Riefenstahl. Hitler had ordered Joseph Goebbels&#x27;s Propaganda Ministry to give the film commission to Riefenstahl, but the Ministry had never informed her. Riefenstahl agreed to direct the movie even though she was only given a few days before the rally to prepare. She and Hitler got on well, forming a friendly relationship. The propaganda film was funded entirely by the NSDAP.

During the filming of &quot;Der Sieg des Glaubens&quot;, Hitler had stood side by side with the leader of the &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA), Ernst Röhm, a man with whom he clearly had a close working relationship. Röhm was murdered on Hitler&#x27;s orders a short time later, during the purge of the SA referred to as the Night of the Long Knives. It has gone on record that, immediately following the killings, Hitler ordered all copies of the film to be destroyed, although Riefenstahl disputed that this ever happened.
Still impressed with Riefenstahl&#x27;s work, Hitler asked her to film &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot; (&quot;Triumph of the Will&quot;), a new propaganda film about the 1934 party rally in Nuremberg. More than one million Germans participated in the rally. The film is sometimes considered the greatest propaganda film ever made. Initially, according to Riefenstahl, she resisted and did not want to create further Nazi Party films, instead wanting to direct a feature film based on Eugen d&#x27;Albert&#x27;s &quot;Tiefland&quot; (&quot;Lowlands&quot;), an opera that was extremely popular in Berlin in the 1920s. Riefenstahl received private funding for the production of &quot;Tiefland&quot;, but the filming in Spain was derailed and the project was cancelled. (When &quot;Tiefland&quot; was eventually shot, between 1940 and 1944, it was done in black and white, and was the third most expensive film produced in Nazi Germany. During the filming of &quot;Tiefland,&quot; Riefenstahl utilized Romani from internment camps for extras, who were severely mistreated on set, and when the filming completed they were sent to the death camp Auschwitz.) Hitler was able to convince her to film &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot; on the condition that she would not be required to make further films for the party, according to Riefenstahl. The motion picture was generally recognized as an epic, innovative work of propaganda filmmaking. The film took Riefenstahl&#x27;s career to a new level and gave her further international recognition.

In interviews for the 1993 documentary &quot;The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl&quot;, Riefenstahl adamantly denied any deliberate attempt to create Nazi propaganda and said she was disgusted that &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot; was used in such a way.

In a private letter to Hitler, quoted in a 2024 documentary, Riefensthal seems enthusiastic about the propaganda effects of &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot;: &quot;the film&#x27;s impact as German propaganda is greater than I could have imagined and your image, my Führer, is always applauded&quot;.

Despite allegedly vowing not to make any more films about the Nazi Party, Riefenstahl made the 28-minute &quot;Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht&quot; (&quot;Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces&quot;) about the German Army in 1935. Like &quot;Der Sieg des Glaubens&quot; and &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot;, this was filmed at the annual Nazi Party rally at Nuremberg. Riefenstahl said this film was a sub-set of &quot;Der Sieg des Glaubens&quot;, added to mollify the German Army which felt it was not represented well in &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot;.

Hitler invited Riefenstahl to film the 1936 Summer Olympics scheduled to be held in Berlin, a film which Riefenstahl said had been commissioned by the International Olympic Committee. She visited Greece to take footage of the route of the inaugural torch relay and the games&#x27; original site at Olympia, where she was aided by Greek photographer Nelly&#x27;s. This material became &quot;Olympia&quot;, a hugely successful film which has since been widely noted for its technical and aesthetic achievements. &quot;Olympia&quot; was secretly funded by the Nazis. She was one of the first filmmakers to use tracking shots in a documentary, placing a camera on rails to follow the athletes&#x27; movement. The film is also noted for its slow motion shots. Riefenstahl played with the idea of slow motion, underwater diving shots, extremely high and low shooting angles, panoramic aerial shots, and tracking system shots for allowing fast action. Riefensthal also &quot;reversed the film to make the divers turn backwards, holding them in the air as if to defy the laws of gravity&quot;. Many of these shots were relatively unheard of at the time, but Riefenstahl&#x27;s use and augmentation of them set a standard, and is the reason they are still used to this day. Riefenstahl&#x27;s work on &quot;Olympia&quot; has been cited as a major influence in modern sports photography. Riefenstahl filmed competitors of all races, including African-American Jesse Owens in what later became famous footage.
&quot;Olympia&quot; premiered for Hitler&#x27;s 49th birthday in 1938. Its international debut led Riefenstahl to embark on an American publicity tour in an attempt to secure commercial release. In February 1937, Riefenstahl enthusiastically told a reporter for the &quot;Detroit News&quot;, &quot;To me, Hitler is the greatest man who ever lived. He truly is without fault, so simple and at the same time possessed of masculine strength&quot;. On 31 August 1938, &quot;Olympia&quot; won the Mussolini cup at the Venice Film Festival as &quot;Best foreign film&quot;. She arrived in New York City on 4 November 1938, five days before &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; (the &quot;Night of the Broken Glass&quot;). When news of the event reached the United States, Riefenstahl publicly defended Hitler. On 18 November, she was received by Henry Ford in Detroit. &quot;Olympia&quot; was shown at the Chicago Engineers Club two days later. Avery Brundage, President of the International Olympic Committee, praised the film and held Riefenstahl in the highest regard. She negotiated with Louis B. Mayer, and on 8 December, Walt Disney brought her on a three-hour tour showing her the ongoing production of &quot;Fantasia&quot;.

From the &quot;Goebbels Diaries&quot;, researchers learned that Riefenstahl had been friendly with Joseph Goebbels and his wife Magda, attending the opera with them and going to his parties. Riefenstahl maintained that Goebbels was upset when she rejected his advances and was jealous of her influence on Hitler, seeing her as an internal threat. She therefore insisted his diary entries could not be trusted. By later accounts, Goebbels thought highly of Riefenstahl&#x27;s filmmaking but was angered with what he saw as her overspending on the Nazi-provided filmmaking budgets.

===Iconography===
In &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot;, Tom Saunders argues that Hitler serves as the object of the camera&#x27;s gaze. Saunders writes, &quot;Without denying that &#x27;rampant masculinity&#x27; (the &#x27;sexiness&#x27; of Hitler and the SS) serves as the object of the gaze, I would suggest that desire is also directed toward the feminine. This occurs not in the familiar sequences of adoring women greeting Hitler&#x27;s arrival and cavalcade through Nuremberg. In these Hitler clearly remains the focus of attraction, as more generally in the visual treatment of his mass following. Rather, it is encoded in representation of flags and banners, which were shot in such a way as to make them visually desirable as well as potent political symbols&quot;. The flag serves as a symbol of masculinity, equated with national pride and dominance, that supposedly channels men&#x27;s sexual and masculine energy. Riefenstahl&#x27;s cinematic framing of the flags encapsulated its iconography. Saunders continues, &quot;The effect is a significant double transformation: the images mechanize human beings and breathe life into flags. Even when the carriers are not mostly submerged under the sea of colored cloth, and when facial features are visible in profile, they attain neither character nor distinctiveness. The men remain ants in a vast enterprise. By contrast and paradoxically, the flags, whether a few or hundreds peopling the frame, assume distinct identities&quot;.

===Use of music===
Riefenstahl distorts the diegetic sound in &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot;. Her distortion of sound suggests she was influenced by German art cinema. Influenced by Classical Hollywood cinema&#x27;s style, German art film employed music to enhance the narrative, establish a sense of grandeur, and to heighten the emotions in a scene. In &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot;, Riefenstahl used traditional folk music to accompany and intensify her shots. Ben Morgan comments on Riefenstahl&#x27;s distortion of sound: &quot;In &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot;, the material world leaves no aural impression beyond the music. Where the film does combine diegetic noise with the music, the effects used are human (laughter or cheering) and offer a rhythmic extension to the music rather than a contrast to it. By replacing diegetic sound, Riefenstahl&#x27;s film employs music to combine the documentary with the fantastic.&quot;

===World War II===

When Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, Riefenstahl was photographed in Poland wearing a military uniform and a pistol on her belt in the company of German soldiers; she had gone to Poland as a war correspondent. On 12 September, she was in the town of Końskie when 30 civilians were executed in retaliation for an alleged attack on German soldiers. According to her memoir, Riefenstahl tried to intervene but a furious German soldier held her at gunpoint and threatened to shoot her on the spot. She said she did not realize the victims were Jews. According to another account given by a German officer, Riefenstahl had asked that the Jews be removed from the market, which was relayed to the soldiers as &quot;Get rid of the Jews&quot;, thus leading to the massacre. Photographs of a potentially distraught Riefenstahl survive from that day. Nevertheless, by 5 October 1939, Riefenstahl was back in occupied Poland filming Hitler&#x27;s victory parade in Warsaw. Afterwards, she left Poland and chose not to make any more Nazi-related films.
On 14 June 1940, the day Paris was declared an open city by the French and occupied by German troops, Riefenstahl wrote to Hitler in a telegram, &quot;With indescribable joy, deeply moved and filled with burning gratitude, we share with you, my Führer, your and Germany&#x27;s greatest victory, the entry of German troops into Paris. You exceed anything human imagination has the power to conceive, achieving deeds without parallel in the history of mankind. How can we ever thank you?&quot; She later explained, &quot;Everyone thought the war was over, and in that spirit I sent the cable to Hitler&quot;. Riefenstahl was friends with Hitler for 12 years. However, her relationship with Hitler severely declined in 1944 after her brother died on the Russian Front.

After the Nuremberg rallies trilogy and &quot;Olympia&quot;, Riefenstahl began work on the movie she had tried and failed to direct once before, namely &quot;Tiefland&quot;. On Hitler&#x27;s direct order, the German government paid her in compensation. From 23 September until 13 November 1940, she filmed in Krün near Mittenwald. The extras playing Spanish women and farmers were drawn from Romani detained in a camp at Salzburg-Maxglan who were forced to work with her. Filming at the Babelsberg Studios near Berlin began 18 months later in April 1942. This time Sinti and Roma people from the Marzahn detention camp near Berlin were compelled to work as extras. Almost to the end of her life, despite overwhelming evidence that the concentration camp occupants had been forced to work on the movie were later sent to the Auschwitz death camp, Riefenstahl continued to maintain that all the film extras survived. Riefenstahl sued filmmaker Nina Gladitz, who said Riefenstahl personally chose the extras at their holding camp; Gladitz had found one of the Romani survivors and matched his memory with stills of the movie for a documentary Gladitz was filming. The German court ruled largely in favour of Gladitz, declaring that Riefenstahl had known the extras were from a concentration camp, but they also agreed that Riefenstahl had not been informed the Romani would be sent to Auschwitz after filming was completed.
This issue came up again in 2002, when Riefenstahl was 100 years old and she was taken to court by a Roma group for denying the Nazis had exterminated Romani. Riefenstahl apologized and said, &quot;I regret that Sinti and Roma [people] had to suffer during the period of National Socialism. It is known today that many of them were murdered in concentration camps&quot;.

In October 1944 the production of &quot;Tiefland&quot; moved to Barrandov Studios in Prague for interior filming. Lavish sets made these shots some of the most costly of the film. The film was not edited and released until almost ten years later.

The last time Riefenstahl saw Hitler was when she married Peter Jacob on 21 March 1944. Riefenstahl and Jacob divorced in 1946. As Germany&#x27;s military situation became impossible by early 1945, Riefenstahl left Berlin and was hitchhiking with a group of men, trying to reach her mother, when she was taken into custody by American troops. She walked out of a holding camp, beginning a series of escapes and arrests across the chaotic landscape. At last making it back home on a bicycle, she found that American troops had seized her house. She was surprised by how kindly they treated her.

===Thwarted film projects===
Most of Riefenstahl&#x27;s unfinished projects were lost towards the end of the war. The French government confiscated all of her editing equipment, along with the production reels of &quot;Tiefland&quot;. After years of legal wrangling, these were returned to her, but the French government had reportedly damaged some of the film stock whilst trying to develop and edit it, with a few key scenes being missing (although Riefenstahl was surprised to find the original negatives for &quot;Olympia&quot; in the same shipment). During the filming of &quot;Olympia&quot;, Riefenstahl was funded by the state to create her own production company in her own name, Riefenstahl-Film GmbH, which was uninvolved with her most influential works. She edited and dubbed the remaining material and &quot;Tiefland&quot; premiered on 11 February 1954 in Stuttgart. However, it was denied entry into the Cannes Film Festival. Although Riefenstahl lived for almost another half century, &quot;Tiefland&quot; was her last feature film.
Riefenstahl tried many times to make more films during the 1950s and 1960s, but was met with resistance, public protests and sharp criticism. Many of her filmmaking peers in Hollywood had fled Nazi Germany and were unsympathetic to her. Although both film professionals and investors were willing to support her work, most of the projects she attempted were stopped owing to ever-renewed and highly negative publicity about her past work in Nazi Germany.

In 1954, Jean Cocteau, who greatly admired the film, insisted on &quot;Tiefland&quot; being shown at the Cannes Film Festival, which he was running that year. In 1960, Riefenstahl attempted to prevent filmmaker Erwin Leiser from juxtaposing scenes from &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot; with footage from concentration camps in his film &quot;Mein Kampf&quot;. Riefenstahl had high hopes for a collaboration with Cocteau called &quot;Friedrich und Voltaire&quot; (&quot;Friedrich and Voltaire&quot;), wherein Cocteau was to play two roles. They thought the film might symbolize the love-hate relationship between Germany and France. Cocteau&#x27;s illness and 1963 death put an end to the project. A musical remake of &quot;Das Blaue Licht&quot; (&quot;The Blue Light&quot;) with an English production company also fell apart.

In the 1960s, Riefenstahl became interested in Africa from Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s &quot;Green Hills of Africa&quot; and from the photographs of George Rodger. She visited Kenya for the first time in 1956 and later Sudan, where she photographed Nuba tribes with whom she sporadically lived, learning about their culture so she could photograph them more easily. Even though her film project about modern slavery entitled &quot;Die Schwarze Fracht&quot; (&quot;The Black Cargo&quot;) was never completed, Riefenstahl was able to sell the stills from the expedition to magazines in various parts of the world. While scouting shooting locations, she almost died from injuries received in a truck accident. After waking up from a coma in a Nairobi hospital, she finished writing the script, but was soon thoroughly thwarted by uncooperative locals, the Suez Canal crisis and bad weather. In the end, the film project was called off. Even so, Riefenstahl was granted Sudanese citizenship for her services to the country, becoming the first foreigner to receive a Sudanese passport.

==Detention and trials==
Novelist and sports writer Budd Schulberg, assigned by the U.S. Navy to the OSS for intelligence work while attached to John Ford&#x27;s documentary unit, was ordered to arrest Riefenstahl at her chalet in Kitzbühel, ostensibly to have her identify Nazi war criminals in German film footage captured by the Allied troops shortly after the war. Riefenstahl said she was not aware of the nature of the internment camps. According to Schulberg, &quot;She gave me the usual song and dance. She said, &#x27;Of course, you know, I&#x27;m really so misunderstood. I&#x27;m not political&#x27;&quot;.

Riefenstahl said she was fascinated by the Nazis, but also politically naive, claiming ignorance about any war crimes. Such claims were not unambiguously dispelled until 2024, testifying to Riefenstahl&#x27;s successful campaign of denial over six decades. Throughout 1945 to 1948, she was held by various Allied-controlled prison camps across Germany. She was also under house arrest for a period of time. She was tried four times by postwar authorities for denazification and eventually found to be a &quot;fellow traveller&quot; (&quot;Mitläufer&quot;) who sympathised with the Nazis. While never an official member of the Nazi party, she was always seen in association due to the propaganda films she made in Nazi Germany. Over the years, she filed and won over fifty libel cases against people who had accused her of complicity with Nazi crimes.

Riefenstahl said that her biggest regret in life was meeting Hitler, declaring, &quot;It was the biggest catastrophe of my life. Until the day I die people will keep saying, &#x27;Leni is a Nazi&#x27;, and I&#x27;ll keep saying, &#x27;But what did she do?&#x27;&quot; Even though she went on to win up to fifty libel cases, details about her relation to the Nazi party remained unclear during her lifetime. 

Shortly before she died, Riefenstahl voiced her final words on the subject of her connection to Hitler in a BBC interview: &quot;I was one of millions who thought Hitler had all the answers. We saw only the good things; we didn&#x27;t know bad things were to come.&quot;

In October 2024, Andres Veiel and Sandra Maischberger released a documentary based on Riefenstahl&#x27;s legacy document collection of 700 archive boxes, in which Riefenstahl&#x27;s early knowledge of Nazi atrocities are clearly documented. As of 1948, however, Riefenstahl consistently denied all knowledge and presented herself as a victim.

== Africa, photography, books and final film ==
Riefenstahl began a lifelong companionship with her cameraman , who was 40 years her junior and assisted her with the photographs; they were together from the time she was 60 and he was 20.

Riefenstahl travelled to Africa, inspired by the works of George Rodger that celebrated the ceremonial wrestling matches of the Nuba. Riefenstahl&#x27;s books with photographs of the Nuba tribes were published in 1974 and republished in 1976 as &quot;Die Nuba&quot; (translated as &quot;The Last of the Nuba&quot;) and &quot;Die Nuba von Kau&quot; (&quot;The Nuba People of Kau&quot;). They were harshly criticized by American writer and critic Susan Sontag, who wrote in &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot; that they were evidence of Riefenstahl&#x27;s continued adherence to &quot;fascist aesthetics&quot;. In this review, which art critic Hilton Kramer described as &quot;one of the most important inquiries into the relation of esthetics to ideology we have had in many years&quot;, Sontag argued that:Although the Nuba are black, not Aryan, Riefenstahl&#x27;s portrait of them is consistent with some of the larger themes of Nazi ideology: the contrast between the clean and the impure, the incorruptible and the defiled, the physical and the mental, the joyful and the critical. [...] What is distinctive about the fascist version of the old idea of the Noble Savage is its contempt for all that is reflective, critical, and pluralistic. [...] In celebrating a society where the exhibition of physical skill and courage and the victory of the stronger man over the weaker have, at least as she sees it, become the unifying symbol of the communal culture—where success in fighting is the &quot;main aspiration of a man&#x27;s life&quot;—Riefenstahl seems only to have modified the ideas of her Nazi films.In December 1974, American writer and photographer Eudora Welty reviewed &quot;Die Nuba&quot; positively for the &quot;New York Times&quot;, giving an impressionistic account of the aesthetics of Riefenstahl&#x27;s book:She uses the light purposefully: the full, blinding brightness to make us see the all‐absorbing blackness of the skin; the ray of light slanting down from the single hole, high in the wall, that is the doorway of the circular house, which tells us how secret and safe it has been made; the first dawn light streaking the face of a calf in the sleeping camp where the young men go to live, which suggests their world apart. All the pictures bring us the physical beauty of the people: a young girl, shy and mischievous of face, with a bead sewn into her lower lip like a permanent cinnamon drop; a wrestler prepared for his match, with his shaven head turned to look over the massive shoulder, all skin color taken away by a coating of ashes.Art Director&#x27;s Club of Germany awarded Riefenstahl a gold medal for the best photographic achievement of 1975. She also sold some of the pictures to German magazines.

Riefenstahl photographed the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, and rock star Mick Jagger along with his wife Bianca for &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;. Years later, Riefenstahl photographed Las Vegas entertainers Siegfried &amp; Roy. She was guest of honour at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

In 1978, Riefenstahl published a book of her sub-aquatic photographs called &quot;Korallengärten&quot; (&quot;Coral Gardens&quot;), followed by the 1990 book &quot;Wunder unter Wasser&quot; (&quot;Wonder under Water&quot;). On 22 August 2002, her 100th birthday, she released the film &quot;Impressionen unter Wasser&quot; (&quot;Underwater Impressions&quot;), an idealized documentary of life in the oceans and her first film in over 25 years. Riefenstahl was a member of Greenpeace for eight years. When filming &quot;Impressionen unter Wasser&quot;, Riefenstahl lied about her age in order to be certified for scuba diving.

Riefenstahl survived a helicopter crash in Sudan in 2000 while trying to learn the fates of her Nuba friends during the Second Sudanese Civil War, and was airlifted to a Munich hospital, where she received treatment for two broken ribs.

==Death==

Riefenstahl celebrated her 101st birthday on 22 August 2003 at a hotel in Feldafing, on Lake Starnberg, Bavaria, near her home. The day after her birthday celebration, she became ill.

Riefenstahl had been diagnosed with cancer for some time, and her health rapidly deteriorated during the last weeks of her life. Kettner said in an interview in 2002, &quot;Ms. Riefenstahl is in great pain and she has become very weak and is taking painkillers&quot;. Riefenstahl died in her sleep at around 10:00 pm on 8 September 2003 at her home in Pöcking. After cremation, her ashes were buried in Munich Waldfriedhof.

After her death, there was a varied response in the obituary pages of leading publications, although most recognized her technical breakthroughs in filmmaking.

Gisela Jahn, Leni Riefenstahl&#x27;s former secretary and sole heir, donated the estate bequeathed to her to the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation. Items included photographs, films, manuscripts, letters, files, and documents dating back to the 1920s.

==Reception==
Riefenstahl claimed in her memoir that Hitler made advances on her at their first meeting in May 1932. Her press secretary Ernst Jaeger came with her to the United States in 1938, but did not return to Germany. He published &quot;How Riefenstahl became Hitler&#x27;s girlfriend&quot; in the &quot;Hollywood Tribune&quot; in 1939. Trenker sold a fake version of Eva Braun&#x27;s diary, which included stories of Riefenstahl dancing naked for Hitler, to the press. The book was published in French in 1948, and translated to Italian and English. Fritz Wiedemann, the personal adjutant to Hitler, stated that Riefenstahl &quot;was never Hitler&#x27;s lover&quot;.

According to Taylor Downing, Riefenstahl&#x27;s Nazi-era work &quot;made it acceptable, even desirable, for millions of Germans to go along with Hitler. And in promoting the Nazi leadership, there is a direct line from her infamous Nazi party films to Auschwitz and Belsen.&quot; Similarly, Abraham Cooper argues that Riefenstahl&#x27;s work was essential to the carrying out of the mission of the Holocaust and describes her as an &quot;unindicted co-conspirator.&quot;

Film scholar Mark Cousins notes in his book &quot;The Story of Film&quot; that, &quot;Next to Orson Welles and Alfred Hitchcock, Leni Riefenstahl was the most technically talented Western film maker of her era.&quot;

When traveling to Hollywood to showcase her film &quot;Olympia&quot; shortly after the coordinated attack on German Jews known as &quot;Kristallnacht&quot;, Riefenstahl was criticized by the Anti-Nazi League and others.

Reviewer Gary Morris called Riefenstahl, &quot;An artist of unparalleled gifts, a woman in an industry dominated by men, one of the great formalists of the cinema on a par with Eisenstein or Welles.&quot;
Film critic Hal Erickson of &quot;The New York Times&quot; states that the &quot;Jewish Question&quot; is mainly unmentioned in &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot;; &quot;filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl prefers to concentrate on cheering crowds, precision marching, military bands, and Hitler&#x27;s climactic speech, all orchestrated, choreographed and illuminated on a scale that makes Griffith and DeMille look like poverty-row directors.&quot;

Charles Moore of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; wrote, &quot;She was perhaps the most talented female cinema director of the 20th century; her celebration of Nazi Germany in film ensured that she was certainly the most infamous.&quot;

Film journalist Sandra Smith from &quot;The Independent&quot; remarked, &quot;Opinions will be divided between those who see her as a young, talented and ambitious woman caught up in the tide of events which she did not fully understand, and those who believe her to be a cold and opportunist propagandist and a Nazi by association.&quot;

Critic Judith Thurman said in &quot;The New Yorker&quot; that, &quot;Riefenstahl&#x27;s genius has rarely been questioned, even by critics who despise the service to which she lent it. Riefenstahl was a consummate stylist obsessed with bodies in motion, particularly those of dancers and athletes. Riefenstahl relies heavily for her transitions on portentous cutaways to butts, mist, statuary, foliage, and rooftops. Her reaction shots have a tedious sameness: shining, ecstatic faces—nearly all young and Aryan, except for Hitler&#x27;s.&quot;

Pauline Kael, also a film reviewer employed for &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, called &quot;Triumph des Willens&quot; and &quot;Olympia&quot;, &quot;the two greatest films ever directed by a woman&quot;.

Writer Richard Corliss wrote in &quot;Time&quot; that he was &quot;impressed by Riefenstahl&#x27;s standing as a total auteur: producer, writer, director, editor and, in the fiction films, actress. The issues her films and her career raise are as complex and they are important, and her vilifiers tend to reduce the argument to one of a director&#x27;s complicity in atrocity or her criminal ignorance.&quot;

In 2002, Steven Bach wrote that &quot;Riefenstahl disturbs because she remains the adamant, fierce, glib voice of the &#x27;how could we have known?&#x27; defense, an argument fewer and fewer Germans, and almost none of the current generation, still feel comfortable making.&quot;

==Film biographies==
In 1993, Riefenstahl was the subject of the award-winning German documentary film &quot;The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl&quot;, directed by Ray Müller. Riefenstahl appeared in the film and answered several questions and detailed the production of her films. The biofilm was nominated for seven Emmy Awards, winning in one category. Riefenstahl, who for some time had been working on her memoirs, decided to cooperate in the production of this documentary to tell her life story about the struggles she had gone through in her personal life, her film-making career and what people thought of her. She was also the subject of Müller&#x27;s 2000 documentary film &quot;Leni Riefenstahl: Her Dream of Africa&quot;, about her return to Sudan to visit the Nuba people.

In 2000, Jodie Foster was planning a biographical drama on Riefenstahl, then seen as the last surviving member of Hitler&#x27;s &quot;inner circle&quot;, causing protests, with the Simon Wiesenthal Centre&#x27;s dean Marvin Hier warning against a revisionist view that glorified the director, observing that Riefenstahl had seemed &quot;quite infatuated&quot; with Hitler. In 2007, British screenwriter Rupert Walters was reported to be writing a script for the movie. The project did not receive Riefenstahl&#x27;s approval prior to her death, as Riefenstahl asked for a veto on any scenes to which she did not agree. Riefenstahl reportedly wanted Sharon Stone to play her rather than Foster.

In 2011, director Steven Soderbergh revealed that he had also been working on a biopic of Riefenstahl for about six months. He eventually abandoned the project over concerns of its commercial prospects.

In 2024, director Andres Veiel released a biopic titled &quot;Riefenstahl&quot;. It premiered at the 81st Venice International Film Festival, and was also screened at the MAMI Mumbai Film Festival 2024.

==In popular culture==

Riefenstahl was portrayed by Zdena Studenková in &quot;Leni&quot;, a 2014 Slovak drama play about her fictional participation in &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;. She was portrayed by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in &quot;Race&quot;, a sports drama film directed by Stephen Hopkins about Jesse Owens. It was released in North America on 19 February 2016.

In the 2016 short film &quot;Leni. Leni.&quot;, based on the play by Tom McNab and directed by Adrian Vitoria, Hildegard Neil portrays Riefenstahl. In 2021, she was the subject of Nigel Farndale&#x27;s novel &quot;The Dictator&#x27;s Muse&quot;.

At the 2024 Venice Film Festival, the documentary &quot;Riefenstahl&quot; was launched by director Andres Veiel and produced by Sandra Maischberger. The feature points to the filmmaker&#x27;s ideological affinity with Nazism.

==Filmography==
===Filmography===
===Acting roles===
* 1925: &quot;Wege zu Kraft und Schönheit&quot; (&quot;Ways to Strength and Beauty&quot;) as Dancer
* 1926: &quot;Der heilige Berg&quot; (&quot;The Holy Mountain&quot;) as Diotima
* 1927: &quot;Der große Sprung&quot; (&quot;The Great Leap&quot;) as Gita
* 1928: &quot;Das Schicksal derer von Habsburg&quot; (&quot;Fate of the House of Habsburg&quot;) as Maria Vetsera
* 1929: &quot;Die weiße Hölle vom Piz Palü&quot; (&quot;The White Hell of Pitz Palu&quot;) as Maria Maioni
* 1930: &quot;Stürme über dem Mont Blanc&quot; (&quot;Storm Over Mont Blanc&quot;) as Hella Armstrong
* 1931: &quot;Der weiße Rausch&quot; (&quot;The White Ecstasy&quot;) as Leni
* 1932: &quot;Das blaue Licht&quot; (&quot;The Blue Light&quot;) as Junta
* 1933: &quot;S.O.S. Eisberg&quot; (&quot;S.O.S. Iceberg&quot;) as Hella, wife of Arctic expedition leader Carl Lorenz
* 1954: &quot;Tiefland&quot; (&quot;Lowlands&quot;) as Martha, a Spanish dancer (final film role)

==Books==
* 
* 
* 
* (reviewed by bell hooks)
* 

==References==
==Works cited==
===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Journals===
* (The essay was also included in Sontag&#x27;s 1980 book &quot;Under the Sign of Saturn&quot;)

===Magazines===
* 
* 

===Online===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Leni Riefenstahl at Jewish Virtual Library
* 
* Leni Riefenstahl&#x27;s &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot; on MoMA Learning</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55415" start="0" end="20" title="Leni Riefenstahl" label="Helene Bertha Amalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55415" start="27" end="31" title="Leni Riefenstahl" label="Leni"/>
<link wikidata="Q55415" start="38" end="49" title="Leni Riefenstahl" label="Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="389" end="419" title="Nazi propaganda" label="propaganda during the Nazi era"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949895" start="626" end="645" title="Mountain of Destiny" label="Mountain of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="839" end="849" title="Weimar era" label="Weimar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q700243" start="919" end="933" title="The Blue Light (1932 film)" label="The Blue Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935609" start="997" end="1012" title="propaganda film" label="propaganda film"/>
<link wikidata="Q156497" start="1020" end="1039" title="Triumph of the Will" label="Triumph of the Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q158069" start="1063" end="1070" title="Olympia (1938 film)" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1359" end="1371" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1373" end="1385" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q532656" start="1474" end="1484" title="Nazi films" label="Nazi films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752720" start="1597" end="1613" title="fellow traveler" label="fellow traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="1645" end="1654" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1714" end="1727" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280105" start="1928" end="1940" title="Nuba peoples" label="Nuba peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="2614" end="2627" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2631" end="2643" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2667" end="2679" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q830493" start="2894" end="2898" title="Nixe (water spirit)" label="Nixe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="3200" end="3210" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="3806" end="3819" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q510815" start="3856" end="3867" title="Harry R. Sokal" label="Harry Sokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949895" start="4200" end="4219" title="Mountain of Destiny" label="Mountain of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q560129" start="4388" end="4400" title="Luis Trenker" label="Luis Trenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q71253" start="4522" end="4534" title="Arnold Fanck" label="Arnold Fanck"/>
<link wikidata="Q819652" start="4605" end="4618" title="mountain film" label="mountain film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210792" start="4914" end="4931" title="The Holy Mountain (1926 film)" label="The Holy Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q471640" start="5120" end="5147" title="The White Hell of Pitz Palu (1929 film)" label="The White Hell of Pitz Palu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="5178" end="5189" title="G. W. Pabst" label="G. W. Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q700243" start="5751" end="5766" title="The Blue Light (1932 film)" label="Das Blaue Licht"/>
<link wikidata="Q78758" start="5825" end="5835" title="Carl Mayer" label="Carl Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q469963" start="5840" end="5851" title="Béla Balázs" label="Béla Balázs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="5891" end="5911" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="6430" end="6439" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q71253" start="6746" end="6758" title="Arnold Fanck" label="Arnold Fanck"/>
<link wikidata="Q834109" start="6791" end="6802" title="SOS Eisberg" label="SOS Eisberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348110" start="6817" end="6828" title="Tay Garnett" label="Tay Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="6975" end="6992" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="7154" end="7164" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7180" end="7192" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="7765" end="7770" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q700243" start="7851" end="7866" title="The Blue Light (1932 film)" label="Das Blaue Licht"/>
<link wikidata="Q57163" start="7933" end="7945" title="Horst Wessel" label="Horst Wessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q700206" start="8021" end="8042" title="The Victory of Faith" label="Der Sieg des Glaubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q160225" start="8095" end="8110" title="Nuremberg Rally" label="Nuremberg Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="8208" end="8223" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q158689" start="8231" end="8250" title="Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda" label="Propaganda Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="8678" end="8692" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="8705" end="8715" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="8886" end="8910" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q156497" start="9163" end="9182" title="Triumph of the Will" label="Triumph des Willens"/>
<link wikidata="Q57178" start="9570" end="9589" title="Eugen d&amp;#x27;Albert" label="Eugen d&amp;#x27;Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398735" start="9603" end="9611" title="Tiefland (opera)" label="Tiefland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400403" start="9864" end="9872" title="Tiefland (film)" label="Tiefland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10005" end="10017" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="10084" end="10090" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="10226" end="10235" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="10496" end="10506" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822468" start="10668" end="10715" title="The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" label="The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="10785" end="10800" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11301" end="11335" title="Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht" label="Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="11399" end="11410" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="11784" end="11804" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="11896" end="11927" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563875" start="11984" end="12005" title="1936 Summer Olympics torch relay" label="inaugural torch relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="12043" end="12050" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222552" start="12094" end="12106" title="Nelly&amp;#x27;s" label="Nelly&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q158069" start="12135" end="12142" title="Olympia (1938 film)" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528025" start="12352" end="12365" title="tracking shot" label="tracking shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="13195" end="13206" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703792" start="13516" end="13528" title="Detroit News" label="Detroit News"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="13736" end="13745" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="13757" end="13777" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13827" end="13840" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="13884" end="13897" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="14073" end="14083" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="14087" end="14094" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q155928" start="14172" end="14186" title="Avery Brundage" label="Avery Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="14319" end="14333" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="14354" end="14365" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q943192" start="14443" end="14451" title="Fantasia (1940 film)" label="Fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577105" start="14475" end="14491" title="Goebbels Diaries" label="Goebbels Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="14559" end="14574" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q57202" start="14588" end="14593" title="Magda Goebbels" label="Magda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790314" start="16575" end="16583" title="diegetic" label="diegetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="17496" end="17518" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Germany invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q776499" start="17753" end="17760" title="Końskie" label="Końskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="17867" end="17873" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552993" start="18401" end="18416" title="History of Poland (1939–45)" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18439" end="18463" title="Invasion of Poland#Aftermath" label="victory parade in Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q862308" start="18591" end="18600" title="open city" label="open city"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="18679" end="18687" title="telegram" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101996" start="19520" end="19537" title="Government of Nazi Germany" label="German government"/>
<link wikidata="Q509557" start="19620" end="19624" title="Krün" label="Krün"/>
<link wikidata="Q127553" start="19630" end="19640" title="Mittenwald" label="Mittenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="19732" end="19748" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg-Maxglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q705676" start="19798" end="19816" title="Babelsberg Studios" label="Babelsberg Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="19876" end="19881" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="19886" end="19890" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q204423" start="19907" end="19914" title="Berlin-Marzahn concentration camp" label="Marzahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="20135" end="20155" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz death camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="20693" end="20702" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="20944" end="20949" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="21076" end="21094" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q790756" start="21168" end="21185" title="Barrandov Studios" label="Barrandov Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="21189" end="21195" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q214912" start="21582" end="21593" title="hitchhiking" label="hitchhiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="22815" end="22824" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="22864" end="22884" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="23459" end="23471" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q96424" start="23661" end="23673" title="Erwin Leiser" label="Erwin Leiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="24335" end="24351" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218581" start="24365" end="24386" title="Green Hills of Africa" label="Green Hills of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q920364" start="24421" end="24434" title="George Rodger" label="George Rodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280105" start="24521" end="24525" title="Nuba peoples" label="Nuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="25012" end="25019" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="25125" end="25142" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Canal crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851957" start="25238" end="25246" title="Sudanese people" label="Sudanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q562874" start="25406" end="25420" title="Budd Schulberg" label="Budd Schulberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="25438" end="25447" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="25455" end="25458" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="25499" end="25508" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="26432" end="26446" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752720" start="26482" end="26498" title="fellow traveller" label="fellow traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11020260" start="26512" end="26521" title="Mitläufer" label="Mitläufer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="26686" end="26698" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="27342" end="27345" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q53412" start="27523" end="27535" title="Andres Veiel" label="Andres Veiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106538" start="27540" end="27559" title="Sandra Maischberger" label="Sandra Maischberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q130218549" start="27571" end="27582" title="Riefenstahl (film)" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746258" start="28340" end="28348" title="The Last of the Nuba" label="Die Nuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756651" start="28414" end="28430" title="The People of Kau" label="Die Nuba von Kau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152824" start="28534" end="28546" title="Susan Sontag" label="Susan Sontag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="28567" end="28595" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764634" start="28736" end="28749" title="Hilton Kramer" label="Hilton Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q259364" start="29755" end="29767" title="Eudora Welty" label="Eudora Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29823" end="29837" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="30867" end="30885" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="30911" end="30922" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q285549" start="30943" end="30949" title="Bianca Jagger" label="Bianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="30960" end="30976" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="31022" end="31031" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60806" start="31045" end="31064" title="Siegfried &amp;amp; Roy" label="Siegfried &amp;amp; Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="31097" end="31115" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="31119" end="31135" title="Montreal" label="Montreal, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169464" start="31228" end="31242" title="Korallengärten" label="Korallengärten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031800" start="31310" end="31329" title="Wunder unter Wasser" label="Wunder unter Wasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714744" start="31437" end="31462" title="Impressionen unter Wasser" label="Impressionen unter Wasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="31619" end="31629" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="31797" end="31807" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q842380" start="31894" end="31919" title="Second Sudanese Civil War" label="Second Sudanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q507424" start="32097" end="32106" title="Feldafing" label="Feldafing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131615" start="32111" end="32125" title="Lake Starnberg" label="Lake Starnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="32127" end="32134" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="32244" end="32250" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q514747" start="32560" end="32567" title="Pöcking" label="Pöcking"/>
<link wikidata="Q253763" start="32611" end="32630" title="Munich Waldfriedhof" label="Munich Waldfriedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q685171" start="32907" end="32944" title="Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation" label="Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76433" start="33426" end="33435" title="Eva Braun" label="Eva Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q214354" start="33609" end="33624" title="Fritz Wiedemann" label="Fritz Wiedemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="33639" end="33647" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q99828689" start="33740" end="33754" title="Taylor Downing" label="Taylor Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="33979" end="33988" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332" start="33993" end="33999" title="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp" label="Belsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329876" start="34018" end="34032" title="Abraham Cooper (rabbi)" label="Abraham Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="34121" end="34134" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767175" start="34212" end="34224" title="Mark Cousins (film critic)" label="Mark Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34249" end="34266" title="Mark Cousins (film critic)#Career" label="The Story of Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="34293" end="34305" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="34310" end="34326" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="34553" end="34566" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098407" start="34608" end="34624" title="Anti-Nazi League" label="Anti-Nazi League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="34815" end="34825" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="34829" end="34835" title="Orson Welles" label="Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="34877" end="34895" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="34924" end="34939" title="Jewish Question" label="Jewish Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="35306" end="35325" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="35560" end="35575" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12320398" start="35867" end="35881" title="Judith Thurman" label="Judith Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="35896" end="35910" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="36406" end="36418" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="36646" end="36650" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914887" start="37027" end="37038" title="Steven Bach" label="Steven Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822468" start="37409" end="37457" title="The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" label="The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="37599" end="37606" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="37631" end="37641" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38003" end="38040" title="Leni Riefenstahl: Her Dream of Africa" label="Leni Riefenstahl: Her Dream of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="38110" end="38122" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="38282" end="38305" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674729" start="38318" end="38329" title="Marvin Hier" label="Marvin Hier"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="38750" end="38762" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="38814" end="38831" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q53412" start="39018" end="39030" title="Andres Veiel" label="Andres Veiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124692383" start="39101" end="39140" title="81st Venice International Film Festival" label="81st Venice International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711622" start="39171" end="39201" title="MAMI Mumbai Film Festival 2024" label="MAMI Mumbai Film Festival 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566458" start="39257" end="39273" title="Zdena Studenková" label="Zdena Studenková"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="39363" end="39402" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q232384" start="39445" end="39462" title="Carice van Houten" label="Carice van Houten"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515125" start="39472" end="39476" title="Race (2016 film)" label="Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339864" start="39486" end="39492" title="Sports film" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="39493" end="39503" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q709076" start="39516" end="39531" title="Stephen Hopkins (director)" label="Stephen Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="39538" end="39549" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761620" start="39717" end="39731" title="Hildegard Neil" label="Hildegard Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032370" start="39786" end="39800" title="Nigel Farndale" label="Nigel Farndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q124692383" start="39865" end="39885" title="81st Venice International Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q130218549" start="39909" end="39920" title="Riefenstahl (2024 film)" label="Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q53412" start="39952" end="39964" title="Andres Veiel" label="Andres Veiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106538" start="39981" end="40000" title="Sandra Maischberger" label="Sandra Maischberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q541297" start="40147" end="40174" title="Ways to Strength and Beauty" label="Wege zu Kraft und Schönheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210792" start="40247" end="40263" title="The Holy Mountain (1926 film)" label="Der heilige Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223321" start="40327" end="40343" title="The Great Leap (film)" label="Der große Sprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222238" start="40401" end="40433" title="The Fate of the House of Habsburg" label="Das Schicksal derer von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q471640" start="40515" end="40543" title="The White Hell of Pitz Palu (1929 film)" label="Die weiße Hölle vom Piz Palü"/>
<link wikidata="Q873199" start="40622" end="40648" title="Stürme über dem Mont Blanc" label="Stürme über dem Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q872972" start="40724" end="40740" title="The White Ecstasy (film)" label="Der weiße Rausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q700243" start="40801" end="40816" title="The Blue Light (1932 film)" label="Das blaue Licht"/>
<link wikidata="Q834109" start="40875" end="40889" title="S.O.S. Eisberg" label="S.O.S. Eisberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516897" start="40943" end="40960" title="Arctic exploration" label="Arctic expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400403" start="40994" end="41002" title="Tiefland (film)" label="Tiefland"/>
<link wikidata="Q259507" start="41113" end="41123" title="bell hooks" label="bell hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014733" start="41279" end="41303" title="Under the Sign of Saturn" label="Under the Sign of Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535917" start="41448" end="41470" title="Jewish Virtual Library" label="Jewish Virtual Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17565" wikidata="Q1422061" url="?curid=17565" title="Labatt Brewing Company">
<text>Labatt Brewing Company Limited () is a Anheuser-Busch InBev-owned brewery headquartered in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Founded in 1847, Labatt is the largest brewer in Canada.

In 1995, it was purchased by Belgian brewer Interbrew. In 2004, Interbrew merged with Brazilian brewer AmBev to form InBev. In 2008, InBev merged with American brewer Anheuser-Busch to form Anheuser-Busch InBev (abbreviated as AB InBev), making Labatt part of Anheuser-Busch InBev. On October 10, 2016, an over $100 billion merger between Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller closed. Labatt is now part of the new company, Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV, which is trading as BUD on the New York Stock Exchange (ABI:BB in Brussels).

In the United States, Labatt brand beers are sold under license by Labatt USA. Since 2009, it has been fully independent of the Canadian firm; it is a subsidiary of the privately held FIFCO USA of Rochester, New York.

== History ==

Labatt Breweries was founded by John Kinder Labatt in 1847 in London, Canada West (now Ontario). Kinder had immigrated to Canada from Ireland in the 1830s and initially established himself as a farmer near London. In 1847, he invested in a brewery with a partner, Samuel Eccles, launching &quot;Labatt and Eccles&quot;. When Eccles retired in 1854, Labatt acquired his interest and renamed the firm the &quot;London Brewery&quot;. He was assisted by his sons Ephraim, Robert and John.

When John Kinder Labatt died in 1866, his son John assumed control of the company. Under his supervision, it grew to be the largest brewery in Canada. Following his death in 1915, the company was controlled by a trust operated by his nine children, although his sons John Sackville Labatt and Hugh Francis Labatt assumed managerial control.

In 1901, Prohibition in Canada began through provincial legislation in Prince Edward Island. In 1916, prohibition was instituted in Ontario as well, affecting all 64 breweries in the province. Although some provinces totally banned alcohol manufacture, some permitted production for export to the United States. Labatt survived by producing full strength beer for export south of the border and by introducing two &quot;temperance ales&quot; with less than two per cent alcohol for sale in Ontario. However, the Canadian beer industry suffered a second blow when Prohibition in the United States began in 1919. When Prohibition was repealed in Ontario in 1926, just 15 breweries remained, and only Labatt retained its original management. This resulted in a strengthened industry position. In 1945, Labatt became a publicly traded company with the issuance of 900,000 shares.

John and Hugh Labatt, grandsons of founder John K. Labatt, launched Labatt 50 in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership. The first light ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canada&#x27;s best-selling beer until 1979.

By the 1960s, both John S. Labatt and Hugh Labatt were deceased, and John Moore was Labatt&#x27;s president, with the Labatt family holding a controlling interest. In 1964, the Schlitz brewing company of the US purchased majority control of Labatt in a friendly takeover. Their ownership of Labatt was short-lived, as Labatt&#x27;s holdings in the United States along with those of Schlitz constituted an anti-trust position in California. By 1966, Schlitz sold its interest to a group led by Moore, putting it back under Canadian ownership.

In 1951, Labatt launched its Pilsener Lager; when it was introduced in Manitoba, the beer was nicknamed &quot;Blue&quot; for the colour of its label and the company&#x27;s support of Winnipeg&#x27;s Canadian Football League (CFL) franchise, the Blue Bombers. The brew-master at the time was Robert Frank Lewarne (b. 1921 Toronto; R. F. Lewarne also headed the team that produced the famous Labatt 50, mainly for the Quebec market). The nickname &quot;Blue&quot; stuck and in 1979, Labatt Blue claimed the top spot in the Canadian beer market. It lost this status in the late eighties to Molson Canadian, but over the next decade, it periodically regained the top spot as consumer preferences fluctuated. In 2004, Budweiser took the top spot, pushing Blue to third for the first time in twenty-five years. However, since Labatt has brewed Budweiser (and other Anheuser-Busch products) in Canada under licence since the 1980s, Labatt likely did not suffer from this shift. Moreover, Labatt Blue remains the best selling Canadian beer in the world, based upon worldwide sales.

Labatt was also the majority owner of the Toronto Blue Jays from their inception in 1976 until 1995, when Interbrew purchased Labatt. In 2000, Rogers Communications purchased an 80% stake in the team and Interbrew retained the other 20%; Rogers later acquired full ownership of the team.

Labatt&#x27;s innovations include the introduction of the first twist-off cap on a refillable bottle in 1984. In 1989, Labatt had the opportunity to hire Canadian model Pamela Anderson as a Labatt&#x27;s Blue Zone Girl after she was picked out of the crowd by a TV camera man at a BC Lions football game wearing a Blue Zone crop-top. Photographer and boyfriend Dann Ilicic produced the Blue Zone Girl poster on his own after Labatt&#x27;s refused to have anything to do with it. Later, Labatt&#x27;s did buy 1000 posters to deal with consumer demand.

In 1995, Labatt was acquired by the large Belgian multinational brewer Interbrew (now InBev), the world market leader. Labatt is part-owner of Brewers Retail Inc., operator of The Beer Store retail chain, which—protected by legislation—has over 90% market share of Ontario off-premises beer sales. 

The company also operated its broadcasting assets through Labatt Communications, namely The Sports Network and Discovery Channel. Labbatt Communications was spun out from Labbatt to form NetStar Communications in 1995 which was owned by multiple Canadian investors and ESPN Inc.; NetStar would later be acquired outright by CTV Inc. (formerly Baton Broadcasting) in 2000, which was then sold to BCE Inc. to form Bell Globemedia, who would later renamed to CTVglobemedia and now Bell Media.

In early 2007, Labatt also acquired Lakeport Brewing Company of Hamilton, Ontario., Two years later, in 2009, the company sold Labatt USA, including the American rights to its core Labatt products (such as Blue, Blue Light, and Labatt 50) to FIFCO USA, and agreed to brew those brands on Labatt USA&#x27;s behalf until 2012. This sale was mandated by the U.S. Department of Justice for competitive reasons following InBev&#x27;s merger with Anheuser-Busch, since Budweiser and Labatt Blue were both among the top brands in upstate New York, despite the latter having less than 1% market share in the U.S. overall.

The sale did not include U.S. rights to Labatt products not carrying the &quot;Labatt&quot; label, such as Kokanee or Alexander Keith&#x27;s, which are now distributed in the U.S. by Anheuser-Busch. Moreover, the underlying intellectual property (such as the Labatt trademarks) remains the property of the Canadian firm. Finally, the sale did not affect Labatt&#x27;s Canadian operations in any way, however Anheuser-Busch InBev retains full control of the Labatt brand portfolio within Canada.

In 2020, Labatt acquired Canadian distiller Goodridge &amp; Williams, a company known for creating Nütrl Vodka Soda and other ready-to-drink (RTD) canned cocktails.

==Operations==
&quot;Canada&quot;
* London, Ontario
* St. John&#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador
* Montreal, Quebec (in the LaSalle borough)
* Halifax, Nova Scotia
* Creston, British Columbia
* Edmonton, Alberta
&quot;United States&quot; (previous to sale)
* Buffalo, New York (original and current United States Headquarters)
* Norwalk, Connecticut (former US headquarters)

Labatt&#x27;s US headquarters were originally located in Buffalo for some years. Labatt then decided to relocate their headquarters to Norwalk, Connecticut, for a time. In 2007 Labatt decided to relocate their US operations back to Buffalo due to strong sales in the city and closer proximity to their Ontario operations. Labatt USA is now owned by FIFCO USA of Rochester, New York.

Labatt&#x27;s Toronto (Rexdale) brewery was built in 1970. It ceased operations in 2005 and was demolished by 2007, thus ending the brewery&#x27;s ties to the city.

==Brands==

&quot;Labatt 50&quot; is a 5% abv ale launched in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership between the grandsons of the brewer&#x27;s founder. The first light-tasting ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canada&#x27;s best-selling beer until 1979, when, with the increasing popularity of lagers, it was surpassed by &quot;Labatt Blue&quot;. Labatt 50 is fermented using a special ale yeast, in use at Labatt since 1933.

&quot;Labatt Blue&quot; is a 5% abv pale lager. There are of beer in a bottle of &quot;Labatt Blue&quot;. There are 355 mL of beer in a standard can of Labatt Blue/Bleue in Canada with other volumes available in specific regions of the country.

In Quebec, Labatt also produces a stronger lager, &quot;Labatt Bleue Dry&quot;, at 6.1%.

Blue, the company&#x27;s flagship brand, has entered a number of international beer ratings competitions and has always performed notably well. In 2003, &quot;Labatt Blue&quot; received a Gold Quality Award at the World Quality Selections, organized yearly by Monde Selection.

Labatt had patented a specific method for making ice beer in 1997, 1998 and 2000: &quot;A process for chill-treating, which is exemplified by a process for preparing a fermented malt beverage wherein brewing materials are mashed with water and the resulting mash is heated and wort separated therefrom. The wort is boiled cooled and fermented and the beer is subjected to a finishing stage, which includes aging, to produce the final beverage. The improvement comprises subjecting the beer to a cold stage comprising rapidly cooling the beer to a temperature of about its freezing point in such a manner that ice crystals are formed therein in only minimal amounts. The resulting cooled beer is then mixed for a short period of time with a beer slurry containing ice crystals, without any appreciable collateral increase in the amount of ice crystals in the resulting mixture. Finally, the so-treated beer is extracted from the mixture.&quot; The company provides the following explanation about &quot;Labatt Ice&quot; and &quot;Maximum Ice&quot; for the layman: &quot;During this unique process, the temperature is reduced until fine ice crystals form in the beer. Then using an exclusive process, the crystals are removed. The result is a full flavoured balanced beer.&quot;

== Corporate activities ==

Labatt has sponsored the construction of many buildings in London, including Labatt Park, the John Labatt Centre, and the John Labatt Visual Arts Centre at the University of Western Ontario (UWO). Bessie Labatt&#x27;s son Arthur Labatt was the 19th chancellor of UWO (2004–2008). In 1998 Labatt announced a 20-year sponsorship agreement with the now defunct Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals), which included naming rights for a downtown Montreal ballpark that was never built.

They sponsored the English football team Nottingham Forest F.C. from 1992 (interchanging with Shipstones Brewery until 1994) to 1997.

They also are the official beer and corporate sponsor of the OHL hockey franchise Plymouth Whalers. In the 1950s, the company sponsored a PGA Tour golf tournament, the Labatt Open.

Labatt sponsored Gilles Villeneuve as well as being the main sponsor of the Formula One Canadian Grand Prix from 1972 to 1986, as well as Williams F1 racing team from 1991 to 1994.

In 1983–1986, Labatt sponsored Ken Westerfield, Canadian Frisbee champion and world record holder, to perform Frisbee shows throughout Ontario, as well as sponsor the World Guts (Frisbee) Championships on Toronto Islands in 1986.

Labatt sponsors the annual Labatt Blue Buffalo Pond Hockey Tournament at Buffalo RiverWorks. The outdoor amateur hockey tournament features more than 800 players.

In May 2009, Labatt gave their support to a seventh NHL team in Canada, which was pursued by Jim Balsillie.

In November 2018, Labatt USA opened Labatt Brew House, a innovation brewery and tasting room in Buffalo, New York. Visitors may sample experimental beers or choose from a variety of established brews.

== Marketing ==
Labatt Blue is sold in all provinces of Canada; however, in Quebec it is sold under the French name Labatt Bleue, with a fleur-de-lis logo. Aside from the name, and containing 4.9% alcohol/volume instead of 5.0%, the red maple leaf on the logo has also been changed to a stylized red sheaf of wheat, which Labatt calls its symbol of &quot;brewing quality.&quot;

Labatt Blue is sold in most of the United States, with sales particularly strong in the Midwest and Northeast along the Canada–United States border.

== Honours ==

=== Coat of arms ===

In 2017, the Canadian Heraldic Authority granted arms, banner and badge to Labatt.

== In media ==

== See also ==
* Beer in Canada
* The Beer Store, beer retailer in Ontario
* Brewers&#x27; Distributor, beer distributor in Western Canada
* Ice beer

== References ==

===Bibliography===

== External links ==
* 1970s Labatt&#x27;s Beer Commercial - From the Internet Archive.
* Article on the streamliner trucks

===Multimedia===
* CBC Archives CBC Radio reports on Interbrew&#x27;s takeover of Labatt (From 1995).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1422061" start="0" end="30" title="Labatt Brewing Company" label="Labatt Brewing Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q128738" start="39" end="59" title="Anheuser-Busch InBev" label="Anheuser-Busch InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="66" end="73" title="brewery" label="brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="91" end="98" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="166" end="172" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272191" start="219" end="228" title="Interbrew" label="Interbrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142669" start="278" end="283" title="AmBev" label="AmBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416717" start="292" end="297" title="InBev" label="InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="342" end="356" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128738" start="365" end="385" title="Anheuser-Busch InBev" label="Anheuser-Busch InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4995" start="539" end="548" title="SABMiller" label="SABMiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="655" end="678" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="709" end="722" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053730" start="886" end="895" title="FIFCO USA" label="FIFCO USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="899" end="918" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181870" start="968" end="986" title="John Kinder Labatt" label="John Kinder Labatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822810" start="990" end="994" title="List of Oldest Breweries of Canada" label="1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="998" end="1004" title="London, Ontario" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="1006" end="1017" title="Canada West" label="Canada West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1023" end="1030" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181896" start="1468" end="1472" title="John Labatt" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256456" start="1689" end="1710" title="John Sackville Labatt" label="John Sackville Labatt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1715" end="1734" title="Hugh Francis Labatt" label="Hugh Francis Labatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507567" start="1773" end="1794" title="Prohibition in Canada" label="Prohibition in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="1835" end="1855" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="2234" end="2241" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="2327" end="2359" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="2579" end="2602" title="Public company" label="publicly traded company"/>
<link wikidata="Q152281" start="3440" end="3454" title="Pilsener Lager" label="Pilsener Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="3482" end="3490" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="3594" end="3602" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="3610" end="3634" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117549" start="3656" end="3668" title="Winnipeg Blue Bombers" label="Blue Bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319676" start="3998" end="4013" title="Molson Canadian" label="Molson Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="4124" end="4133" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="4528" end="4545" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="4629" end="4650" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q83325" start="4944" end="4959" title="Pamela Anderson" label="Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q919062" start="5056" end="5064" title="BC Lions" label="BC Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243674" start="5470" end="5489" title="Brewers Retail Inc." label="Brewers Retail Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q131285937" start="5685" end="5706" title="CTV Specialty Television" label="Labatt Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q617903" start="5715" end="5733" title="The Sports Network" label="The Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228565" start="5738" end="5755" title="USA Network (Canadian TV channel)" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085515" start="5896" end="5905" title="ESPN Inc." label="ESPN Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q24525746" start="6022" end="6030" title="BCE Inc." label="BCE Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="6105" end="6115" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478896" start="6154" end="6178" title="Lakeport Brewing Company" label="Lakeport Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="6182" end="6199" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="6473" end="6499" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="6641" end="6657" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198359" start="6840" end="6847" title="Kokanee beer" label="Kokanee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422369" start="6851" end="6873" title="Alexander Keith&amp;#x27;s" label="Alexander Keith&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="6957" end="6978" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="6999" end="7008" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="7431" end="7446" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="7449" end="7491" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7494" end="7510" title="Montreal" label="Montreal, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629121" start="7519" end="7526" title="LaSalle, Quebec" label="LaSalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="7538" end="7558" title="Halifax Regional Municipality" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139747" start="7561" end="7586" title="Creston, British Columbia" label="Creston, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="7589" end="7606" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="7654" end="7671" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q54217" start="7724" end="7744" title="Norwalk, Connecticut" label="Norwalk, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319368" start="8178" end="8185" title="Rexdale" label="Rexdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="8363" end="8366" title="abv" label="abv"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="8570" end="8574" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="8627" end="8633" title="lagers" label="lagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="8796" end="8806" title="pale lager" label="pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="9175" end="9200" title="Competition" label="beer ratings competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931061" start="9356" end="9371" title="Monde Selection" label="Monde Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q241949" start="9423" end="9431" title="ice beer" label="ice beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466810" start="10757" end="10768" title="Labatt Park" label="Labatt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985200" start="10774" end="10792" title="John Labatt Centre" label="John Labatt Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="10840" end="10869" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799431" start="10902" end="10915" title="Arthur Labatt" label="Arthur Labatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="11038" end="11052" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="11062" end="11082" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="11129" end="11137" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q595452" start="11138" end="11146" title="Baseball park" label="ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="11211" end="11233" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7498119" start="11264" end="11282" title="Shipstones Brewery" label="Shipstones Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q495614" start="11387" end="11403" title="Plymouth Whalers" label="Plymouth Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="11443" end="11451" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466808" start="11473" end="11484" title="Labatt Open" label="Labatt Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="11504" end="11521" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="11563" end="11574" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965" start="11575" end="11594" title="Canadian Grand Prix" label="Canadian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="11625" end="11636" title="Williams F1" label="Williams F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388684" start="11700" end="11715" title="Ken Westerfield" label="Ken Westerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q131689" start="11726" end="11733" title="Frisbee" label="Frisbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q248110" start="11874" end="11889" title="Toronto Islands" label="Toronto Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853297" start="11973" end="11991" title="Buffalo RiverWorks" label="Buffalo RiverWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="12116" end="12119" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178732" start="12157" end="12170" title="Jim Balsillie" label="Jim Balsillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="12269" end="12286" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="12451" end="12457" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="12512" end="12524" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="12842" end="12849" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="12854" end="12863" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="12874" end="12901" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723538" start="13058" end="13072" title="Beer in Canada" label="Beer in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243674" start="13075" end="13089" title="The Beer Store" label="The Beer Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962674" start="13118" end="13143" title="Brewers&amp;#x27; Distributor" label="Brewers&amp;#x27; Distributor"/>
<link wikidata="Q241949" start="13182" end="13190" title="Ice beer" label="Ice beer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17568" wikidata="Q6664306" url="?curid=17568" title="Local color">
<text>Local color/colour may refer to:

*&quot;Local Color&quot; (book), a 1950 note and sketch study by Truman Capote
*&quot;Local Color&quot; (Mose Allison album), 1958
*&quot;Local Color&quot; (University of Northern Iowa Jazz Band One album), 2015
*&quot;Local Color&quot;, a 1977 American drama film directed by Mark Rappaport
*&quot;Local Color&quot; (film), a 2006 American drama film starring Trevor Morgan
*Local color (visual art), the natural color of an object
*&quot;Local Colour: Travels in the Other Australia&quot;, a 1994 book by Bill Bachman and Tim Winton
*&quot;Local Color&quot;, a short-story collection by John Andrew Rice
*Local Color, an art exhibition by Tullio DeSantis
*American literary regionalism, also called local color, a style or genre of writing 

==See also==
*Regionalism (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6664306" start="0" end="18" title="Local color" label="Local color/colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663975" start="35" end="65" title="Local Color (book)" label="&amp;quot;Local Color&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034867" start="114" end="158" title="Local Color (Mose Allison album)" label="&amp;quot;Local Color&amp;quot; (Mose Allison album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678114" start="166" end="239" title="Local Color (University of Northern Iowa Jazz Band One album)" label="&amp;quot;Local Color&amp;quot; (University of Northern Iowa Jazz Band One album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734991" start="311" end="325" title="Mark Rappaport" label="Mark Rappaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663977" start="327" end="357" title="Local Color (film)" label="&amp;quot;Local Color&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q370424" start="410" end="434" title="Local color (visual art)" label="Local color (visual art)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="474" end="518" title="Local Colour: Travels in the Other Australia" label="Local Colour: Travels in the Other Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219074" start="623" end="639" title="John Andrew Rice" label="John Andrew Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852198" start="675" end="690" title="Tullio DeSantis" label="Tullio DeSantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185614" start="692" end="721" title="American literary regionalism" label="American literary regionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q811302" start="792" end="820" title="Regionalism (disambiguation)" label="Regionalism (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17570" wikidata="Q484637" url="?curid=17570" title="Linear equation">
<text>In mathematics, a linear equation is an equation that may be put in the form
formula_1 where formula_2 are the variables (or unknowns), and formula_3 are the coefficients, which are often real numbers. The coefficients may be considered as parameters of the equation and may be arbitrary expressions, provided they do not contain any of the variables. To yield a meaningful equation, the coefficients formula_4 are required to not all be zero.

Alternatively, a linear equation can be obtained by equating to zero a linear polynomial over some field, from which the coefficients are taken.

The solutions of such an equation are the values that, when substituted for the unknowns, make the equality true.

In the case of just one variable, there is exactly one solution (provided that formula_5). Often, the term &quot;linear equation&quot; refers implicitly to this particular case, in which the variable is sensibly called the &quot;unknown&quot;.

In the case of two variables, each solution may be interpreted as the Cartesian coordinates of a point of the Euclidean plane. The solutions of a linear equation form a line in the Euclidean plane, and, conversely, every line can be viewed as the set of all solutions of a linear equation in two variables. This is the origin of the term &quot;linear&quot; for describing this type of equation. More generally, the solutions of a linear equation in variables form a hyperplane (a subspace of dimension ) in the Euclidean space of dimension .

Linear equations occur frequently in all mathematics and their applications in physics and engineering, partly because non-linear systems are often well approximated by linear equations.
This article considers the case of a single equation with coefficients from the field of real numbers, for which one studies the real solutions. All of its content applies to complex solutions and, more generally, to linear equations with coefficients and solutions in any field. For the case of several simultaneous linear equations, see system of linear equations.

== One variable ==
A linear equation in one variable can be written as formula_6 with formula_7. 

The solution is formula_8.

==Two variables==
A linear equation in two variables and can be written as formula_9 where and are not both .

If and are real numbers, it has infinitely many solutions.

===Linear function===

If , the equation 
:formula_10
is a linear equation in the single variable for every value of . It has therefore a unique solution for , which is given by 
:formula_11

This defines a function. The graph of this function is a line with slope formula_12 and -intercept formula_13 The functions whose graph is a line are generally called &quot;linear functions&quot; in the context of calculus. However, in linear algebra, a linear function is a function that maps a sum to the sum of the images of the summands. So, for this definition, the above function is linear only when , that is when the line passes through the origin. To avoid confusion, the functions whose graph is an arbitrary line are often called &quot;affine functions&quot;, and the linear functions such that are often called &quot;linear maps&quot;.

===Geometric interpretation===
Each solution of a linear equation
:formula_14 
may be viewed as the Cartesian coordinates of a point in the Euclidean plane. With this interpretation, all solutions of the equation form a line, provided that and are not both zero. Conversely, every line is the set of all solutions of a linear equation.

The phrase &quot;linear equation&quot; takes its origin in this correspondence between lines and equations: a &quot;linear equation&quot; in two variables is an equation whose solutions form a line.

If , the line is the graph of the function of that has been defined in the preceding section. If , the line is a &quot;vertical line&quot; (that is a line parallel to the -axis) of equation formula_15 which is not the graph of a function of .

Similarly, if , the line is the graph of a function of , and, if , one has a horizontal line of equation formula_16

===Equation of a line===
There are various ways of defining a line. In the following subsections, a linear equation of the line is given in each case.
====Slope–intercept form or Gradient-intercept form ====
A non-vertical line can be defined by its slope , and its -intercept (the coordinate of its intersection with the -axis). In this case, its &quot;linear equation&quot; can be written 
:formula_17

If, moreover, the line is not horizontal, it can be defined by its slope and its -intercept . In this case, its equation can be written
:formula_18
or, equivalently,
:formula_19

These forms rely on the habit of considering a nonvertical line as the graph of a function. For a line given by an equation 
:formula_20
these forms can be easily deduced from the relations 
:formula_21

====Point–slope form or Point-gradient form====

A non-vertical line can be defined by its slope , and the coordinates formula_22 of any point of the line. In this case, a linear equation of the line is
:formula_23
or 
:formula_24

This equation can also be written
:formula_25
for emphasizing that the slope of a line can be computed from the coordinates of any two points.

====Intercept form====
A line that is not parallel to an axis and does not pass through the origin cuts the axes into two different points. The intercept values and of these two points are nonzero, and an equation of the line is
:formula_26
(It is easy to verify that the line defined by this equation has and as intercept values).

====Two-point form====
Given two different points and , there is exactly one line that passes through them. There are several ways to write a linear equation of this line.

If , the slope of the line is formula_27 Thus, a point-slope form is
:formula_28

By clearing denominators, one gets the equation 
:formula_29
which is valid also when (for verifying this, it suffices to verify that the two given points satisfy the equation).

This form is not symmetric in the two given points, but a symmetric form can be obtained by regrouping the constant terms:
:formula_30
(exchanging the two points changes the sign of the left-hand side of the equation).

====Determinant form====
The two-point form of the equation of a line can be expressed simply in terms of a determinant. There are two common ways for that.

The equation formula_31 is the result of expanding the determinant in the equation
:formula_32

The equation formula_33 can be obtained by expanding with respect to its first row the determinant in the equation
:formula_34

Besides being very simple and mnemonic, this form has the advantage of being a special case of the more general equation of a hyperplane passing through points in a space of dimension . These equations rely on the condition of linear dependence of points in a projective space.

==More than two variables==
A linear equation with more than two variables may always be assumed to have the form
:formula_35

The coefficient , often denoted is called the &quot;constant term&quot; (sometimes the &quot;absolute term&quot; in old books). Depending on the context, the term &quot;coefficient&quot; can be reserved for the with .

When dealing with formula_36 variables, it is common to use formula_37 and formula_38 instead of indexed variables.

A solution of such an equation is a -tuple such that substituting each element of the tuple for the corresponding variable transforms the equation into a true equality.

For an equation to be meaningful, the coefficient of at least one variable must be non-zero. If every variable has a zero coefficient, then, as mentioned for one variable, the equation is either &quot;inconsistent&quot; (for ) as having no solution, or all are solutions.

The -tuples that are solutions of a linear equation in are the Cartesian coordinates of the points of an -dimensional hyperplane in an Euclidean space (or affine space if the coefficients are complex numbers or belong to any field). In the case of three variables, this hyperplane is a plane.

If a linear equation is given with , then the equation can be solved for , yielding 
:formula_39
If the coefficients are real numbers, this defines a real-valued function of real variables.

== See also ==
* Linear equation over a ring
* Algebraic equation
* Line coordinates
* Linear inequality
* Nonlinear equation

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="18" end="33" title="Linear equation" label="linear equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="40" end="48" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="111" end="120" title="variable (mathematics)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="125" end="133" title="unknown (mathematics)" label="unknowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="158" end="169" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="188" end="199" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="240" end="249" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498784" start="288" end="299" title="expression (mathematics)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="516" end="533" title="linear polynomial" label="linear polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="544" end="549" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879820" start="595" end="604" title="solution (equation)" label="solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="1021" end="1042" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="1061" end="1076" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="1120" end="1124" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q657586" start="1417" end="1427" title="hyperplane" label="hyperplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="1462" end="1477" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1573" end="1580" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="1585" end="1596" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="1613" end="1630" title="non-linear system" label="non-linear system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1770" end="1781" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1856" end="1863" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="1954" end="1959" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11203" start="2020" end="2046" title="system of linear equations" label="system of linear equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="2554" end="2562" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="2568" end="2573" title="graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="2596" end="2600" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q275447" start="2606" end="2611" title="slope (mathematics)" label="slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q287239" start="2627" end="2637" title="y-intercept" label="-intercept"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="2753" end="2761" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="2775" end="2789" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="2793" end="2808" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="3086" end="3101" title="affine function" label="affine function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="3168" end="3178" title="linear map" label="linear map"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="3288" end="3309" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="3328" end="3343" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="3408" end="3412" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="3746" end="3767" title="graph of a function" label="graph of the function"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="4741" end="4760" title="graph of a function" label="graph of a function"/>
<link wikidata="Q48971469" start="5841" end="5862" title="clearing denominators" label="clearing denominators"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="6345" end="6356" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q657586" start="6745" end="6755" title="hyperplane" label="hyperplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="6846" end="6863" title="linear dependence" label="linear dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="6879" end="6895" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="7867" end="7888" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q657586" start="7922" end="7932" title="hyperplane" label="hyperplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="7939" end="7954" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q382698" start="7959" end="7971" title="affine space" label="affine space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="8090" end="8095" title="plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="8219" end="8230" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="8248" end="8259" title="real-valued function" label="real-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284797" start="8260" end="8286" title="function of several real variables" label="function of real variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050904" start="8306" end="8333" title="Linear equation over a ring" label="Linear equation over a ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="8336" end="8354" title="Algebraic equation" label="Algebraic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553237" start="8357" end="8373" title="Line coordinates" label="Line coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154022" start="8376" end="8393" title="Linear inequality" label="Linear inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="8396" end="8414" title="Nonlinear system" label="Nonlinear equation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17573" wikidata="Q229127" url="?curid=17573" title="LMS">
<text>LMS may refer to:
==Science and technology==
* Labeled magnitude scale, a scaling technique
* Learning management system, education software
* Least mean squares filter, producing least mean square error
* Leiomyosarcoma, a rare form of cancer
* Lenz microphthalmia syndrome
* Computerised Library management system
* Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery, a degree in India
* LMS color space
* Laboratory information management system (but usually LIMS)

==Organisations==
* Latin Mass Society of England and Wales
* List of Marjan Šarec, a Slovenian political party
* Lithuanian Mathematical Society
* London Mathematical Society
* London, Midland and Scottish Railway
* London Missionary Society
* &quot;League of Legends&quot; Master Series
* Loving Municipal Schools

==Entertainment==
* Last man standing (video games), a mode of video games
* LMS, family band of Denroy Morgan

==Other uses==
* Leamington Spa railway station code, England
* Local Mitigation Strategy
* Local Management of Schools, in the Education Reform Act 1988
* Lyrion Music Server, formerly Logitech Media Server
* Loïc Mbe Soh, French footballer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229127" start="0" end="3" title="LMS" label="LMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466896" start="47" end="70" title="Labeled magnitude scale" label="Labeled magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q694007" start="94" end="120" title="Learning management system" label="Learning management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426666" start="143" end="168" title="Least mean squares filter" label="Least mean squares filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504713" start="206" end="220" title="Leiomyosarcoma" label="Leiomyosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523439" start="246" end="274" title="Lenz microphthalmia syndrome" label="Lenz microphthalmia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q93661" start="290" end="315" title="Library management system" label="Library management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064564" start="318" end="352" title="Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery" label="Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q702483" start="374" end="389" title="LMS color space" label="LMS color space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="392" end="433" title="Laboratory information management system " label="Laboratory information management system "/>
<link wikidata="Q4249463" start="473" end="512" title="Latin Mass Society of England and Wales" label="Latin Mass Society of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q53678274" start="515" end="535" title="List of Marjan Šarec" label="List of Marjan Šarec"/>
<link wikidata="Q108936707" start="567" end="598" title="Lithuanian Mathematical Society" label="Lithuanian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="601" end="628" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q629139" start="631" end="667" title="London, Midland and Scottish Railway" label="London, Midland and Scottish Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="670" end="695" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879786" start="698" end="741" title="League of Legends Master Series" label="&amp;quot;League of Legends&amp;quot; Master Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q113039172" start="744" end="768" title="Loving Municipal Schools" label="Loving Municipal Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042400" start="790" end="821" title="Last man standing (video games)" label="Last man standing (video games)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259293" start="867" end="880" title="Denroy Morgan" label="Denroy Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971430" start="899" end="929" title="Leamington Spa railway station" label="Leamington Spa railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664206" start="946" end="971" title="Local Mitigation Strategy" label="Local Mitigation Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340918" start="1010" end="1035" title="Education Reform Act 1988" label="Education Reform Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476949" start="1038" end="1057" title="Lyrion Music Server" label="Lyrion Music Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q63718477" start="1092" end="1104" title="Loïc Mbe Soh" label="Loïc Mbe Soh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17575" wikidata="Q17050732" url="?curid=17575" title="Limousine liberal">
<text>Limousine liberal and latte liberal are pejorative U.S. political terms used to illustrate perceived hypocritical behavior by affluent political liberals and other left-leaning people of upper class or upper middle class status. Related terms are Champagne socialist, silver-spoon socialist, Mercedes Marxist, and Red Nobility.

==Formation and early use==
===Procaccino campaign===
Democratic New York City mayoral hopeful Mario Procaccino coined the term &quot;limousine liberal&quot; to describe incumbent Mayor John Lindsay and his wealthy Manhattan backers during a heated 1969 campaign. Historian David Callahan says that Procaccino:

It was a populist and producerist epithet, carrying an implicit accusation that the people it described were insulated from all negative consequences of their programs purported to benefit the poor and that the costs and consequences of such programs would be borne in the main by working class or lower middle class people who were not so poor as to be beneficiaries themselves. In particular, Procaccino criticized Lindsay for favoring unemployed minorities, ex. blacks and Hispanics, over working-class white ethnics.

One Procaccino campaign memo criticized &quot;rich super-assimilated people who live on Fifth Avenue and maintain some choice mansions outside the city and have no feeling for the small middle class shopkeeper, home owner, etc. They preach the politics of confrontation and condone violent upheaval in society because they are not touched by it and are protected by their courtiers&quot;. &quot;The Independent&quot; later stated that &quot;Lindsay came across as all style and no substance, a &#x27;limousine liberal&#x27; who knew nothing of the concerns of the same &#x27;silent majority&#x27; that was carrying Richard Nixon to the White House at the very same time.&quot;

===Desegregation===
After the Supreme Court ruled against school integration delays in Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education, former Alabama Governor George Wallace denounced the court&#x27;s opinion and called the Justices &quot;limousine hypocrites&quot;.

==Later use==

&quot;The New York Observer&quot; applied the term to 2008 Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards who paid $400 () for a haircut and, according to the newspaper, &quot;lectures about poverty while living in gated opulence&quot;. 

Civil rights leader Al Sharpton used the term &quot;latte liberal&quot; to criticize (mostly white and high-income) left-leaning people &quot;sit[ing] around the Hamptons&quot; who advocated for the defund the police movement and ignored the concerns of African-Americans that suffer under high crime rates and rely on a strong police force.

==See also==

*Boba liberal
*Bobo (socio-economic group)
*&quot;Bobos in Paradise&quot;
*Champagne socialist
*Chattering class
*Gauche caviar
*Liberal elite
*Luxury belief
*Radical chic
==References==
==Further reading==
* Francia, Peter L., et al. &quot;Limousine liberals and corporate conservatives: The financial constituencies of the democratic and republican parties.&quot; &quot;Social Science Quarterly&quot; 86.4 (2005): 761–778.
* Fraser, Steve. &quot;The Limousine Liberal: How an Incendiary Image United the Right and Fractured America&quot; (Basic, 2016). viii, 291 pp.
* Stark, Andrew. &quot;Limousine liberals, welfare conservatives: On belief, interest, and inconsistency in democratic discourse.&quot; &quot;Political Theory&quot; 25.4 (1997): 475–501.
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17050732" start="0" end="17" title="Limousine liberal" label="Limousine liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050732" start="22" end="35" title="Limousine liberal" label="latte liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="56" end="65" title="politics" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="101" end="113" title="Hypocrisy" label="hypocritical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="145" end="153" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="187" end="198" title="upper class" label="upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="202" end="220" title="upper middle class" label="upper middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q667229" start="247" end="266" title="Champagne socialist" label="Champagne socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="383" end="393" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="394" end="407" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849007" start="424" end="440" title="Mario Procaccino" label="Mario Procaccino"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="509" end="514" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q666931" start="515" end="527" title="John Lindsay" label="John Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="544" end="553" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971543" start="578" end="591" title="New York City mayoral election, 1969" label="1969 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232099" start="603" end="617" title="David Callahan" label="David Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="650" end="658" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247692" start="663" end="674" title="producerism" label="producerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="922" end="935" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269776" start="939" end="957" title="lower middle class" label="lower middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995606" start="1147" end="1159" title="white ethnic" label="white ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="1220" end="1231" title="assimilation (sociology)" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="1251" end="1263" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802963" start="1289" end="1297" title="mansions" label="mansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="1349" end="1361" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511216" start="1535" end="1544" title="courtiers" label="courtiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="1558" end="1573" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555361" start="1738" end="1753" title="Silent Majority (Politics)" label="silent majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="1778" end="1791" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="1899" end="1917" title="School integration in the United States" label="school integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720517" start="1928" end="1973" title="Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education" label="Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="1999" end="2013" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038698" start="2129" end="2150" title="The New York Observer" label="The New York Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9062647" start="2177" end="2215" title="2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2008 Democratic presidential candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217314" start="2216" end="2228" title="John Edwards" label="John Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q380433" start="2382" end="2393" title="Al Sharpton" label="Al Sharpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574020" start="2520" end="2532" title="the Hamptons" label="the Hamptons"/>
<link wikidata="Q96150192" start="2561" end="2578" title="defund the police" label="defund the police"/>
<link wikidata="Q111167835" start="2720" end="2732" title="Boba liberal" label="Boba liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q837880" start="2734" end="2761" title="Bobo (socio-economic group)" label="Bobo (socio-economic group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360400" start="2769" end="2786" title="Bobos in Paradise" label="Bobos in Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q667229" start="2794" end="2813" title="Champagne socialist" label="Champagne socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068298" start="2815" end="2831" title="Chattering class" label="Chattering class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052630" start="2833" end="2846" title="Gauche caviar" label="Gauche caviar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540837" start="2848" end="2861" title="Liberal elite" label="Liberal elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q118897872" start="2863" end="2876" title="Luxury belief" label="Luxury belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q17162840" start="2878" end="2890" title="Radical chic" label="Radical chic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106922740" start="2928" end="2945" title="Francia, Peter L." label="Francia, Peter L."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17615" wikidata="Q505802" url="?curid=17615" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition">
<text>The Lewis and Clark Expedition, also known as the Corps of Discovery Expedition, was the United States expedition to cross the newly acquired western portion of the country after the Louisiana Purchase. The Corps of Discovery was a select group of U.S. Army and civilian volunteers under the command of Captain Meriwether Lewis and his close friend Second Lieutenant William Clark. Clark, along with 30 others, set out from Camp Dubois (Camp Wood), Illinois, on May 14, 1804, met Lewis and ten other members of the group in St. Charles, Missouri, then went up the Missouri River. The expedition crossed the Continental Divide of the Americas near the Lemhi Pass, eventually coming to the Columbia River, and the Pacific Ocean in 1805. The return voyage began on March 23, 1806, at Fort Clatsop, Oregon, ending six months later on September 23 of that year.

President Thomas Jefferson commissioned the expedition, shortly after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, to explore and detail as much of the new territory as possible. Furthermore, he wished to find a practical travel route across the western half of the continent—directly avoiding the hot and desolate desert southwest—and to establish an American presence in the new lands before European powers attempted to establish claims of their own. The campaign&#x27;s secondary objectives were scientific, economical and humanitarian, i.e., to document the West&#x27;s biodiversity, topography and geography and to establish positive trade relations with (potentially unknown) Native American tribes. The expedition returned to St. Louis to report their findings to President Jefferson via maps, sketches, and various journals.

==Motivations==
One of Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s goals was to find &quot;the most direct and practicable water communication across this continent, for the purposes of commerce.&quot; He also placed special importance on declaring US sovereignty over the land occupied by the many different Native American tribes along the Missouri River, and getting an accurate sense of the resources in the recently completed Louisiana Purchase. The expedition made notable contributions to science, but scientific research was not the main goal of the mission.

== Preparations ==
For years, Thomas Jefferson read accounts about the adventures of various explorers on the western frontier, and, consequently, maintained a long-held interest in further exploring this mostly-unknown region of the continent. In the 1780s, while Minister to France, Jefferson met John Ledyard in Paris, where they discussed a possible trip to the Pacific Northwest. Jefferson had also read Captain James Cook&#x27;s &quot;A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean&quot; (London, 1784), an account of Cook&#x27;s third voyage, and Le Page du Pratz&#x27;s &quot;The History of Louisiana&quot; (London, 1763), all of which greatly influenced his decision to send an expedition. Like Captain Cook, he wished to discover a practical route through the Northwest to the Pacific coast. Alexander Mackenzie had already charted a route in his quest for the Pacific, following Canada&#x27;s Mackenzie River to the Arctic Ocean in 1789. Mackenzie and his party were the first non-indigenous people to cross mainland North America, north of Mexico, reaching the Pacific coast of British Columbia in 1793–twelve years earlier than Lewis and Clark. Mackenzie&#x27;s accounts in &quot;Voyages from Montreal&quot; (1801) informed Jefferson of Britain&#x27;s intent to establish control over the lucrative fur trade of the Columbia River, convincing him of the importance of securing the territory posthaste. In Philadelphia, Israel Whelen, purveyor of public supplies, purchased necessities for the expedition with a list provided by Lewis; among the items found were 193 pounds of portable soup, 130 rolls of pigtail tobacco, 30 gallons of strong spirit of wine, a wide assortment of Native American presents, medical and surgical supplies, mosquito netting and oilskin bags.

Two years into his presidency, Jefferson asked Congress to fund an expedition through the Louisiana territory to the Pacific Ocean. He did not attempt to make a secret of the Lewis and Clark expedition from Spanish, French, and British officials, but rather claimed different reasons for the venture; he used a secret message to ask for funding, due to poor relations with the opposition Federalist Party in Congress. Congress subsequently appropriated $2,324 for supplies and food, the appropriation of which was left in Lewis&#x27;s charge.

In 1803, Jefferson commissioned the Corps of Discovery and named Army Captain Meriwether Lewis its leader, who then invited William Clark to co-lead the expedition with him. Lewis demonstrated remarkable skills and potential as a frontiersman, and Jefferson made efforts to prepare him for the long journey ahead as the expedition was gaining approval and funding. Jefferson explained his choice of Lewis:

It was impossible to find a character who to a complete science in botany, natural history, mineralogy &amp; astronomy, joined the firmness of constitution &amp; character, prudence, habits adapted to the woods &amp; a familiarity with the Indian manners and character, requisite for this undertaking. All the latter qualifications Capt. Lewis has.

In 1803, Jefferson sent Lewis to Philadelphia to study medicinal cures under Benjamin Rush, a physician and former leader in the American Revolution. He also arranged for Lewis to be further educated by Andrew Ellicott, an astronomer who instructed him in the use of a sextant, among other navigational instruments. From Benjamin Smith Barton, Lewis learned how to describe and preserve plant and animal specimens; from Robert Patterson, refinements in computing latitude and longitude, and Caspar Wistar covered fossils, and the search for possible living remnants. Lewis, however, was not ignorant of science, having demonstrated a marked capacity to learn, especially with Jefferson as his teacher. At Monticello, Jefferson possessed an enormous library on the subject of North American geography, to which Lewis had full access. He spent time consulting maps and books, as well as conferring with Jefferson.

The keelboat used for the first year of the journey was built near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in the summer of 1803, to Lewis&#x27;s specifications, and was completed on August 31. The vessel was immediately loaded with equipment and provisions. While in Pittsburgh, Lewis bought a Newfoundland dog, Seaman, to accompany them. Newfoundlands are amicable, large working dogs and good swimmers, lovers of water and commonly found on fishing boats, as they can assist in water rescues. Seaman proved a valuable member of the party, aiding with hunting and protection from bears and other potential predators. He was the only animal to complete the entire trip.

Lewis and his crew set-sail that afternoon, traveling down the Ohio River to meet up with Clark near Louisville, Kentucky, in October 1803, at the Falls of the Ohio. Their goals were to explore the vast territory acquired by the Louisiana Purchase and to establish trade and US sovereignty over the Native Americans along the Missouri River. Jefferson also wanted to establish a US claim of &quot;discovery&quot; to the Pacific Northwest and Oregon territory by documenting an American presence there before European nations could claim the land. According to some historians, Jefferson understood that he would have a better claim of ownership to the Pacific Northwest if the team gathered scientific data on animals and plants. However, his main objectives were centered around finding an all-water route to the Pacific coast and commerce. His instructions to the expedition stated:

The US mint prepared special silver medals with a portrait of Jefferson and inscribed with a message of friendship and peace, called Indian Peace Medals. The soldiers were to distribute them to the tribes that they met. The expedition also prepared advanced weapons to display their military firepower. Among these was an Austrian-made .46 caliber Girandoni air rifle, a repeating rifle with a 20-round tubular magazine that was powerful enough to kill a deer. The expedition was prepared with flintlock firearms, knives, blacksmithing supplies, and cartography equipment. They also carried flags, gift bundles, medicine, and other items that they would need for their journey.
The route of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s expedition took them up the Missouri River to its headwaters, then on to the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia River, and it may have been influenced by the purported transcontinental journey of Moncacht-Apé by the same route about a century before. Jefferson had a copy of Le Page&#x27;s book in his library detailing Moncacht-Apé&#x27;s itinerary, and Lewis carried a copy with him during the expedition. Le Page&#x27;s description of Moncacht-Apé&#x27;s route across the continent neglects to mention the need to cross the Rocky Mountains, and it might be the source of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s mistaken belief that they could easily carry boats from the Missouri&#x27;s headwaters to the westward-flowing Columbia.

== Journey ==
=== Departure ===
The Corps of Discovery departed from Camp Dubois (Camp Wood) at 4pm on May 14, 1804. Under Clark&#x27;s command, they traveled up the Missouri River in their keelboat and two pirogues to St. Charles, Missouri where Lewis joined them six days later. The expedition set out the next afternoon, May 21. While accounts vary, it is believed the Corps had as many as 45 members, including the officers, enlisted military personnel, civilian volunteers, and York, an African-American man enslaved by Clark.

From St. Charles, the expedition followed the Missouri through what is now Kansas City, Missouri, and Omaha, Nebraska. On August 20, 1804, Sergeant Charles Floyd died, apparently from acute appendicitis. He had been among the first to sign up with the Corps of Discovery and was the only member to die during the expedition. He was buried at a bluff by the river, now named after him, in what is now Sioux City, Iowa. His burial site was marked with a cedar post on which was inscribed his name and day of death. up the river, the expedition camped at a small river which they named Floyd&#x27;s River. During the final week of August, Lewis and Clark reached the edge of the Great Plains, a place abounding with elk, deer, bison, pronghorn and beavers.

The Lewis and Clark Expedition established relations with two dozen Native American nations, without whose help the group would have risked starvation during the harsh winters and/or become hopelessly lost in the vast ranges of the Rocky Mountains.

The Americans and the Lakota nation (whom the Americans called Sioux or &quot;Teton-wan Sioux&quot;) had problems when they met, and there was a concern the two sides might clash. According to Harry W. Fritz, &quot;All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha tribe, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners.&quot; The expedition held talks with the Lakota near the confluence of the Missouri and Bad Rivers in what is now Fort Pierre, South Dakota.

One of their horses disappeared, and they believed the Sioux were responsible. Afterward, the two sides met and there was a disagreement, and the Sioux asked the men to stay or to give more gifts (or tribute) instead, before being allowed to pass through their territory. Clark wrote they were &quot;warlike&quot; and were the &quot;vilest miscreants of the savage race&quot;. They came close to blows several times, until the Lakota chief, Black Buffalo, persuaded Lewis to distribute more tobacco to the assembled warriors. Lewis complied and the expedition was allowed to continue upstream to the Arikara villages. 

In the winter of 180405, the party built Fort Mandan, near present-day Washburn, North Dakota. Just before departing on April 7, 1805, the expedition sent the keelboat back to St. Louis with a sample of specimens, some never-before-seen east of the Mississippi. One chief asked Lewis and Clark to provide a boat for passage through their national territory. The Americans quickly continued westward (upriver), and camped for the winter in the Mandan nation&#x27;s territory.

After the expedition had set-up camp, nearby tribal members came to visit in fair numbers, some staying all night. For several days, Lewis and Clark met in council with Mandan chiefs. Here they met a French-Canadian fur trapper named Toussaint Charbonneau, and his young Shoshone wife, Sacagawea. Charbonneau, at this time, began to serve as the expedition&#x27;s translator. Peace was established between the expedition and the Mandan chiefs with the sharing of a Mandan ceremonial pipe. By April 25, Captain Lewis wrote his progress report of the expedition&#x27;s activities and observations of the Native American nations they had encountered to-date in &quot;A Statistical view of the Indian nations inhabiting the Territory of Louisiana&quot;, which outlined the names of various tribes, their locations, trading practices and water routes used, among other points. President Jefferson would later present this report to Congress.

They followed the Missouri to its headwaters, and over the Continental Divide at Lemhi Pass, then north to Traveler&#x27;s Rest, and crossed the Bitteroots at Lolo Pass. They descended on foot, then proceeded in canoes down the Clearwater, Snake, and Columbia rivers, past Celilo Falls and present-day Portland, at the confluence of the Willamette and Columbia rivers. Lewis and Clark used William Robert Broughton&#x27;s 1792 notes and maps to orient themselves once they reached the lower Columbia River. The sighting of Mount Hood and other stratovolcanos confirmed that the expedition had almost reached the Pacific Ocean.

=== Pacific Ocean ===

The expedition sighted the Pacific Ocean for the first time on November 7, 1805, arriving two weeks later. The expedition faced the beginning of its second bitter winter camped on the north side of the Columbia River, in a storm-wracked area Clark called Dismal Nitch. Lack of food was a major factor. The elk, the party&#x27;s main source of food, had retreated from their usual haunts into the mountains, and the party was now too poor to purchase enough food from neighboring tribes. On November 24, 1805, the majority of the party voted to move their camp to the south side of the Columbia River near modern Astoria, Oregon. Both Sacagawea and the enslaved York participated in the vote.

On the south side of the Columbia River, upstream on the west side of the Netul River (now Lewis and Clark River), they constructed Fort Clatsop. They did this not just for shelter and protection, but also to officially establish the American presence there, with the American flag flying over the fort. During the winter at Fort Clatsop, Lewis committed himself to writing. He filled many pages of his journals with valuable knowledge, mostly about botany, because of the abundant growth and forests that covered that part of the continent. The health of the men also became a problem, with many suffering from colds and influenza.

Knowing that maritime fur traders sometimes visited the lower Columbia River, Lewis and Clark repeatedly asked the local Chinooks about trading ships. They learned that Captain Samuel Hill had been there in early 1805. Miscommunication caused Clark to record the name as &quot;Haley&quot;. Captain Hill returned in November 1805, and anchored about from Fort Clatsop. The Chinook told Hill about Lewis and Clark, but no direct contact was made.

A Russian maritime expedition under statesman Nikolai Rezanov arrived at the mouth of the Columbia River while Lewis and Clark were still there. Neither Rezanov nor Lewis and Clark knew about each other. Rezanov had come from &quot;Novo-Arkhangelsk&quot; (today Sitka, Alaska), intending to establish a Russian agricultural colony to help with the perennial food shortages in Russian America, and made plans for a relocation of the capital of Russian America from Sitka to the lower Columbia River. But his ship, &quot;Juno&quot;, was unable to cross the Columbia Bar. So Rezanov went to California instead, setting in motion a process that eventually led to the founding of Fort Ross, California.

=== Return trip ===
Lewis was determined to remain at the fort until April 1, but was still anxious to move out at the earliest opportunity. By March 22, the stormy weather had subsided and the following morning, on March 23, 1806, the journey home began. The Corps began their journey homeward using canoes to ascend the Columbia River, and later by trekking over land.

Before leaving, Clark gave the Chinook a letter to give to the next ship captain to visit, which was the same Captain Hill who had been nearby during the winter. Hill took the letter to Canton and had it forwarded to Thomas Jefferson, who thus received it before Lewis and Clark returned.

They made their way to Camp Chopunnish in Idaho, along the north bank of the Clearwater River, where the members of the expedition collected 65 horses in preparation to cross the Bitterroot Mountains, lying between modern-day Idaho and western Montana. However, the range was still covered in snow, which prevented the expedition from making the crossing. On April 11, while the Corps was waiting for the snow to diminish, Lewis&#x27;s dog, Seaman, was stolen by Native Americans, but was retrieved shortly. Worried that other such acts might follow, Lewis warned the chief that any other wrongdoing or mischievous acts would result in instant death.

On July 3, before crossing the Continental Divide, the Corps split into two teams so Lewis could explore the Marias River. Lewis&#x27;s group of four met some men from the Blackfeet nation. During the night, the Blackfeet tried to steal their weapons. In the struggle, the soldiers killed two Blackfeet men. Lewis, George Drouillard, and the Field brothers fled over in a day before they camped again.

Meanwhile, Clark had entered the Crow tribe&#x27;s territory. In the night, half of Clark&#x27;s horses disappeared, but not a single Crow had been seen. Lewis and Clark stayed separated until they reached the confluence of the Yellowstone and Missouri Rivers on August 11. As the groups reunited, one of Clark&#x27;s hunters, Pierre Cruzatte, mistook Lewis for an elk and fired, injuring Lewis in the thigh. Once together, the Corps was able to return home quickly via the Missouri River. They reached St. Louis on September 23, 1806.

=== Spanish interference ===
In March 1804, before the expedition began in May, the Spanish in New Mexico learned from General James Wilkinson that the Americans were encroaching on territory claimed by Spain. After the Lewis and Clark expedition set off in May, the Spanish sent four armed expeditions of 52 soldiers, mercenaries , and Native Americans on August 1, 1804, from Santa Fe, New Mexico northward under Pedro Vial and José Jarvet to intercept Lewis and Clark and imprison the entire expedition. They reached the Pawnee settlement on the Platte River in central Nebraska and learned that the expedition had been there many days before. The expedition was covering a day and Vial&#x27;s attempt to intercept them was unsuccessful.

== Geography and science ==


The Lewis and Clark Expedition gained an understanding of the geography of the Northwest and produced the first accurate maps of the area. During the journey, Lewis and Clark drew about 140 maps. Stephen Ambrose says the expedition &quot;filled in the main outlines&quot; of the area.

The expedition documented natural resources and plants that had been previously unknown to Euro-Americans, though not to the indigenous peoples. Lewis and Clark were the first Americans to cross the Continental Divide, and the first Americans to see Yellowstone, enter into Montana, and produce an official description of these different regions. Their visit to the Pacific Northwest, maps, and proclamations of sovereignty with medals and flags were legal steps needed to claim title to each indigenous nation&#x27;s lands under the Doctrine of Discovery.

The expedition was sponsored by the American Philosophical Society (APS). Lewis and Clark received some instruction in astronomy, botany, climatology, ethnology, geography, meteorology, mineralogy, ornithology, and zoology. During the expedition, they made contact with over 70 Native American tribes and described more than 200 new plant and animal species.

Jefferson had the expedition declare &quot;sovereignty&quot; and demonstrate their military strength to ensure native tribes would be subordinate to the U.S., as European colonizers did elsewhere. After the expedition, the maps that were produced allowed the further discovery and settlement of this vast territory in the years that followed.

In 1807, Patrick Gass, a private in the U.S. Army, published an account of the journey. He was promoted to sergeant during the course of the expedition. Paul Allen edited a two-volume history of the Lewis and Clark expedition that was published in 1814, in Philadelphia, but without mention of the actual author, banker Nicholas Biddle. Even then, the complete report was not made public until more recently. The earliest authorized edition of the Lewis and Clark journals resides in the Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library at the University of Montana.

== Encounters with Native Americans ==
One of the expedition&#x27;s primary objectives as directed by President Jefferson was to be a surveillance mission that would report back the whereabouts, military strength, lives, activities, and cultures of the various Native American tribes that inhabited the territory newly acquired by the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase and the northwest in general. The expedition was to make native people understand that their lands now belonged to the United States and that &quot;their great father&quot; in Washington was now their sovereign. The expedition encountered many different native nations and tribes along the way, many of whom offered their assistance, providing the expedition with their knowledge of the wilderness and with the acquisition of food. The expedition had blank leather-bound journals and ink for the purpose of recording such encounters, as well as for scientific and geological information. They were also provided with various gifts of medals, ribbons, needles, mirrors, and other articles which were intended to ease any tensions when negotiating their passage with the various Native American chiefs whom they would encounter along their way.

Many of the tribes had friendly experiences with British and French fur traders in various isolated encounters along the Missouri and Columbia Rivers, and for the most part the expedition did not encounter hostilities. However, there was a tense confrontation on September 25, 1804, with the Teton-Sioux tribe (also known as the Lakota people, one of the three tribes that comprise the Great Sioux Nation), under chiefs that included Black Buffalo and the Partisan. These chiefs confronted the expedition and demanded tribute from the expedition for their passage over the river. The seven native tribes that comprised the Lakota people controlled a vast inland empire and expected gifts from strangers who wished to navigate their rivers or to pass through their lands. According to Harry W. Fritz, &quot;All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha tribe, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners.&quot;

Captain Lewis made his first mistake by offering the Sioux chief gifts first, which insulted and angered the Partisan chief. Communication was difficult, since the expedition&#x27;s only Sioux language interpreter was Pierre Dorion who had stayed behind with the other party and was also involved with diplomatic affairs with another tribe. Consequently, both chiefs were offered a few gifts, but neither was satisfied and they wanted some gifts for their warriors and tribe. At that point, some of the warriors from the Partisan tribe took hold of their boat and one of the oars. Lewis took a firm stand, ordering a display of force and presenting arms; Captain Clark brandished his sword and threatened violent reprisal. Just before the situation erupted into a violent confrontation, Black Buffalo ordered his warriors to back off.

The captains were able to negotiate their passage without further incident with the aid of better gifts and a bottle of whiskey. During the next two days, the expedition made camp not far from Black Buffalo&#x27;s tribe. Similar incidents occurred when they tried to leave, but trouble was averted with gifts of tobacco.

=== Observations ===
As the expedition encountered the various Native American tribes during the course of their journey, they observed and recorded information regarding their lifestyles, customs and the social codes they lived by, as directed by President Jefferson. By European standards, the Native American way of life seemed harsh and unforgiving as witnessed by members of the expedition. After many encounters and camping in close proximity to the Native American nations for extended periods of time during the winter months, they soon learned first hand of their customs and social orders.

One of the primary customs that distinguished Native American cultures from those of the West was that it was customary for the men to take on two or more wives if they were able to provide for them and often took on a wife or wives who were members of the immediate family circle, e.g. men in the Minnetaree and Mandan tribes would often take on a sister for a wife. Chastity among women was not held in high regard. Infant daughters were often sold by the father to men who were grown, usually for horses or mules. Women in Sioux nations were often bartered away for horses or other supplies; yet this was not practiced among the Shoshone nation, who held their women in higher regard.

They witnessed that many of the Native American nations were constantly at war with other tribes, especially the Sioux, who, while remaining generally friendly to the white fur traders, had proudly boasted of and justified the almost complete destruction of the once great Cahokia nation, along with the Missouris, Illinois, Kaskaskia, and Piorias tribes that lived about the countryside adjacent to the upper Mississippi and Missouri rivers.

=== Sacagawea ===

Sacagawea, sometimes spelled Sakajawea or Sakagawea ( 1788December 20, 1812), was a Shoshone Native American woman who arrived with her husband and owner Toussaint Charbonneau on the expedition to the Pacific Ocean.

On February 11, 1805, a few weeks after her first contact with the expedition, Sacagawea went into labor which was slow and painful, so the Frenchman Charbonneau suggested she be given a potion of rattlesnake&#x27;s rattle to aid in her delivery. Lewis happened to have some snake&#x27;s rattle with him. A short time after administering the potion, she delivered a healthy boy who was given the name Jean Baptiste Charbonneau.

When the expedition reached Marias River, on June 16, 1805, Sacagawea became dangerously ill. She was able to find some relief by drinking mineral water from the sulphur spring that fed into the river.

Though she has been discussed in literature frequently, much of the information is exaggeration or fiction. Scholars say she did notice some geographical features, but &quot;Sacagawea ... was not the guide for the Expedition, she was important to them as an interpreter and in other ways.&quot; The sight of a woman and her infant son would have been reassuring to some indigenous nations, and she played an important role in diplomatic relations by talking to chiefs, easing tensions, and giving the impression of a peaceful mission.

In his writings, Meriwether Lewis presented a somewhat negative view of her, though Clark had a higher regard for her, and provided some support for her children in subsequent years. In the journals, they used the terms &quot;squar&quot; (squaw) and &quot;savages&quot; to refer to Sacagawea and other indigenous peoples.

== York ==

An enslaved Black man known only as York took part in the expedition as personal servant to William Clark, his enslaver. York did much to help the expedition succeed. He proved popular with the Native Americans, who had never seen a Black man. He also helped with hunting and the heavy labor of pulling boats upstream. Despite his contributions to the Corps of Discovery, Clark refused to release York from bondage upon returning east. While all the other explorers enjoyed rewards of double pay and hundreds of acres of land, York received nothing. After the end of the expedition, Clark allowed York only a brief visit to Kentucky to see his wife before forcing him to return to Missouri. It is unlikely that he ever saw his wife again: &quot;ten years after the expedition&#x27;s end, York was still enslaved, working as a wagoner for the Clark family&quot;. The last years of York&#x27;s life are disputed. In the 1830s, a Black man who said he had first come with Lewis and Clark was living as a chief with Native Americans they met on the expedition, in modern Wyoming.

== Accomplishments ==
The Corps met their objective of reaching the Pacific, mapping and establishing their presence for a legal claim to the land. They established diplomatic relations and trade with at least two dozen indigenous nations. They did not find a continuous waterway to the Pacific Ocean but located a Native American trail that led from the upper end of the Missouri River to the Columbia River which ran to the Pacific Ocean. They gained information about the natural habitat, flora and fauna, bringing back various plant, seed and mineral specimens. They mapped the topography of the land, designating the location of mountain ranges, rivers and the many Native American tribes during the course of their journey. They also learned and recorded much about the language and customs of the Native American tribes they encountered, and brought back many of their artifacts, including bows, clothing and ceremonial robes.

== Aftermath ==

Two months passed after the expedition&#x27;s end before Jefferson made his first public statement to Congress and others, giving a one-sentence summary about the success of the expedition before getting into the justification for the expenses involved. In the course of their journey, they acquired a knowledge of numerous tribes of Native Americans hitherto unknown; they informed themselves of the trade which may be carried on with them, the best channels and positions for it, and they are enabled to give with accuracy the geography of the line they pursued. Back east, the botanical and zoological discoveries drew the intense interest of the American Philosophical Society who requested specimens, various artifacts traded with the Native Americans, and reports on plants and wildlife along with various seeds obtained. Jefferson used seeds from &quot;Missouri hominy corn&quot; along with a number of other unidentified seeds to plant at Monticello which he cultivated and studied. He later reported on the &quot;Indian corn&quot; he had grown as being an &quot;excellent&quot; food source. The expedition helped establish the U.S. presence in the newly acquired territory and beyond and opened the door to further exploration, trade and scientific discoveries.

Lewis and Clark returned from their expedition, bringing with them the Mandan Native American Chief Shehaka from the Upper Missouri to visit the &quot;Great Father&quot; in Washington. After Chief Shehaka&#x27;s visit, it required multiple attempts and multiple military expeditions to safely return Shehaka to his nation.

Upon the return from their expedition, Lewis and Clark struggled to prepare their manuscripts for publication. Clark managed to persuade Nicholas Biddle to edit the journals, which were then published in 1814 as the &quot;History of the Expedition Under the Commands of Captains Lewis and Clark&quot;. However, Biddle&#x27;s narrative account omitted much of the material related to their discoveries in flora and fauna. Since Biddle&#x27;s account was the only printed account of the original journals for the next 90 years, many of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s discoveries were later unknowingly rediscovered and given new names. It wasn&#x27;t until 1904–1905, through the publication of &quot;Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition&quot; by Reuben Gold Thwaites, that the general public became aware of the full extent of the scientific discoveries made by the expedition.

During the 19th century, references to Lewis and Clark &quot;scarcely appeared&quot; in history books, even during the United States Centennial in 1876, and the expedition was largely forgotten. Lewis and Clark began to gain attention around the start of the 20th century. Both the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis and the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in Portland, Oregon, showcased them as American pioneers. However, the story remained relatively shallow until mid-century as a celebration of US conquest and personal adventures, but more recently the expedition has been more thoroughly researched.

As of 1984, no US exploration party was more famous, and no American expedition leaders are more recognizable by name.

In 2004, a complete and reliable set of the expedition&#x27;s journals was compiled by Gary E. Moulton. Circa 2004, the bicentennial of the expedition further elevated popular interest in Lewis and Clark.

== Legacy and honors ==
In the 1970s, the federal government memorialized the winter assembly encampment, Camp Dubois, as the start of the Lewis and Clark voyage of discovery and in 2019 it recognized Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania as the start of the expedition.

Since the expedition, Lewis and Clark have been commemorated and honored over the years on various coins, currency, and commemorative postage stamps, as well as in a number of other capacities. In 2004, the American elm cultivar &quot;Ulmus americana&quot; &#x27;Lewis &amp; Clark&#x27; (selling name ) was released by North Dakota State University Research Foundation in commemoration of the expedition&#x27;s bicentenary; the tree has a resistance to Dutch elm disease.

Lewis and Clark County, in Montana, as well as the Lewis and Clark River in Oregon are both named after the expedition&#x27;s leaders.

The Lewis and Clark Public School District in North Dakota is named after the pair.

Campsite Lewis and Clark in Camp Sandy Beach at Yawgoog Scout Reservation in Rockville, Rhode Island also honors both explorers.

== Prior discoveries ==
In 1682, René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle traveled down the Mississippi from the Great Lakes to the Gulf. The French then established a chain of posts along the Mississippi from New Orleans to the Great Lakes. There followed a number of French explorers including Pedro Vial and Pierre Antoine and Paul Mallet, among others. Vial may have preceded Lewis and Clark to Montana. In 1787, he gave a map of the upper Missouri River and locations of &quot;territories transited by Pedro Vial&quot; to Spanish authorities.

Early in 1792, the American explorer Robert Gray, sailing in the &quot;Columbia Rediviva&quot;, discovered the yet to be named Columbia River, named it after his ship and claimed it for the United States. Later in 1792, the Vancouver Expedition had learned of Gray&#x27;s discovery and used his maps. Vancouver&#x27;s expedition explored over up the Columbia, into the Columbia River Gorge. Lewis and Clark used the maps produced by these expeditions when they descended the lower Columbia to the Pacific coast.

From 1792 to 1793, Alexander Mackenzie had crossed North America from Quebec to the Pacific.

== See also ==
* &quot;The Far Horizons&quot;, a 1955 film about the expedition
* Gateway Arch National Park
* Lewis and Clark Pass (Montana) – the only non-motorized pass on the expedition&#x27;s route
* Lewis and Clark&#x27;s Keelboat
* The Red River Expedition (1806) and the Pike Expedition were also commissioned by Jefferson
* James Kendall Hosmer, American history professor and librarian who edited and published Nicholas Biddle&#x27;s account of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s journal
* Timeline of the Lewis and Clark Expedition

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* Cutright, Paul Russel (1969). &quot;Lewis and Clark: Pioneering Naturalists.&quot; University of Nebraska Press. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
=== Primary sources ===
* E&#x27;books, Full view 
* 
* Lewis, Meriwether (1811). &quot;The Travels of Captains Lewis and Clarke, from St. Louis, by way of the Missouri and Columbia Rivers, to the Paciﬁc Ocean; performed in the Years 1804, 1805, and 1806.&quot; By Order of the Government of the United States; containing Delineations of the Manners, Customs, Religion, &amp;c. of the Indians; compiled from various authentic Sources and original Documents; and a summary of the Statistical View of the Indian Nations, from the official communication of Meriwether Lewis. In 8vo. illustrated with a Map of the Country inhabited by the Tribes of Western Indians. (&quot;This is an interesting volume, and exhibits not only some valuable geographical notices, but very copious and amusing details respecting the manners, habits, and divisions of the India North America Tribes.&quot;) Modern Publications, and New Editions of Valuable Standard Works. In: &quot;The Quarterly Review&quot;, February 1811, p. 2.
** 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Full text of the Lewis and Clark journals online – edited by Gary E. Moulton, University of Nebraska–Lincoln
* Travel the Lewis and Clark Expedition, a National Park Service &quot;Discover Our Shared Heritage&quot; Travel Itinerary
* &quot;History of the Expedition Under the Command of Captains Lewis and Clark: To the Sources of the Missouri, thence Across the Rocky Mountains and down the River Columbia to the Pacific Ocean&quot; published in 1814; from the World Digital Library
* Lewis &amp; Clark Fort Mandan Foundation: Discover Lewis &amp; Clark
* Corps of Discovery Online Atlas, created by Watzek Library, Lewis &amp; Clark College
* . Yale Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
* . Yale Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
* Yale Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="4" end="30" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="50" end="79" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Corps of Discovery Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="183" end="201" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172576" start="207" end="225" title="Corps of Discovery" label="Corps of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="248" end="257" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="262" end="270" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="311" end="327" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355348" start="367" end="380" title="William Clark" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935211" start="424" end="435" title="Camp Dubois" label="Camp Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="449" end="457" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q773432" start="524" end="545" title="St. Charles, Missouri" label="St. Charles, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="564" end="578" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="607" end="641" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521136" start="651" end="661" title="Lemhi Pass" label="Lemhi Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="688" end="702" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="712" end="725" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375324" start="781" end="793" title="Fort Clatsop" label="Fort Clatsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="795" end="801" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="868" end="884" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="1167" end="1176" title="Southwestern United States" label="southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="1420" end="1432" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="1434" end="1444" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="1449" end="1458" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1528" end="1543" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1579" end="1588" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1703" end="1719" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="2002" end="2016" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="2493" end="2511" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to France" label="Minister to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q718690" start="2527" end="2539" title="John Ledyard" label="John Ledyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2543" end="2548" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="2594" end="2611" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2645" end="2655" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750283" start="2747" end="2759" title="Third voyage of James Cook" label="third voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775422" start="2765" end="2781" title="Le Page du Pratz" label="Le Page du Pratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2998" end="3005" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="3013" end="3032" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3101" end="3107" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411" start="3115" end="3130" title="Mackenzie River" label="Mackenzie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="3138" end="3150" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="3263" end="3269" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="3301" end="3317" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="3461" end="3468" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="3523" end="3532" title="North American fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="3540" end="3554" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3629" end="3641" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108815407" start="3643" end="3656" title="Israel Whelen" label="Israel Whelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231376" start="3800" end="3813" title="portable soup" label="portable soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="3836" end="3843" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511275" start="3866" end="3880" title="spirit of wine" label="spirit of wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q696265" start="3960" end="3972" title="mosquito net" label="mosquito net"/>
<link wikidata="Q297424" start="3981" end="3988" title="oilskin" label="oilskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4043" end="4051" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="4384" end="4400" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172576" start="4576" end="4594" title="Corps of Discovery" label="Corps of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="5374" end="5387" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="5426" end="5445" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129901" start="5500" end="5515" title="Andrew Ellicott" label="Andrew Ellicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="5520" end="5530" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="5566" end="5573" title="sextant" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q276825" start="5618" end="5639" title="Benjamin Smith Barton" label="Benjamin Smith Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348777" start="5717" end="5733" title="Robert Patterson (educator)" label="Robert Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q347595" start="5788" end="5801" title="Caspar Wistar (physician)" label="Caspar Wistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="5810" end="5816" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q199618" start="6002" end="6012" title="Monticello" label="Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064657" start="6214" end="6222" title="Lewis and Clark&amp;#x27;s keelboat" label="keelboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="6277" end="6301" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38706" start="6491" end="6507" title="Newfoundland dog" label="Newfoundland dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440695" start="6509" end="6515" title="Seaman (dog)" label="Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="6931" end="6941" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="6969" end="6989" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064799" start="7015" end="7032" title="Falls of the Ohio" label="Falls of the Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="7310" end="7326" title="Oregon territory" label="Oregon territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200683" start="7887" end="7905" title="Indian Peace Medal" label="Indian Peace Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q900843" start="8102" end="8121" title="Girandoni air rifle" label="Girandoni air rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="8496" end="8510" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="8545" end="8558" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898460" start="8660" end="8672" title="Moncacht-Apé" label="Moncacht-Apé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="8991" end="9006" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172576" start="9219" end="9237" title="Corps of Discovery" label="Corps of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935211" start="9252" end="9263" title="Camp Dubois" label="Camp Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q33791" start="9390" end="9398" title="pirogues" label="pirogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q773432" start="9402" end="9423" title="St. Charles, Missouri" label="St. Charles, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055353" start="9666" end="9670" title="York (explorer)" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="9675" end="9691" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="9696" end="9704" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="9791" end="9812" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="9818" end="9833" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064378" start="9864" end="9877" title="Charles Floyd (explorer)" label="Charles Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="9906" end="9918" title="appendicitis" label="appendicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462365" start="10084" end="10099" title="Floyd&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q489255" start="10116" end="10126" title="Sioux City" label="Sioux City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="10128" end="10132" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430371" start="10299" end="10317" title="Floyd River" label="Floyd&amp;#x27;s River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="10392" end="10404" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="10429" end="10432" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="10434" end="10438" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="10440" end="10445" title="American Bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="10447" end="10456" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="10461" end="10467" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="10743" end="10749" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="10784" end="10789" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="11130" end="11135" title="Omaha people" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994648" start="11366" end="11391" title="Fort Pierre, South Dakota" label="Fort Pierre, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="11994" end="12001" title="Arikara" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147514" start="12055" end="12066" title="Fort Mandan" label="Fort Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018717" start="12085" end="12107" title="Washburn, North Dakota" label="Washburn, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q474161" start="12173" end="12181" title="keelboat" label="keelboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="12457" end="12463" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356512" start="12724" end="12745" title="Toussaint Charbonneau" label="Toussaint Charbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="12761" end="12769" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q238960" start="12776" end="12785" title="Sacagawea" label="Sacagawea"/>
<link wikidata="Q253390" start="12962" end="12977" title="ceremonial pipe" label="ceremonial pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="13487" end="13505" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521136" start="13509" end="13519" title="Lemhi Pass" label="Lemhi Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835974" start="13535" end="13555" title="Traveler&amp;#x27;s Rest (Lolo, Montana)" label="Traveler&amp;#x27;s Rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q879014" start="13573" end="13583" title="Bitterroot Range" label="Bitteroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q452977" start="13587" end="13596" title="Lolo Pass (Idaho–Montana)" label="Lolo Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099574" start="13656" end="13666" title="Clearwater River (Idaho)" label="Clearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="13668" end="13673" title="Snake River" label="Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746999" start="13701" end="13713" title="Celilo Falls" label="Celilo Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="13730" end="13738" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131071" start="13765" end="13775" title="Willamette River" label="Willamette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333687" start="13818" end="13842" title="William Robert Broughton" label="William Robert Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q275662" start="13951" end="13961" title="Mount Hood" label="Mount Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="13972" end="13985" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282349" start="14334" end="14346" title="Dismal Nitch" label="Dismal Nitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="14691" end="14706" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375324" start="14904" end="14916" title="Fort Clatsop" label="Fort Clatsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q323002" start="15419" end="15437" title="maritime fur trade" label="maritime fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074448" start="15527" end="15535" title="Chinookan peoples" label="Chinooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q96404875" start="15583" end="15594" title="Samuel Hill (sea captain)" label="Samuel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q332732" start="15898" end="15913" title="Nikolai Rezanov" label="Nikolai Rezanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="16114" end="16127" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="16228" end="16243" title="Russian America" label="Russian America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881995" start="16407" end="16419" title="Columbia Bar" label="Columbia Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278115" start="16527" end="16548" title="Fort Ross, California" label="Fort Ross, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="17109" end="17115" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027065" start="17236" end="17251" title="Camp Chopunnish" label="Camp Chopunnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q879008" start="17392" end="17412" title="Bitterroot Mountains" label="Bitterroot Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440695" start="17654" end="17660" title="Seaman (dog)" label="Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q595366" start="17974" end="17986" title="Marias River" label="Marias River"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="18037" end="18046" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q326626" start="18180" end="18197" title="George Drouillard" label="George Drouillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="18301" end="18311" title="Crow tribe" label="Crow tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="18496" end="18507" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="18900" end="18910" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q888614" start="18932" end="18947" title="James Wilkinson" label="James Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="19183" end="19191" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159993" start="19220" end="19230" title="Pedro Vial" label="Pedro Vial"/>
<link wikidata="Q655754" start="19354" end="19366" title="Platte River" label="Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164323" start="20397" end="20418" title="Doctrine of Discovery" label="Doctrine of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="20457" end="20487" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="20540" end="20549" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="20551" end="20557" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q52139" start="20559" end="20570" title="climatology" label="climatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="20572" end="20581" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="20583" end="20592" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="20594" end="20605" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="20607" end="20617" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="20619" end="20630" title="ornithology" label="ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="20636" end="20643" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057607" start="21134" end="21146" title="Patrick Gass" label="Patrick Gass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149037" start="21278" end="21288" title="Paul Allen (editor)" label="Paul Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="21382" end="21394" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="21445" end="21460" title="Nicholas Biddle" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792771" start="21613" end="21647" title="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library" label="Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="21655" end="21676" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="22043" end="22061" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="23204" end="23209" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="23235" end="23248" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota people"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="23292" end="23310" title="Great Sioux Nation" label="Great Sioux Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="23529" end="23542" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota people"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="23906" end="23911" title="Omaha people" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="26092" end="26102" title="Minnetaree" label="Minnetaree"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="26107" end="26113" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="26426" end="26434" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017447" start="26756" end="26763" title="Cahokia tribe" label="Cahokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085692" start="26808" end="26817" title="Kaskaskia" label="Kaskaskia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356512" start="27100" end="27121" title="Toussaint Charbonneau" label="Toussaint Charbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q326706" start="27564" end="27589" title="Jean Baptiste Charbonneau" label="Jean Baptiste Charbonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937101" start="28570" end="28575" title="squaw" label="squaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="31345" end="31375" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394051" start="31564" end="31570" title="hominy" label="hominy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="31717" end="31728" title="Indian corn" label="Indian corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="32038" end="32044" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492838" start="32061" end="32074" title="Chief Shehaka" label="Chief Shehaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="32428" end="32443" title="Nicholas Biddle" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317451" start="33043" end="33063" title="Reuben Gold Thwaites" label="Reuben Gold Thwaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q984109" start="33295" end="33319" title="United States Centennial" label="United States Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="33463" end="33492" title="Louisiana Purchase Exposition" label="Louisiana Purchase Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537206" start="33519" end="33556" title="Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition" label="Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="33560" end="33576" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935211" start="34240" end="34251" title="Camp Dubois" label="Camp Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="34335" end="34345" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="34347" end="34359" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879395" start="34622" end="34679" title="Ulmus americana &amp;#x27;Lewis &amp;amp; Clark&amp;#x27;" label="&amp;quot;Ulmus americana&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Lewis &amp;amp; Clark&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000624" start="34712" end="34741" title="North Dakota State University" label="North Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="34846" end="34863" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch elm disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q496656" start="34866" end="34888" title="Lewis and Clark County" label="Lewis and Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q641343" start="34917" end="34938" title="Lewis and Clark River" label="Lewis and Clark River"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325365" start="35006" end="35044" title="Lewis and Clark Public School District" label="Lewis and Clark Public School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050460" start="35135" end="35160" title="Yawgoog Scout Reservation" label="Yawgoog Scout Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899405" start="35164" end="35173" title="Rockville, Rhode Island" label="Rockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="35175" end="35187" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="35250" end="35289" title="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159993" start="35512" end="35522" title="Pedro Vial" label="Pedro Vial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192051" start="35527" end="35557" title="Pierre Antoine and Paul Mallet" label="Pierre Antoine and Paul Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q777219" start="35802" end="35813" title="Robert Gray (sea captain)" label="Robert Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q383698" start="35836" end="35853" title="Columbia Rediviva" label="Columbia Rediviva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="35892" end="35906" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="35989" end="36009" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="Vancouver Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112581" start="36134" end="36154" title="Columbia River Gorge" label="Columbia River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="36297" end="36316" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140572" start="36395" end="36411" title="The Far Horizons" label="The Far Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="36454" end="36480" title="Gateway Arch National Park" label="Gateway Arch National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537220" start="36483" end="36513" title="Lewis and Clark Pass (Montana)" label="Lewis and Clark Pass (Montana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064657" start="36577" end="36608" title="Lewis and Clark&amp;#x27;s Keelboat" label="Lewis and Clark&amp;#x27;s Keelboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304841" start="36615" end="36642" title="Red River Expedition (1806)" label="Red River Expedition (1806)"/>
<link wikidata="Q581638" start="36651" end="36666" title="Pike Expedition" label="Pike Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137218" start="36705" end="36725" title="James Kendall Hosmer" label="James Kendall Hosmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="36793" end="36808" title="Nicholas Biddle" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966940" start="36860" end="36902" title="Timeline of the Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Timeline of the Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q475225" start="38660" end="38681" title="World Digital Library" label="World Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17616" wikidata="Q34027" url="?curid=17616" title="Latitude">
<text>In geography, latitude is a geographic coordinate that specifies the north-south position of a point on the surface of the Earth or another celestial body. Latitude is given as an angle that ranges from −90° at the south pole to 90° at the north pole, with 0° at the Equator. Lines of constant latitude, or &quot;parallels&quot;, run east-west as circles parallel to the equator. Latitude and longitude are used together as a coordinate pair to specify a location on the surface of the Earth.

On its own, the term &quot;latitude&quot; normally refers to the &quot;geodetic latitude&quot; as defined below. Briefly, the geodetic latitude of a point is the angle formed between the vector perpendicular (or &quot;normal&quot;) to the ellipsoidal surface from the point, and the plane of the equator.

==Background==
Two levels of abstraction are employed in the definitions of latitude and longitude. In the first step the physical surface is modeled by the geoid, a surface which approximates the mean sea level over the oceans and its continuation under the land masses. The second step is to approximate the geoid by a mathematically simpler reference surface. The simplest choice for the reference surface is a sphere, but the geoid is more accurately modeled by an ellipsoid of revolution. The definitions of latitude and longitude on such reference surfaces are detailed in the following sections. Lines of constant latitude and longitude together constitute a graticule on the reference surface. The latitude of a point on the &quot;actual&quot; surface is that of the corresponding point on the reference surface, the correspondence being along the normal to the reference surface, which passes through the point on the physical surface. Latitude and longitude together with some specification of height constitute a geographic coordinate system as defined in the specification of the ISO 19111 standard.

Since there are many different reference ellipsoids, the precise latitude of a feature on the surface is not unique: this is stressed in the ISO standard which states that &quot;without the full specification of the coordinate reference system, coordinates (that is latitude and longitude) are ambiguous at best and meaningless at worst&quot;. This is of great importance in accurate applications, such as a Global Positioning System (GPS), but in common usage, where high accuracy is not required, the reference ellipsoid is not usually stated.

In English texts, the latitude angle, defined below, is usually denoted by the Greek lower-case letter phi ( or ). It is measured in degrees, minutes and seconds, or decimal degrees, north or south of the equator. For navigational purposes positions are given in degrees and decimal minutes. For instance, The Needles lighthouse is at 50°39.734′ N 001°35.500′ W.
This article relates to coordinate systems for the Earth: it may be adapted to cover the Moon, planets and other celestial objects (planetographic latitude).

For a brief history, see History of latitude.

===Determination===

In celestial navigation, latitude is determined with the meridian altitude method.
More precise measurement of latitude requires an understanding of the gravitational field of the Earth, either to set up theodolites or to determine GPS satellite orbits. The study of the figure of the Earth together with its gravitational field is the science of geodesy.
==Latitude on the sphere==
===The graticule on the sphere===
The graticule is formed by the lines of constant latitude and constant longitude, which are constructed with reference to the rotation axis of the Earth. The primary reference points are the poles where the axis of rotation of the Earth intersects the reference surface. Planes which contain the rotation axis intersect the surface at the meridians; and the angle between any one meridian plane and that through Greenwich (the Prime Meridian) defines the longitude: meridians are lines of constant longitude. The plane through the centre of the Earth and perpendicular to the rotation axis intersects the surface at a great circle called the Equator. Planes parallel to the equatorial plane intersect the surface in circles of constant latitude; these are the parallels. The Equator has a latitude of 0°, the North Pole has a latitude of 90° North (written 90° N or +90°), and the South Pole has a latitude of 90° South (written 90° S or −90°). The latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal to the surface at that point: the normal to the surface of the sphere is along the radial vector.

The latitude, as defined in this way for the sphere, is often termed the spherical latitude, to avoid ambiguity with the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes defined in subsequent sections of this article.

===Named latitudes on the Earth===

Besides the equator, four other parallels are of significance:
The plane of the Earth&#x27;s orbit about the Sun is called the ecliptic, and the plane perpendicular to the rotation axis of the Earth is the equatorial plane. The angle between the ecliptic and the equatorial plane is called variously the axial tilt, the obliquity, or the inclination of the ecliptic, and it is conventionally denoted by . The latitude of the tropical circles is equal to and the latitude of the polar circles is its complement (90° - &quot;i&quot;). The axis of rotation varies slowly over time and the values given here are those for the current epoch. The time variation is discussed more fully in the article on axial tilt.

The figure shows the geometry of a cross-section of the plane perpendicular to the ecliptic and through the centres of the Earth and the Sun at the December solstice when the Sun is overhead at some point of the Tropic of Capricorn. The south polar latitudes below the Antarctic Circle are in daylight, whilst the north polar latitudes above the Arctic Circle are in night. The situation is reversed at the June solstice, when the Sun is overhead at the Tropic of Cancer. Only at latitudes in between the two tropics is it possible for the Sun to be directly overhead (at the zenith).

On map projections there is no universal rule as to how meridians and parallels should appear. The examples below show the named parallels (as red lines) on the commonly used Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. On the former the parallels are horizontal and the meridians are vertical, whereas on the latter there is no exact relationship of parallels and meridians with horizontal and vertical: both are complicated curves.
==Latitude on the ellipsoid==

===Ellipsoids===
In 1687 Isaac Newton published the &quot;Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica&quot;, in which he proved that a rotating self-gravitating fluid body in equilibrium takes the form of an oblate ellipsoid. (This article uses the term &quot;ellipsoid&quot; in preference to the older term &quot;spheroid&quot;.) Newton&#x27;s result was confirmed by geodetic measurements in the 18th century. (See Meridian arc.) An oblate ellipsoid is the three-dimensional surface generated by the rotation of an ellipse about its shorter axis (minor axis). &quot;Oblate ellipsoid of revolution&quot; is abbreviated to &#x27;ellipsoid&#x27; in the remainder of this article. (Ellipsoids which do not have an axis of symmetry are termed triaxial.)

Many different reference ellipsoids have been used in the history of geodesy. In pre-satellite days they were devised to give a good fit to the geoid over the limited area of a survey but, with the advent of GPS, it has become natural to use reference ellipsoids (such as WGS84) with centre at the centre of mass of the Earth and minor axis aligned to the rotation axis of the Earth. These geocentric ellipsoids are usually within of the geoid. Since latitude is defined with respect to an ellipsoid, the position of a given point is different on each ellipsoid: one cannot exactly specify the latitude and longitude of a geographical feature without specifying the ellipsoid used. Many maps maintained by national agencies are based on older ellipsoids, so one must know how the latitude and longitude values are transformed from one ellipsoid to another. GPS handsets include software to carry out datum transformations which link WGS84 to the local reference ellipsoid with its associated grid.

===The geometry of the ellipsoid===
The shape of an ellipsoid of revolution is determined by the shape of the ellipse which is rotated about its minor (shorter) axis. Two parameters are required. One is invariably the equatorial radius, which is the semi-major axis, . The other parameter is usually (1) the polar radius or semi-minor axis, ; or (2) the (first) flattening, ; or (3) the eccentricity, . These parameters are not independent: they are related by

:formula_1
Many other parameters (see ellipse, ellipsoid) appear in the study of geodesy, geophysics and map projections but they can all be expressed in terms of one or two members of the set , , and . Both and are small and often appear in series expansions in calculations; they are of the order and 0.0818 respectively. Values for a number of ellipsoids are given in Figure of the Earth. Reference ellipsoids are usually defined by the semi-major axis and the &quot;inverse&quot; flattening, . For example, the defining values for the WGS84 ellipsoid, used by all GPS devices, are
* (equatorial radius): exactly
* (inverse flattening): exactly
from which are derived
* (polar radius): 
* (eccentricity squared): 
The difference between the semi-major and semi-minor axes is about and as fraction of the semi-major axis it equals the flattening; on a computer monitor the ellipsoid could be sized as 300 by 299 pixels. This would barely be distinguishable from a 300-by-300-pixel sphere, so illustrations usually exaggerate the flattening.

===Geodetic and geocentric latitudes===


The graticule on the ellipsoid is constructed in exactly the same way as on the sphere. The normal at a point on the surface of an ellipsoid does not pass through the centre, except for points on the equator or at the poles, but the definition of latitude remains unchanged as the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The terminology for latitude must be made more precise by distinguishing:

*&quot;Geodetic latitude&quot;: the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The standard notation in English publications is . This is the definition assumed when the word latitude is used without qualification. The definition must be accompanied with a specification of the ellipsoid.
*&quot;Geocentric latitude&quot; (also known as &quot;spherical latitude&quot;, after the 3D polar angle): the angle between the radius (from centre to the point on the surface) and the equatorial plane. (Figure below). There is no standard notation: examples from various texts include , , , , , . This article uses .

Geographic latitude must be used with care, as some authors use it as a synonym for geodetic latitude whilst others use it as an alternative to the astronomical latitude.
&quot;Latitude&quot; (unqualified) should normally refer to the geodetic latitude.

The importance of specifying the reference datum may be illustrated by a simple example. On the reference ellipsoid for WGS84, the centre of the Eiffel Tower has a geodetic latitude of 48° 51′ 29″ N, or 48.8583° N and longitude of 2° 17′ 40″ E or 2.2944°E. The same coordinates on the datum ED50 define a point on the ground which is distant from the tower. A web search may produce several different values for the latitude of the tower; the reference ellipsoid is rarely specified.

==Meridian distance==
The length of a degree of latitude depends on the figure of the Earth assumed.

===Meridian distance on the sphere===
On the sphere the normal passes through the centre and the latitude () is
therefore equal to the angle subtended at the centre by the meridian arc from the equator to the point concerned. If the meridian distance is denoted by then
:formula_2
where denotes the mean radius of the Earth. is equal to . No higher accuracy is appropriate for since higher-precision results necessitate an ellipsoid model. With this value for the meridian length of 1 degree of latitude on the sphere is (60.0 nautical miles). The length of one minute of latitude is (1.00 nautical miles), while the length of 1 second of latitude is (see nautical mile).

===Meridian distance on the ellipsoid===

In Meridian arc and standard texts it is shown that the distance along a meridian from latitude to the equator is given by ( in radians)

:formula_3

where is the meridional radius of curvature.

The &quot;quarter meridian&quot; distance from the equator to the pole is

:formula_4

For WGS84 this distance is .

The evaluation of the meridian distance integral is central to many studies in geodesy and map projection. It can be evaluated by expanding the integral by the binomial series and integrating term by term: see Meridian arc for details. The length of the meridian arc between two given latitudes is given by replacing the limits of the integral by the latitudes concerned. The length of a &quot;small&quot; meridian arc is given by

:formula_5

When the latitude difference is 1 degree, corresponding to radians, the arc distance is about
:formula_6

The distance in metres (correct to 0.01 metre) between latitudes formula_7 − 0.5 degrees and formula_7 + 0.5 degrees on the WGS84 spheroid is
:formula_9

The variation of this distance with latitude (on WGS84) is shown in the table along with the length of a degree of longitude (east-west distance):
:formula_10

A calculator for any latitude is provided by the U.S. Government&#x27;s National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).

==Auxiliary latitudes==

There are six auxiliary latitudes that have applications to special problems in geodesy, geophysics and the theory of map projections:
* Geocentric latitude
* Parametric (or reduced) latitude
* Rectifying latitude
* Authalic latitude
* Conformal latitude
* Isometric latitude
The definitions given in this section all relate to locations on the reference ellipsoid but the first two auxiliary latitudes, like the geodetic latitude, can be extended to define a three-dimensional geographic coordinate system as discussed below. The remaining latitudes are not used in this way; they are used &quot;only&quot; as intermediate constructs in map projections of the reference ellipsoid to the plane or in calculations of geodesics on the ellipsoid. Their numerical values are not of interest. For example, no one would need to calculate the authalic latitude of the Eiffel Tower.

The expressions below give the auxiliary latitudes in terms of the geodetic latitude, the semi-major axis, , and the eccentricity, . (For inverses see below.) The forms given are, apart from notational variants, those in the standard reference for map projections, namely &quot;Map projections: a working manual&quot; by J. P. Snyder. Derivations of these expressions may be found in Adams and online publications by Osborne and Rapp.

===Geocentric latitude===
The geocentric latitude is the angle between the equatorial plane and the radius from the centre to a point of interest.

When the point is on the surface of the ellipsoid, the relation between the geocentric latitude () and the geodetic latitude () is:
:formula_11
For points not on the surface of the ellipsoid, the relationship involves additionally the ellipsoidal height &quot;h&quot;:
: formula_12

where is the prime vertical radius of curvature. The geodetic and geocentric latitudes are equal at the equator and at the poles but at other latitudes they differ by a few minutes of arc. Taking the value of the squared eccentricity as 0.0067 (it depends on the choice of ellipsoid) the maximum difference of formula_13 may be shown to be about 11.5 minutes of arc at a geodetic latitude of approximately 45° 6′.

===Parametric latitude (or reduced latitude)===
The parametric latitude or reduced latitude, , is defined by the radius drawn from the centre of the ellipsoid to that point on the surrounding sphere (of radius ) which is the projection parallel to the Earth&#x27;s axis of a point on the ellipsoid at latitude . It was introduced by Legendre and Bessel who solved problems for geodesics on the ellipsoid by transforming them to an equivalent problem for spherical geodesics by using this smaller latitude. Bessel&#x27;s notation, , is also used in the current literature. The parametric latitude is related to the geodetic latitude by:
:formula_14

The alternative name arises from the parameterization of the equation of the ellipse describing a meridian section. In terms of Cartesian coordinates , the distance from the minor axis, and , the distance above the equatorial plane, the equation of the ellipse is:
:formula_15

The Cartesian coordinates of the point are parameterized by
:formula_16

Cayley suggested the term &quot;parametric latitude&quot; because of the form of these equations.

The parametric latitude is not used in the theory of map projections. Its most important application is in the theory of ellipsoid geodesics, (Vincenty, Karney).

===Rectifying latitude===

The rectifying latitude, , is the meridian distance scaled so that its value at the poles is equal to 90 degrees or radians:
:formula_17

where the meridian distance from the equator to a latitude is (see Meridian arc)
:formula_18

and the length of the meridian quadrant from the equator to the pole (the polar distance) is
:formula_19

Using the rectifying latitude to define a latitude on a sphere of radius
:formula_20

defines a projection from the ellipsoid to the sphere such that all meridians have true length and uniform scale. The sphere may then be projected to the plane with an equirectangular projection to give a double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane such that all meridians have true length and uniform meridian scale. An example of the use of the rectifying latitude is the equidistant conic projection. (Snyder, Section 16). The rectifying latitude is also of great importance in the construction of the Transverse Mercator projection.

===Authalic latitude===

The authalic latitude (after the Greek for &quot;&quot;), , gives an equal-area projection to a sphere.
:formula_21

where
:formula_22

and
:formula_23

and the radius of the sphere is taken as
:formula_24

An example of the use of the authalic latitude is the Albers equal-area conic projection.

===Conformal latitude===
The conformal latitude, , gives an angle-preserving (conformal) transformation to the sphere.
:formula_25

where is the Gudermannian function. (See also Mercator projection.)

The conformal latitude defines a transformation from the ellipsoid to a sphere of &quot;arbitrary&quot; radius such that the angle of intersection between any two lines on the ellipsoid is the same as the corresponding angle on the sphere (so that the shape of &quot;small&quot; elements is well preserved). A further conformal transformation from the sphere to the plane gives a conformal double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane. This is not the only way of generating such a conformal projection. For example, the &#x27;exact&#x27; version of the Transverse Mercator projection on the ellipsoid is not a double projection. (It does, however, involve a generalisation of the conformal latitude to the complex plane).

===Isometric latitude===
The isometric latitude, , is used in the development of the ellipsoidal versions of the normal Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. The name &quot;isometric&quot; arises from the fact that at any point on the ellipsoid equal increments of and longitude give rise to equal distance displacements along the meridians and parallels respectively. The graticule defined by the lines of constant and constant , divides the surface of the ellipsoid into a mesh of squares (of varying size). The isometric latitude is zero at the equator but rapidly diverges from the geodetic latitude, tending to infinity at the poles. The conventional notation is given in Snyder (page 15):
:formula_26

For the &quot;normal&quot; Mercator projection (on the ellipsoid) this function defines the spacing of the parallels: if the length of the equator on the projection is (units of length or pixels) then the distance, , of a parallel of latitude from the equator is
:formula_27

The isometric latitude is closely related to the conformal latitude :
:formula_28

===Inverse formulae and series===
The formulae in the previous sections give the auxiliary latitude in terms of the geodetic latitude. The expressions for the geocentric and parametric latitudes may be inverted directly but this is impossible in the four remaining cases: the rectifying, authalic, conformal, and isometric latitudes. There are two methods of proceeding.
* The first is a numerical inversion of the defining equation for each and every particular value of the auxiliary latitude. The methods available are fixed-point iteration and Newton–Raphson root finding.
** When converting from isometric or conformal to geodetic, two iterations of Newton-Raphson gives double precision accuracy.
* The other, more useful, approach is to express the auxiliary latitude as a series in terms of the geodetic latitude and then invert the series by the method of Lagrange reversion. Such series are presented by Adams who uses Taylor series expansions and gives coefficients in terms of the eccentricity. Orihuela gives series for the conversions between all pairs of auxiliary latitudes in terms of the third flattening, . Karney establishes that the truncation errors for such series are consistently smaller that the equivalent series in terms of the eccentricity. The series method is not applicable to the isometric latitude and one must find the conformal latitude in an intermediate step.

===Numerical comparison of auxiliary latitudes===

The plot to the right shows the difference between the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes other than the isometric latitude (which diverges to infinity at the poles) for the case of the WGS84 ellipsoid. The differences shown on the plot are in arc minutes. 
In the Northern hemisphere (positive latitudes), &quot;θ&quot; ≤ &quot;χ&quot; ≤ &quot;μ&quot; ≤ &quot;ξ&quot; ≤ &quot;β&quot; ≤ &quot;ϕ&quot;; in the Southern hemisphere (negative latitudes), the inequalities are reversed, with equality at the equator and the poles. Although the graph appears symmetric about 45°, the minima of the curves actually lie between 45° 2′ and 45° 6′. Some representative data points are given in the table below. The conformal and geocentric latitudes are nearly indistinguishable, a fact that was exploited in the days of hand calculators to expedite the construction of map projections.

To first order in the flattening &quot;f&quot;, the auxiliary latitudes can be expressed as
&quot;ζ&quot; = &quot;ϕ&quot; − &quot;Cf&quot; sin 2&quot;ϕ&quot;
where the constant &quot;C&quot; takes on the values
[, , , 1, 1]
for
&quot;ζ&quot; = [&quot;β&quot;, &quot;ξ&quot;, &quot;μ&quot;, &quot;χ&quot;, &quot;θ&quot;].


==Latitude and coordinate systems==
The geodetic latitude, or any of the auxiliary latitudes defined on the reference ellipsoid, constitutes with longitude a two-dimensional coordinate system on that ellipsoid. To define the position of an arbitrary point it is necessary to extend such a coordinate system into three dimensions. Three latitudes are used in this way: the geodetic, geocentric and parametric latitudes are used in geodetic coordinates, spherical polar coordinates and ellipsoidal coordinates respectively.

===Geodetic coordinates===
At an arbitrary point consider the line which is normal to the reference ellipsoid. The geodetic coordinates are the latitude and longitude of the point on the ellipsoid and the distance . This height differs from the height above the geoid or a reference height such as that above mean sea level at a specified location. The direction of will also differ from the direction of a vertical plumb line. The relation of these different heights requires knowledge of the shape of the geoid and also the gravity field of the Earth.

===Spherical polar coordinates===
The geocentric latitude is the complement of the &quot;polar angle&quot; or &quot;colatitude&quot; in conventional spherical polar coordinates in which the coordinates of a point are where is the distance of from the centre , is the angle between the radius vector and the polar axis and is longitude. Since the normal at a general point on the ellipsoid does not pass through the centre it is clear that points on the normal, which all have the same geodetic latitude, will have differing geocentric latitudes. Spherical polar coordinate systems are used in the analysis of the gravity field.

===Ellipsoidal-harmonic coordinates===
The parametric latitude can also be extended to a three-dimensional coordinate system. For a point not on the reference ellipsoid (semi-axes and ) construct an auxiliary ellipsoid which is confocal (same foci , ) with the reference ellipsoid: the necessary condition is that the product of semi-major axis and eccentricity is the same for both ellipsoids. Let be the semi-minor axis () of the auxiliary ellipsoid. Further let be the parametric latitude of on the auxiliary ellipsoid. The set define the ellipsoidal-harmonic coordinates or simply &quot;ellipsoidal coordinates&quot; (although that term is also used to refer to geodetic coordinate). These coordinates are the natural choice in models of the gravity field for a rotating ellipsoidal body.
The above applies to a biaxial ellipsoid (a spheroid, as in oblate spheroidal coordinates); for a generalization, see triaxial ellipsoidal coordinates.

===Coordinate conversions===
The relations between the above coordinate systems, and also Cartesian coordinates are not presented here. The transformation between geodetic and Cartesian coordinates may be found in geographic coordinate conversion. The relation of Cartesian and spherical polars is given in spherical coordinate system. The relation of Cartesian and ellipsoidal coordinates is discussed in Torge.

==Astronomical latitude==

Astronomical latitude () is the angle between the equatorial plane and the true vertical direction at a point on the surface. The true vertical, the direction of a plumb line, is also the gravity direction (the resultant of the gravitational acceleration (mass-based) and the centrifugal acceleration) at that latitude. Astronomic latitude is calculated from angles measured between the zenith and stars whose declination is accurately known.

In general the true vertical at a point on the surface does not exactly coincide with either the normal to the reference ellipsoid or the normal to the geoid. The geoid is an idealized, theoretical shape &quot;at mean sea level&quot;. Points on land do not lie precisely on the geoid, and the vertical at a point at a specific time is influenced by tidal forces which the theoretical geoid averages out. The angle between the astronomic and geodetic normals is called &quot;vertical deflection&quot; and is usually a few seconds of arc but it is important in geodesy.

Astronomical latitude is not to be confused with declination, the coordinate astronomers use in a similar way to specify the angular position of stars north-south of the celestial equator (see equatorial coordinates), nor with ecliptic latitude, the coordinate that astronomers use to specify the angular position of stars north-south of the ecliptic (see ecliptic coordinates).

==See also==

*Altitude (mean sea level)
*Bowditch&#x27;s American Practical Navigator
*Cardinal direction
*Circle of latitude
*Colatitude
*Declination on celestial sphere
*Degree Confluence Project
*Geodesy
*Geodetic datum
*Geographic coordinate system
*Geographical distance
*Geomagnetic latitude
*Geotagging
*Great-circle distance
*History of latitude
*Horse latitudes
*International Latitude Service
*List of countries by latitude
*Longitude
*Natural Area Code
*Navigation
*Orders of magnitude (length)
*World Geodetic System
==References==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
==External links==

*GEONets Names Server. . access to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency&#x27;s (NGA) database of foreign geographic feature names.
*Resources for determining your latitude and longitude 
*Convert decimal degrees into degrees, minutes, seconds. – info about decimal to sexagesimal conversion.
*Convert decimal degrees into degrees, minutes, seconds
*Distance calculation based on latitude and longitude – JavaScript version
*16th Century Latitude Survey
*Determination of Latitude by Francis Drake on the Coast of California in 1579</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="3" end="12" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="14" end="22" title="Latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="28" end="49" title="geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q659" start="69" end="74" title="north" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q667" start="75" end="80" title="south" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="119" end="128" title="the Earth" label="the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="267" end="274" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="276" end="302" title="Parallel (latitude)" label="Lines of constant latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="393" end="402" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="712" end="718" title="Normal (geometry)" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="777" end="797" title="equatorial plane" label="plane of the equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q185969" start="957" end="962" title="geoid" label="geoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="997" end="1011" title="Sea level" label="mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="1214" end="1220" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="1269" end="1292" title="ellipsoid of revolution" label="ellipsoid of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="1466" end="1475" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="graticule"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="1656" end="1662" title="Normal (geometry)" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="1804" end="1810" title="Altitude" label="height"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="1824" end="1852" title="geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335878" start="1944" end="1963" title="reference ellipsoid" label="reference ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="2321" end="2346" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q10029" start="2563" end="2566" title="phi (letter)" label="phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="2593" end="2600" title="Degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="2602" end="2621" title="arcminute" label="minutes and seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798227" start="2626" end="2641" title="decimal degrees" label="decimal degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281259" start="2766" end="2777" title="The Needles" label="The Needles"/>
<link wikidata="Q106867959" start="2955" end="2978" title="planetographic latitude" label="planetographic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591685" start="3007" end="3026" title="History of latitude" label="History of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="3053" end="3073" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12873396" start="3107" end="3124" title="meridian altitude" label="meridian altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q181517" start="3254" end="3264" title="theodolite" label="theodolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q437882" start="3321" end="3340" title="figure of the Earth" label="figure of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="3397" end="3404" title="geodesy" label="geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="3658" end="3663" title="Geographical pole" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="3806" end="3815" title="Meridian (geography)" label="meridians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="3894" end="3908" title="Prime Meridian" label="Prime Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="4109" end="4116" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="4276" end="4286" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="4348" end="4358" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="4982" end="4990" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="5485" end="5490" title="Epoch (astronomy)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="5553" end="5563" title="axial tilt" label="axial tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q845080" start="5601" end="5614" title="cross section (geometry)" label="cross-section"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="5723" end="5731" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="5778" end="5797" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q182657" start="5835" end="5851" title="Antarctic Circle" label="Antarctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="6075" end="6082" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="6142" end="6148" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q186386" start="6155" end="6170" title="map projections" label="map projections"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="6327" end="6346" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329238" start="6355" end="6385" title="Transverse Mercator projection" label="Transverse Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="6657" end="6669" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="6690" end="6733" title="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="6840" end="6846" title="Oblate spheroid" label="oblate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="7049" end="7061" title="Meridian arc" label="Meridian arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="7372" end="7380" title="triaxial ellipsoid" label="triaxial"/>
<link wikidata="Q437882" start="7399" end="7419" title="Figure of the Earth" label="reference ellipsoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="7453" end="7460" title="geodesy" label="geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185969" start="7528" end="7533" title="geoid" label="geoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="7592" end="7595" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="7656" end="7661" title="WGS84" label="WGS84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502887" start="8284" end="8305" title="Datum (geodesy)" label="datum transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8493" end="8500" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8633" end="8648" title="ellipse" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8707" end="8722" title="ellipse" label="semi-minor axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="8745" end="8755" title="flattening" label="flattening"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8770" end="8782" title="ellipse" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8883" end="8890" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="8892" end="8901" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q437882" start="9216" end="9235" title="Figure of the Earth" label="Figure of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="9384" end="9389" title="WGS84" label="WGS84"/>
<link wikidata="Q109252968" start="10345" end="10362" title="Geodetic latitude" label="Geodetic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="10642" end="10661" title="Geocentric latitude" label="Geocentric latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="10725" end="10739" title="3D polar angle" label="3D polar angle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10847" end="10852" title="#Geocentric latitude" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11103" end="11124" title="#Astronomical latitude" label="astronomical latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="11355" end="11367" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378064" start="11501" end="11505" title="ED50" label="ED50"/>
<link wikidata="Q437882" start="11767" end="11786" title="figure of the Earth" label="figure of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="12030" end="12047" title="Meridian arc" label="meridian distance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12096" end="12107" title="Earth radius#Mean radii" label="mean radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="12453" end="12466" title="nautical mile" label="nautical mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="12515" end="12527" title="Meridian arc" label="Meridian arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136069" start="12686" end="12705" title="radius of curvature (applications)" label="radius of curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="12718" end="12734" title="quarter meridian" label="quarter meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="12799" end="12804" title="WGS84" label="WGS84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="13035" end="13047" title="Meridian arc" label="Meridian arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="13578" end="13583" title="WGS84" label="WGS84"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="13622" end="13653" title="length of a degree of longitude" label="length of a degree of longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296491" start="13761" end="13800" title="National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency" label="National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="13971" end="13990" title="Geocentric latitude" label="Geocentric latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="14050" end="14067" title="Authalic latitude" label="Authalic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="14312" end="14340" title="geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14354" end="14359" title="#Latitude and coordinate systems" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14861" end="14866" title="#Inverse formulae and series" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q109252968" start="15529" end="15547" title="ellipsoidal height" label="ellipsoidal height"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="16894" end="16901" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077670" start="17234" end="17242" title="Vincenty&amp;#x27;s formulae" label="Vincenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="17486" end="17498" title="Meridian arc" label="Meridian arc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17587" end="17601" title="Meridian arc#Polar distance" label="polar distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326965" start="17873" end="17899" title="equirectangular projection" label="equirectangular projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879196" start="18085" end="18113" title="equidistant conic projection" label="equidistant conic projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329238" start="18216" end="18246" title="Transverse Mercator projection" label="Transverse Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q761699" start="18343" end="18364" title="equal-area projection" label="equal-area projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587118" start="18535" end="18569" title="Albers projection" label="Albers equal-area conic projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="18650" end="18659" title="Conformal map" label="conformal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328149" start="18717" end="18738" title="Gudermannian function" label="Gudermannian function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18750" end="18769" title="Mercator projection#Alternative expressions" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329238" start="19332" end="19362" title="Transverse Mercator projection" label="Transverse Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="19622" end="19641" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329238" start="19650" end="19680" title="Transverse Mercator projection" label="Transverse Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="19897" end="19906" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="graticule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030759" start="21113" end="21134" title="fixed-point iteration" label="fixed-point iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q374195" start="21139" end="21153" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method" label="Newton–Raphson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="21267" end="21283" title="double precision" label="double precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q544292" start="21456" end="21474" title="Lagrange reversion" label="Lagrange reversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="23427" end="23444" title="coordinate system" label="coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q962585" start="24447" end="24457" title="colatitude" label="colatitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="24480" end="24507" title="spherical polar coordinates" label="spherical polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075615" start="25813" end="25842" title="oblate spheroidal coordinates" label="oblate spheroidal coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408386" start="25871" end="25903" title="triaxial ellipsoidal coordinates" label="triaxial ellipsoidal coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606510" start="26120" end="26152" title="geographic coordinate conversion" label="geographic coordinate conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="26213" end="26240" title="spherical coordinate system" label="spherical coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027571" start="26427" end="26445" title="vertical direction" label="vertical direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826066" start="26511" end="26521" title="plumb line" label="plumb line"/>
<link wikidata="Q673166" start="26535" end="26552" title="gravity direction" label="gravity direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30006" start="26575" end="26601" title="gravitational acceleration" label="gravitational acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="26623" end="26647" title="centrifugal acceleration" label="centrifugal acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="26734" end="26740" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="26757" end="26768" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q159914" start="27265" end="27284" title="vertical deflection" label="vertical deflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="27409" end="27420" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="27437" end="27447" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="27530" end="27547" title="celestial equator" label="celestial equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q208617" start="27553" end="27575" title="equatorial coordinates" label="equatorial coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q500348" start="27587" end="27604" title="ecliptic latitude" label="ecliptic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="27702" end="27710" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q500348" start="27716" end="27736" title="ecliptic coordinates" label="ecliptic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="27755" end="27763" title="Altitude" label="Altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="27765" end="27779" title="sea level" label="mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759883" start="27782" end="27826" title="Bowditch&amp;#x27;s American Practical Navigator" label="Bowditch&amp;#x27;s American Practical Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718" start="27828" end="27846" title="Cardinal direction" label="Cardinal direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="27848" end="27866" title="Circle of latitude" label="Circle of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q962585" start="27868" end="27878" title="Colatitude" label="Colatitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="27880" end="27891" title="Declination" label="Declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="27895" end="27911" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q978963" start="27913" end="27938" title="Degree Confluence Project" label="Degree Confluence Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="27940" end="27947" title="Geodesy" label="Geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502887" start="27949" end="27963" title="Geodetic datum" label="Geodetic datum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="27965" end="27993" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="Geographic coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030660" start="27995" end="28016" title="Geographical distance" label="Geographical distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535441" start="28018" end="28038" title="Geomagnetic latitude" label="Geomagnetic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q852595" start="28040" end="28050" title="Geotagging" label="Geotagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q912925" start="28052" end="28073" title="Great-circle distance" label="Great-circle distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591685" start="28075" end="28094" title="History of latitude" label="History of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q972926" start="28096" end="28111" title="Horse latitudes" label="Horse latitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619348" start="28113" end="28143" title="International Latitude Service" label="International Latitude Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613902" start="28145" end="28174" title="List of countries by latitude" label="List of countries by latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="28176" end="28185" title="Longitude" label="Longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980429" start="28187" end="28204" title="Natural Area Code" label="Natural Area Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="28206" end="28216" title="Navigation" label="Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="28218" end="28246" title="Orders of magnitude (length)" label="Orders of magnitude (length)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="28248" end="28269" title="World Geodetic System" label="World Geodetic System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296491" start="28376" end="28415" title="National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency" label="National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q114799" start="28612" end="28623" title="sexagesimal" label="sexagesimal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17617" wikidata="Q36477" url="?curid=17617" title="Longitude">
<text>Longitude (, ) is a geographic coordinate that specifies the east-west position of a point on the surface of the Earth, or another celestial body. It is an angular measurement, usually expressed in degrees and denoted by the Greek letter lambda (λ). Meridians are imaginary semicircular lines running from pole to pole that connect points with the same longitude. The prime meridian defines 0° longitude; by convention the International Reference Meridian for the Earth passes near the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, south-east London on the island of Great Britain. Positive longitudes are east of the prime meridian, and negative ones are west.

Because of the Earth&#x27;s rotation, there is a close connection between longitude and time measurement. Scientifically precise local time varies with longitude: a difference of 15° longitude corresponds to a one-hour difference in local time, due to the differing position in relation to the Sun. Comparing local time to an absolute measure of time allows longitude to be determined. Depending on the era, the absolute time might be obtained from a celestial event visible from both locations, such as a lunar eclipse, or from a time signal transmitted by telegraph or radio. The principle is straightforward, but in practice finding a reliable method of determining longitude took centuries and required the effort of some of the greatest scientific minds.

A location&#x27;s north-south position along a meridian is given by its &quot;latitude&quot;, which is approximately the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal from the ground at that location.

Longitude is generally given using the geodetic normal or the gravity direction. The astronomical longitude can differ slightly from the ordinary longitude because of &quot;vertical deflection&quot;, small variations in Earth&#x27;s gravitational field (see astronomical latitude).

== History ==

The concept of longitude was first developed by ancient Greek astronomers. Hipparchus (2nd century BCE) used a coordinate system that assumed a spherical Earth, and divided it into 360° as we still do today. His prime meridian passed through Alexandria. He also proposed a method of determining longitude by comparing the local time of a lunar eclipse at two different places, thus demonstrating an understanding of the relationship between longitude and time. Claudius Ptolemy (2nd century CE) developed a mapping system using curved parallels that reduced distortion. He also collected data for many locations, from Britain to the Middle East. He used a prime meridian through the Canary Islands, so that all longitude values would be positive. While Ptolemy&#x27;s system was sound, the data he used were often poor, leading to a gross over-estimate (by about 70%) of the length of the Mediterranean.

After the fall of the Roman Empire, interest in geography greatly declined in Europe. Hindu and Muslim astronomers continued to develop these ideas, adding many new locations and often improving on Ptolemy&#x27;s data. For example, al-Battānī used simultaneous observations of two lunar eclipses to determine the difference in longitude between Antakya and Raqqa with an error of less than 1°. This is considered to be the best that can be achieved with the methods then available: observation of the eclipse with the naked eye, and determination of local time using an astrolabe to measure the altitude of a suitable &quot;clock star&quot;.

In the later Middle Ages, interest in geography revived in the west, as travel increased, and Arab scholarship began to be known through contact with Spain and North Africa. In the 12th century, astronomical tables were prepared for a number of European cities, based on the work of al-Zarqālī in Toledo. The lunar eclipse of September 12, 1178 was used to establish the longitude differences between Toledo, Marseilles, and Hereford.

Christopher Columbus made two attempts to use lunar eclipses to discover his longitude, the first in Saona Island, on 14 September 1494 (second voyage), and the second in Jamaica on 29 February 1504 (fourth voyage). It is assumed that he used astronomical tables for reference. His determinations of longitude showed large errors of 13° and 38° W respectively. Randles (1985) documents longitude measurement by the Portuguese and Spanish between 1514 and 1627 both in the Americas and Asia. Errors ranged from 2° to 25°.

The telescope was invented in the early 17th century. Initially an observation device, developments over the next half century transformed it into an accurate measurement tool. The pendulum clock was patented by Christiaan Huygens in 1657 and gave an increase in accuracy of about 30 fold over previous mechanical clocks. These two inventions would revolutionise observational astronomy and cartography.

On land, the period from the development of telescopes and pendulum clocks until the mid-18th century saw a steady increase in the number of places whose longitude had been determined with reasonable accuracy, often with errors of less than a degree, and nearly always within 2° to 3°. By the 1720s errors were consistently less than 1°. At sea during the same period, the situation was very different. Two problems proved intractable; the first was the need of a navigator for immediate results, and the second was the marine environment. Making accurate observations in an ocean swell is much harder than on land, and pendulum clocks do not work well in these conditions.
===The Chronometer===

In response to the problems of navigation, a number of European maritime powers offered prizes for a method to determine longitude at sea. The best-known of these is the Longitude Act passed by the British parliament in 1714. It offered two levels of rewards, for solutions within 1° and 0.5°. Rewards were given for two solutions: lunar distances, made practicable by the tables of Tobias Mayer developed into an nautical almanac by the Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne; and for the chronometers developed by the Yorkshire carpenter and clock-maker John Harrison. Harrison built five chronometers over more than three decades. This work was supported and rewarded with thousands of pounds from the Board of Longitude, but he fought to receive money up to the top reward of £20,000, finally receiving an additional payment in 1773 after the intervention of Parliament. It was some while before either method became widely used in navigation. In the early years, chronometers were very expensive, and the calculations required for lunar distances were still complex and time-consuming. Lunar distances came into general use after 1790. Chronometers had the advantages that both the observations and the calculations were simpler, and as they became cheaper in the early 19th century they started to replace lunars, which were seldom used after 1850.

The first working telegraphs were established in Britain by Wheatstone and Cooke in 1839, and in the US by Morse in 1844. It was quickly realised that the telegraph could be used to transmit a time signal for longitude determination. The method was soon in practical use for longitude determination, especially in North America, and over longer and longer distances as the telegraph network expanded, including western Europe with the completion of transatlantic cables. The United States Coast Survey, renamed the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in 1878, was particularly active in this development, and not just in the United States. The Survey established chains of mapped locations through Central and South America, and the West Indies, and as far as Japan and China in the years 1874–90. This contributed greatly to the accurate mapping of these areas.

While mariners benefited from the accurate charts, they could not receive telegraph signals while under way, and so could not use the method for navigation. This changed when wireless telegraphy (radio) became available in the early 20th century. Wireless time signals for the use of ships were transmitted from Halifax, Nova Scotia, starting in 1907 and from the Eiffel Tower in Paris from 1910. These signals allowed navigators to check and adjust their chronometers frequently.

Radio navigation systems came into general use after World War II. The systems all depended on transmissions from fixed navigational beacons. A ship-board receiver calculated the vessel&#x27;s position from these transmissions. They allowed accurate navigation when poor visibility prevented astronomical observations, and became the established method for commercial shipping until replaced by GPS in the early 1990s.

== Determination ==

The main conventional methods for determining longitude are listed below. With one exception (magnetic declination), they all depend on a common principle, which is to determine the time for an event or measurement and to compare it with the time at a different location. Longitude, being up to 180° east or west of a prime meridian, is mathematically related to time differences up to 12 hours by a factor of 15. Thus, a time differential (in hours) between two points is multiplied by 15 to obtain a longitudinal difference (in degrees).

Historically, times used for calculating longitude have included apparent solar time, local mean time, and ephemeris time, with mean time being the one most used for navigation of the sea. See also the equation of time for details on the differences.

* Lunar distances and moon culminations. In its orbit around the Earth, the Moon moves relative to the stars at a rate of just over 0.5°/hour. The angle between the limb of the Moon and a suitable star, planet, or sun is measured with a sextant, and, after consulting ephemeris tables, a value for the mean time at a reference meridian, usually Greenwich, can be calculated. For a culmination, the observer simply records the time and compares it with the reference time in the ephemerides after correcting for refraction and other errors. This method was established by Nathaniel Pigott around 1786. The Nautical Almanac was published in the UK beginning in 1767 and the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac starting in 1852.
* Satellites of Jupiter. Galileo proposed that with sufficiently accurate knowledge of the orbits of the satellites, their positions could provide a measure of absolute time. The method requires a telescope, as the moons are not visible to the naked eye. Ephemeris tables are employed for comparison to a reference meridian.
* Appulses, occultations, transits, and eclipses. An appulse is the least apparent distance between two objects (the Moon, a star or a planet); an occultation occurs when a star or planet passes behind the Moon — essentially a type of eclipse. Lunar eclipses continued to be used. The times of these events are compared to those of a reference meridian. Major observatories used the transit circle or meridian circle to establish very accurate longitude values for their country, often establishing their own prime meridian at the longitude of the instrument.
* Transport of chronometers. A clock is set to the local time of a starting point whose longitude is known, and the longitude of any other place can be determined by comparing its local mean time with the clock time. While marine chronometers are relatively stable, they are also relatively large and expensive. Prior to the quartz crystal, chronometers were susceptible to time drift from temperature fluctuations and vibration.
* Signals. Rockets and lights were occasionally used in the 18th and 19th century, although the method is impractical except for short distances and demonstrations. It was a rudimentary form of synchronizing time and establishing longitude. However, signaling by &quot;ball drop&quot; was extensively used in the US Navy and Royal Navy in the 19th century. In each case, there were observatories near bodies of water that would drop a ball from a tower, alerting the ships of the correct time, and hence enabling them to maintain stable longitudinal position fixes while at sea.
* Telegraphic determination of longitude. First suggested by the American astronomer Sears Cook Walker, the United States Coast Survey began deploying it in 1849. Europe quickly followed. As the American West was settled, mapping and surveying was greatly improved by the use of the telegraph to determine time and longitude differences between stations. The laying of transatlantic telegraph cables also helped establish coordinated global mapping and navigation.
* Magnetic declination. A compass needle does not in general point true north. The variation from true north varies with location, and it was suggested that this could provide a basis for determination of longitude.
With the exception of magnetic declination, all proved practicable methods. Developments on land and sea, however, were very different.

Several newer methods for navigation, location finding, and the determination of longitude exist. Radio navigation, satellite navigation, and Inertial navigation systems, along with celestial navigation, are a few of the more prevalent ones.

==Values==
Longitude is given as an angular measurement with 0° at the Prime Meridian, ranging from −180° westward to +180° eastward. The Greek letter λ (lambda) is used to denote the location of a place on Earth east or west of the Prime Meridian.

Each degree of longitude is sub-divided into 60 minutes, each of which is divided into 60 seconds. A longitude is thus specified in sexagesimal notation as, for example, 23° 27′ 30″ E. For higher precision, the seconds are specified with a decimal fraction. An alternative representation uses degrees and minutes, and parts of a minute are expressed in decimal notation, thus: 23° 27.5′ E. Degrees may also be expressed as a decimal fraction: 23.45833° E. For calculations, the angular measure may be converted to radians, so longitude may also be expressed in this manner as a signed fraction of (pi), or an unsigned fraction of 2.

For calculations, the west/east suffix is replaced by a negative sign in the western hemisphere. The international standard convention (ISO 6709)—that east is positive—is consistent with a right-handed Cartesian coordinate system, with the North Pole up. A specific longitude may then be combined with a specific latitude (positive in the northern hemisphere) to give a precise position on the Earth&#x27;s surface. Confusingly, the convention of negative for east is also sometimes seen, most commonly in the United States; the Earth System Research Laboratories used it on an older version of one of their pages, in order &quot;to make coordinate entry less awkward&quot; for applications confined to the Western Hemisphere. They have since shifted to the standard approach.

The longitude is singular at the Poles and calculations that are sufficiently accurate for other positions may be inaccurate at or near the Poles. Also the discontinuity at the ±180° meridian must be handled with care in calculations. An example is a calculation of east displacement by subtracting two longitudes, which gives the wrong answer if the two positions are on either side of this meridian. To avoid these complexities, some applications use another horizontal position representation.

==Length of a degree of longitude==
The length of a degree of longitude (east–west distance) depends only on the radius of a circle of latitude. For a sphere of radius that radius at latitude is , and the length of a one-degree (or radian) arc along a circle of latitude is
:formula_1
When the Earth is modelled by an ellipsoid this arc length becomes
:formula_2
where , the eccentricity of the ellipsoid, is related to the major and minor axes (the equatorial and polar radii respectively) by
:formula_3

An alternative formula is
:formula_4; here formula_5 is the so-called parametric or reduced latitude.

cos decreases from 1 at the equator to 0 at the poles, which measures how circles of latitude shrink from the equator to a point at the pole, so the length of a degree of longitude decreases likewise. This contrasts with the small (1%) increase in the length of a degree of latitude (north–south distance), equator to pole. The table shows both for the WGS84 ellipsoid with = and = . The distance between two points 1 degree apart on the same circle of latitude, measured along that circle of latitude, is slightly more than the shortest (geodesic) distance between those points (unless on the equator, where these are equal); the difference is less than .

A geographical mile is defined to be the length of one minute of arc along the equator (one equatorial minute of longitude) therefore a degree of longitude along the equator is exactly 60 geographical miles or 111.3 kilometers, as there are 60 minutes in a degree. The length of 1 minute of longitude along the equator is 1 geographical mile or , while the length of 1 second of it is 0.016 geographical mile or .

==See also==

* American Practical Navigator
* Cardinal direction
* Dead reckoning
* Ecliptic longitude
* Geodesy
* Geodetic system
* Geographic coordinate system
* Geographical distance
* Geotagging
* Great-circle distance
* History of longitude
* &quot;The Island of the Day Before&quot;
* Latitude
* Meridian arc
* Natural Area Code
* Navigation
* Orders of magnitude
* Planetary coordinate system#Longitude
* Right ascension on celestial sphere
* World Geodetic System
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Resources for determining your latitude and longitude 
* IAU/IAG Working Group On Cartographic Coordinates and Rotational Elements of the Planets and Satellites 
* &quot;Longitude forged&quot;: an essay exposing a hoax solution to the problem of calculating longitude, undetected in Dava Sobel&#x27;s Longitude, from TLS, November 12, 2008.
* Board of Longitude Collection, Cambridge Digital Library – complete digital version of the Board&#x27;s archive
* Longitude And Latitude Of Points of Interest
* Length Of A Degree Of Latitude And Longitude Calculator
* Esame critico intorno alla scoperta di Vespucci ...
* A land beyond the stars - Museo Galileo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="0" end="9" title="Longitude" label="Longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="20" end="41" title="geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q684" start="61" end="65" title="east" label="east"/>
<link wikidata="Q679" start="66" end="70" title="west" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="113" end="118" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="131" end="140" title="Celestial navigation" label="celestial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="156" end="175" title="angular measurement" label="angular measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="198" end="205" title="degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="225" end="237" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897" start="238" end="244" title="lambda" label="lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="250" end="259" title="meridian (geography)" label="Meridians"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="306" end="310" title="geographical pole" label="pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="368" end="382" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333287" start="423" end="455" title="International Reference Meridian" label="International Reference Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="486" end="516" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="Royal Observatory in Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="553" end="566" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q244743" start="664" end="685" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s rotation" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="715" end="753" title="Time zone" label="between longitude and time measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203484" start="778" end="788" title="local time" label="local time"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="1488" end="1496" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="1549" end="1565" title="equatorial plane" label="equatorial plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="1574" end="1580" title="Normal (geometry)" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951517" start="1655" end="1670" title="geodetic normal" label="geodetic normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q673166" start="1678" end="1695" title="gravity direction" label="gravity direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="1701" end="1723" title="Longitude" label="astronomical longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159914" start="1789" end="1808" title="vertical deflection" label="vertical deflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="1874" end="1895" title="astronomical latitude" label="astronomical latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="1989" end="1999" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="2126" end="2140" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="2156" end="2166" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="2252" end="2265" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2375" end="2391" title="Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="3051" end="3061" title="Al-Battani" label="al-Battānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q80561" start="3164" end="3171" title="Antakya" label="Antakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="3176" end="3181" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="3389" end="3398" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="3745" end="3755" title="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī" label="al-Zarqālī"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="3759" end="3765" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="3871" end="3880" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q204720" start="3887" end="3895" title="Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3898" end="3918" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339113" start="3999" end="4011" title="Saona Island" label="Saona Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="4069" end="4076" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41751" start="4601" end="4615" title="pendulum clock" label="pendulum clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="4632" end="4650" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673993" start="5692" end="5705" title="Longitude Act" label="Longitude Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q60406" start="5905" end="5917" title="Tobias Mayer" label="Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q752001" start="5936" end="5952" title="nautical almanac" label="nautical almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q369877" start="5960" end="5976" title="Astronomer Royal" label="Astronomer Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q450757" start="5977" end="5992" title="Nevil Maskelyne" label="Nevil Maskelyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="6006" end="6018" title="chronometers" label="chronometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q314335" start="6072" end="6085" title="John Harrison" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="6890" end="6900" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="6932" end="6942" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409652" start="6947" end="6952" title="William Fothergill Cooke" label="Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="6979" end="6984" title="Samuel Morse" label="Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="7387" end="7426" title="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey" label="United States Coast and Geodetic Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="8052" end="8072" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="8104" end="8116" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413038" start="8222" end="8238" title="Radio navigation" label="Radio navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8275" end="8287" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="8617" end="8620" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="8981" end="8995" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192854" start="9269" end="9288" title="apparent solar time" label="apparent solar time"/>
<link wikidata="Q219919" start="9290" end="9305" title="local mean time" label="local mean time"/>
<link wikidata="Q908676" start="9311" end="9325" title="ephemeris time" label="ephemeris time"/>
<link wikidata="Q186058" start="9406" end="9422" title="equation of time" label="equation of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547342" start="9458" end="9473" title="Lunar distance (navigation)" label="Lunar distances"/>
<link wikidata="Q611114" start="9483" end="9494" title="culmination" label="culmination"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="9693" end="9700" title="sextant" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="9724" end="9733" title="ephemeris" label="ephemeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q219919" start="9758" end="9767" title="local mean time" label="mean time"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="9967" end="9977" title="refraction" label="refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049428" start="10027" end="10043" title="Nathaniel Pigott" label="Nathaniel Pigott"/>
<link wikidata="Q362567" start="10057" end="10077" title="The Nautical Almanac" label="The Nautical Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826570" start="10128" end="10167" title="American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac" label="American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="10211" end="10218" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503510" start="10564" end="10571" title="appulse" label="appulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="10658" end="10669" title="occultation" label="occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q364882" start="10894" end="10927" title="Meridian circle" label="transit circle or meridian circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="11020" end="11034" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="11086" end="11098" title="Marine chronometer" label="chronometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219919" start="11251" end="11266" title="local mean time" label="local mean time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805271" start="11695" end="11713" title="Time and frequency transfer" label="synchronizing time"/>
<link wikidata="Q185876" start="11751" end="11785" title="time ball" label="signaling by &amp;quot;ball drop&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="12082" end="12091" title="Telegraph" label="Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441787" start="12165" end="12182" title="Sears Cook Walker" label="Sears Cook Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q103439667" start="12188" end="12214" title="United States Coast Survey" label="United States Coast Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="12449" end="12478" title="transatlantic telegraph cable" label="transatlantic telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q243289" start="12547" end="12567" title="Magnetic declination" label="Magnetic declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q339264" start="12612" end="12622" title="true north" label="true north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413038" start="12996" end="13012" title="Radio navigation" label="Radio navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="13014" end="13034" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="13040" end="13066" title="Inertial navigation system" label="Inertial navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="13080" end="13100" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="13177" end="13196" title="angle" label="angular measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="13212" end="13226" title="Prime Meridian" label="Prime Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="13439" end="13446" title="minute of arc" label="minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="13481" end="13488" title="arcsecond" label="seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q114799" start="13523" end="13534" title="sexagesimal" label="sexagesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="13631" end="13647" title="decimal fraction" label="decimal fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="13905" end="13911" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="13989" end="13991" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="14102" end="14120" title="western hemisphere" label="western hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084724" start="14161" end="14169" title="ISO 6709" label="ISO 6709"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="14227" end="14254" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="14364" end="14383" title="northern hemisphere" label="northern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14535" end="14548" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327135" start="14554" end="14588" title="Earth System Research Laboratories" label="Earth System Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="14732" end="14750" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q863349" start="14820" end="14828" title="mathematical singularity" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="14836" end="14841" title="Geographical pole" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q541961" start="14959" end="14972" title="Discontinuity (mathematics)" label="discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q838283" start="14981" end="14994" title="180th meridian" label="180° meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903587" start="15264" end="15298" title="horizontal position representation" label="horizontal position representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="15533" end="15539" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="15619" end="15628" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="15877" end="15907" title="Parametric latitude" label="parametric or reduced latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="16162" end="16192" title="length of a degree of latitude" label="length of a degree of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="16263" end="16268" title="WGS84" label="WGS84"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="16449" end="16457" title="geodesic" label="geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992215" start="16570" end="16587" title="geographical mile" label="geographical mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="16623" end="16636" title="minute of arc" label="minute of arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759883" start="16999" end="17027" title="American Practical Navigator" label="American Practical Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718" start="17030" end="17048" title="Cardinal direction" label="Cardinal direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q152255" start="17051" end="17065" title="Dead reckoning" label="Dead reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q500348" start="17068" end="17086" title="Ecliptic longitude" label="Ecliptic longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="17089" end="17096" title="Geodesy" label="Geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502887" start="17099" end="17114" title="Geodetic system" label="Geodetic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="17117" end="17145" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="Geographic coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030660" start="17148" end="17169" title="Geographical distance" label="Geographical distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q852595" start="17172" end="17182" title="Geotagging" label="Geotagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q912925" start="17185" end="17206" title="Great-circle distance" label="Great-circle distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8507766" start="17209" end="17229" title="History of longitude" label="History of longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q472031" start="17238" end="17266" title="The Island of the Day Before" label="The Island of the Day Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="17275" end="17283" title="Latitude" label="Latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="17286" end="17298" title="Meridian arc" label="Meridian arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980429" start="17301" end="17318" title="Natural Area Code" label="Natural Area Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="17321" end="17331" title="Navigation" label="Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="17334" end="17353" title="Orders of magnitude (length)" label="Orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17356" end="17393" title="Planetary coordinate system#Longitude" label="Planetary coordinate system#Longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="17396" end="17411" title="Right ascension" label="Right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="17415" end="17431" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="17434" end="17455" title="World Geodetic System" label="World Geodetic System"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17618" wikidata="Q34253" url="?curid=17618" title="Linus Torvalds">
<text>Linus Benedict Torvalds ( , ; born 28 December 1969) is a Finnish software engineer who is the creator and lead developer of the Linux kernel. He also created the distributed version control system Git.

He was honored, along with Shinya Yamanaka, with the 2012 Millennium Technology Prize by the Technology Academy Finland &quot;in recognition of his creation of a new open source operating system for computers leading to the widely used Linux kernel&quot;. He is also the recipient of the 2014 IEEE Computer Society Computer Pioneer Award and the 2018 IEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award.

== Life and career ==
=== Early years ===
Torvalds was born in Helsinki, Finland, on 28 December 1969, the son of journalists Anna and Nils Torvalds, the grandson of statistician Leo Törnqvist and of poet Ole Torvalds, and the great-grandson of journalist and soldier Toivo Karanko. His parents were campus radicals at the University of Helsinki in the 1960s. His family belongs to the Swedish-speaking minority in Finland. He was named after Linus Pauling, the Nobel Prize–winning American chemist, although in the book &quot;Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution&quot;, he is quoted as saying, &quot;I think I was named equally for Linus the Peanuts cartoon character&quot;, noting that this made him &quot;half Nobel Prize–winning chemist and half blanket-carrying cartoon character&quot;.

His interest in computers began with a VIC-20 at the age of 11 in 1981. He started programming for it in BASIC, then later by directly accessing the 6502 CPU in machine code (he did not utilize assembly language). He then purchased a Sinclair QL, which he modified extensively, especially its operating system. &quot;Because it was so hard to get software for it in Finland&quot;, he wrote his own assembler and editor &quot;(in addition to Pac-Man graphics libraries)&quot; for the QL, and a few games. He wrote a &quot;Pac-Man&quot; clone, &quot;Cool Man&quot;. 

Torvalds attended the University of Helsinki from 1988 to 1996, graduating with a master&#x27;s degree in computer science from the NODES research group. His textbooks while there included &quot;Programming the 80386&quot; by John H. Crawford and Patrick P. Gelsinger (SYBEX, 1987, ), and &quot;The Design of the UNIX Operating System&quot; by Maurice J. Bach (Prentice-Hall, 1986, ).

He bought computer science professor Andrew Tanenbaum&#x27;s book &quot;Operating Systems: Design and Implementation&quot;, in which Tanenbaum describes MINIX, an educational stripped-down version of Unix. In 1990, Torvalds resumed his university studies, and was exposed to Unix for the first time in the form of a DEC MicroVAX running ULTRIX. His MSc thesis was titled &quot;Linux: A Portable Operating System&quot;.

On 5 January 1991 he purchased an Intel 80386-based IBM PC clone before receiving his MINIX copy, which in turn enabled him to begin work on Linux.

His academic career was interrupted after his first year of study when he joined the Finnish Navy Nyland Brigade in the summer of 1989, selecting the 11-month officer training program to fulfill the mandatory military service of Finland. He gained the rank of second lieutenant, with the role of an artillery observer. 

=== Linux ===

The first Linux prototypes were publicly released on the Internet in late 1991 from an FTP server at his university. Version 1.0 was released on 14 March 1994.

Torvalds first encountered the GNU Project in the autumn of 1991 when another Swedish-speaking computer science student, Lars Wirzenius, took him to the University of Technology to listen to free software guru Richard Stallman&#x27;s speech. Because of the talk and pressure from other contributors, Torvalds would ultimately switch his original license (which forbade commercial use) to Stallman&#x27;s GNU General Public License version 2 (GPLv2) for his Linux kernel.

After a visit to Transmeta in late 1996, Torvalds accepted a position at the company in California, where he worked from February 1997 to June 2003. He then moved to the Open Source Development Labs, which has since merged with the Free Standards Group to become the Linux Foundation, under whose auspices he continues to work. In June 2004, Torvalds and his family moved to Dunthorpe, Oregon to be closer to the OSDL&#x27;s headquarters in Beaverton.

From 1997 to 1999, he was involved in 86open, helping select the standard binary format for Linux and Unix. In 1999, he was named by the &quot;MIT Technology Review&quot; TR100 as one of the world&#x27;s top 100 innovators under age 35.

In 1999, Red Hat and VA Linux, both leading developers of Linux-based software, presented Torvalds with stock options in gratitude for his creation. That year both companies went public and Torvalds&#x27;s share value briefly shot up to about US$20 million.

His personal mascot is a penguin nicknamed Tux, which has been widely adopted by the Linux community as the Linux kernel&#x27;s mascot.

Although Torvalds believes &quot;open source is the only right way to do software&quot;, he also has said that he uses the &quot;best tool for the job&quot;, even if that includes proprietary software. He was criticized for his use and alleged advocacy of the proprietary BitKeeper software for version control in the Linux kernel. He subsequently wrote a free-software replacement for it called Git.

In 2008, Torvalds stated that he used the Fedora Linux distribution because it had fairly good support for the PowerPC processor architecture, which he favored at the time. He confirmed this in a 2012 interview. Torvalds abandoned GNOME for a while after the release of GNOME 3.0, saying, &quot;The developers have apparently decided that it&#x27;s &#x27;too complicated&#x27; to actually do real work on your desktop, and have decided to make it really annoying to do&quot;. He then switched to Xfce. In 2013, Torvalds resumed using GNOME, noting that &quot;they have extensions now that are still much too hard to find; but with extensions you can make your desktop look almost as good as it used to look two years ago&quot;.

The Linux Foundation currently sponsors Torvalds so he can work full-time on improving Linux.

In 2012, while giving a talk at Aalto University, Torvalds said &quot;fuck you&quot; after critiquing the company Nvidia, which specializes in GPU technology. He said Nvidia was, at the time, the single worst company he has dealt with in the development of the kernel. In the talk, he also discussed other elements of computing.

Torvalds is known for vocally disagreeing with other developers on the Linux kernel mailing list. Calling himself a &quot;really unpleasant person&quot;, he explained, &quot;I&#x27;d like to be a nice person and curse less and encourage people to grow rather than telling them they are idiots. I&#x27;m sorry—I tried, it&#x27;s just not in me.&quot; His attitude, which he considers necessary for making his points clear, has drawn criticism from Intel programmer Sage Sharp and systemd developer Lennart Poettering, among others.

On Sunday, 16 September 2018, the Linux kernel &quot;Code of Conflict&quot; was suddenly replaced by a new &quot;Code of Conduct&quot; based on the Contributor Covenant. Shortly thereafter, in the release notes for Linux 4.19-rc4, Torvalds apologized for his behavior, calling his personal attacks of the past &quot;unprofessional and uncalled for&quot; and announced a period of &quot;time off&quot; to &quot;get some assistance on how to understand people&#x27;s emotions and respond appropriately&quot;. It soon transpired that these events followed &quot;The New Yorker&quot; approaching Torvalds with a series of questions critical of his conduct. Following the release of Linux 4.19 on 22 October 2018, Torvalds returned to maintaining the kernel.

In 2024, Russian developers were excluded from the list of Linux kernel maintainers. Torvalds commented: &quot;I&#x27;m Finnish. Did you think I&#x27;d be supporting Russian aggression?&quot;

==== The Linus/Linux connection ====
Initially, Torvalds wanted to call the kernel he developed &quot;Freax&quot; (a combination of &quot;free&quot;, &quot;freak&quot;, and the letter X to indicate that it was a Unix-like system), but his friend Ari Lemmke, who administered the FTP server where the kernel was first hosted, named Torvalds&#x27; directory &quot;linux&quot;.

== Authority and trademark ==
As of 2006, approximately 2% of the Linux kernel was written by Torvalds. Despite the thousands who have contributed to it, his percentage is still one of the largest. However, he said in 2012 that his own personal contribution is now mostly merging code written by others, with little programming. He retains the highest authority to decide which new code is incorporated into the standard Linux kernel.

Torvalds holds the &quot;Linux&quot; trademark and monitors its use, chiefly through the Linux Mark Institute.

==Other software==

;Git

On 3 April 2005, Torvalds began development on Git, version control software that later became widely used. On 26 July 2005, he handed over Git&#x27;s maintenance to Junio Hamano, a major project contributor.
;Subsurface
Subsurface is software for logging and planning scuba dives, which Torvalds began developing in late 2011. It is free and open-source software distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2. Dirk Hohndel became its head maintainer in late 2012.

== Personal life ==
Linus Torvalds is married to Tove Torvalds (née Monni), a six-time Finnish national karate champion, whom he met in late 1993. He was running introductory computer laboratory exercises for students and instructed the course attendees to send him an e-mail as a test, to which Tove responded with an e-mail asking for a date. They were later married and have three daughters, two of whom were born in the United States. The Linux kernel&#x27;s &quot;reboot&quot; system call accepts their dates of birth (written in hexadecimal) as magic values.

Torvalds has described himself as &quot;completely a-religious—atheist&quot;, adding, &quot;I find that people seem to think religion brings morals and appreciation of nature. I actually think it detracts from both. It gives people the excuse to say, &#x27;Oh, nature was just created,&#x27; and so the act of creation is seen to be something miraculous. I appreciate the fact that, &#x27;Wow, it&#x27;s incredible that something like this could have happened in the first place. He later added that while in Europe religion is mostly a personal issue, in the United States it has become very politicized. When discussing the issue of church and state separation, he said, &quot;Yeah, it&#x27;s kind of ironic that in many European countries, there is actually a kind of legal binding between the state and the state religion.&quot; In &quot;Linus the Liberator&quot;, a story about the March LinuxWorld Conference, Torvalds says: &quot;There are like two golden rules in life. One is &#x27;Do unto others as you would want them to do unto you.&#x27; For some reason, people associate this with Christianity. I&#x27;m not a Christian. I&#x27;m agnostic. The other rule is &#x27;Be proud of what you do.

In 2004, Torvalds moved with his family from Silicon Valley to Portland, Oregon.

In 2010, Torvalds became a United States citizen and registered to vote in the United States. As of that year, he was unaffiliated with any U.S. political party, saying, &quot;I have way too much personal pride to want to be associated with any of them, quite frankly.&quot;

Linus developed an interest in scuba diving in the early 2000s and has achieved numerous certifications, leading him to create the Subsurface project.

== Awards and achievements ==

== Media recognition ==
&quot;Time&quot; magazine has recognized Torvalds multiple times:
* In 2000, he was 17th in their Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century poll.
* In 2004, he was named one of the most influential people in the world by &quot;Time&quot; magazine.
* In 2006, the magazine&#x27;s Europe edition named him one of the revolutionary heroes of the past 60 years.

&quot;InfoWorld&quot; presented him with the 2000 Award for Industry Achievement. In 2005, Torvalds appeared as one of &quot;the best managers&quot; in a survey by &quot;BusinessWeek&quot;. In 2006, &quot;Business 2.0&quot; magazine named him one of &quot;10 people who don&#x27;t matter&quot; because the growth of Linux has shrunk Torvalds&#x27;s individual impact.

In summer 2004, viewers of YLE (the Finnish Broadcasting Company) placed Torvalds 16th in the network&#x27;s 100 Greatest Finns. In 2010, as part of a series called &quot;The Britannica Guide to the World&#x27;s Most Influential People&quot;, Torvalds was listed among &quot;The 100 Most Influential Inventors of All Time&quot; ().

On 11 October 2017, the Linux company SUSE made a song titled &quot;Linus Said&quot;.

== Bibliography ==
* 
* Moody, Glyn: Rebel Code. Engl. the beginning of work: Rebel Code. Eng. Riikka Toivanen and Heikki Karjalainen. In January 2001. .
* Nikkanen, Tuula: The Linux story. Satku, 2000. .

== See also ==
* Linus&#x27;s law
* Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate
* List of pioneers in computer science

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* Linus&#x27; blog at Blogger (last post in 2011)
* Linus Torvalds and His Five Entrepreneurial Lessons at AllBusiness.com
* NPR Fresh Air episode
* Ten years of NODES
* Linus Torvalds: Linux succeeded thanks to selfishness and trust
* No highs, no lows: Linus Torvalds on 25 years of Linux</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="0" end="23" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Benedict Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="129" end="141" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186723" start="163" end="190" title="distributed version control" label="distributed version control"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="198" end="201" title="Git" label="Git"/>
<link wikidata="Q80917" start="231" end="246" title="Shinya Yamanaka" label="Shinya Yamanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853663" start="262" end="289" title="Millennium Technology Prize" label="Millennium Technology Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354206" start="297" end="323" title="Technology Academy Finland" label="Technology Academy Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="370" end="381" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="382" end="398" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="403" end="411" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="446" end="452" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363133" start="497" end="541" title="Computer Pioneer Award" label="IEEE Computer Society Computer Pioneer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q933972" start="555" end="599" title="IEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award" label="IEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="665" end="673" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q949046" start="737" end="750" title="Nils Torvalds" label="Nils Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524295" start="781" end="794" title="Leo Törnqvist" label="Leo Törnqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367643" start="807" end="819" title="Ole Torvalds" label="Ole Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q17381434" start="870" end="883" title="Toivo Karanko" label="Toivo Karanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="925" end="947" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="988" end="1013" title="Swedish-speaking Finns" label="Swedish-speaking minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="1045" end="1058" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866746" start="1129" end="1139" title="Rebel Code" label="Rebel Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351248" start="1247" end="1252" title="Linus van Pelt" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="1257" end="1264" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="1446" end="1452" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="1512" end="1517" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="1556" end="1560" title="6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="1568" end="1580" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="1601" end="1618" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q602253" start="1641" end="1652" title="Sinclair QL" label="Sinclair QL"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="1819" end="1825" title="text editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="1848" end="1855" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="1928" end="1935" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="1995" end="2017" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="2079" end="2095" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="2131" end="2139" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181290" start="2199" end="2215" title="John H. Crawford" label="John H. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143480" start="2220" end="2240" title="Pat Gelsinger" label="Patrick P. Gelsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="2242" end="2247" title="SYBEX" label="SYBEX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2268" end="2307" title="The Design of the UNIX Operating System" label="The Design of the UNIX Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="2334" end="2347" title="Prentice-Hall" label="Prentice-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q92621" start="2396" end="2412" title="Andrew Tanenbaum" label="Andrew Tanenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2431" end="2475" title="Operating Systems: Design and Implementation" label="Operating Systems: Design and Implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="2512" end="2517" title="MINIX" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="2559" end="2563" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="2675" end="2678" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586528" start="2679" end="2687" title="MicroVAX" label="MicroVAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="2696" end="2702" title="ULTRIX" label="ULTRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2736" end="2741" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="2813" end="2824" title="Intel 80386" label="Intel 80386"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="2831" end="2843" title="IBM PC clone" label="IBM PC clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="2865" end="2870" title="MINIX" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071948" start="3013" end="3025" title="Finnish Navy" label="Finnish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268054" start="3026" end="3040" title="Nyland Brigade" label="Nyland Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162764" start="3127" end="3164" title="Conscription in Finland" label="mandatory military service of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="3188" end="3205" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q97210751" start="3227" end="3245" title="artillery observer" label="artillery observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="3351" end="3354" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598" start="3456" end="3467" title="GNU Project" label="GNU Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="3635" end="3651" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="3829" end="3855" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="3882" end="3894" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q836542" start="3914" end="3923" title="Transmeta" label="Transmeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353202" start="4067" end="4095" title="Open Source Development Labs" label="Open Source Development Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235277" start="4129" end="4149" title="Free Standards Group" label="Free Standards Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q858851" start="4164" end="4180" title="Linux Foundation" label="Linux Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459651" start="4272" end="4289" title="Dunthorpe, Oregon" label="Dunthorpe, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81856" start="4338" end="4347" title="Beaverton, Oregon" label="Beaverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343830" start="4388" end="4394" title="86open" label="86open"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="4442" end="4447" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="4452" end="4456" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q796078" start="4493" end="4514" title="MIT Technology Review" label="MIT Technology Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671220" start="4521" end="4526" title="TR100" label="TR100"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="4597" end="4604" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397449" start="4609" end="4617" title="VA Linux" label="VA Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q187860" start="4692" end="4704" title="stock option" label="stock option"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="4762" end="4773" title="went public" label="went public"/>
<link wikidata="Q131200" start="4890" end="4893" title="Tux (mascot)" label="Tux"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="5017" end="5028" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="5164" end="5184" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary software"/>
<link wikidata="Q878697" start="5256" end="5265" title="BitKeeper" label="BitKeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="5380" end="5383" title="Git" label="Git"/>
<link wikidata="Q48267" start="5428" end="5440" title="Fedora Linux" label="Fedora Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="5497" end="5504" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85865373" start="5656" end="5665" title="GNOME 3.0" label="GNOME 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q170821" start="5882" end="5886" title="Xfce" label="Xfce"/>
<link wikidata="Q858851" start="6119" end="6135" title="Linux Foundation" label="Linux Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q300980" start="6242" end="6258" title="Aalto University" label="Aalto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="6324" end="6330" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555099" start="6611" end="6636" title="Linux kernel mailing list" label="Linux kernel mailing list"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="6987" end="6992" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211963" start="7004" end="7014" title="Sage Sharp" label="Sage Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q286124" start="7019" end="7026" title="systemd" label="systemd"/>
<link wikidata="Q72007" start="7037" end="7055" title="Lennart Poettering" label="Lennart Poettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q57892570" start="7220" end="7240" title="Contributor Covenant" label="Contributor Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="7631" end="7645" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517650" start="8266" end="8276" title="Ari Lemmke" label="Ari Lemmke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="8299" end="8302" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="8303" end="8309" title="server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827115" start="8921" end="8941" title="Linux Mark Institute" label="Linux Mark Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="9022" end="9046" title="version control software" label="version control software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="9239" end="9250" title="Scuba diving" label="scuba dives"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="9304" end="9333" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="9369" end="9395" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="9566" end="9572" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284099" start="10013" end="10025" title="Magic number (programming)" label="magic values"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="10079" end="10090" title="irreligion" label="a-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="10091" end="10098" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="10663" end="10690" title="separation of church and state" label="church and state separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="10839" end="10853" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100124" start="10921" end="10931" title="LinuxWorld Conference and Expo" label="LinuxWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="11277" end="11291" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="11295" end="11311" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11367" end="11406" title="Voter registration#United States" label="registered to vote in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="11621" end="11633" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="11797" end="11822" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11895" end="11945" title="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century" label="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474544" start="12171" end="12180" title="InfoWorld" label="InfoWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="12335" end="12347" title="BusinessWeek" label="BusinessWeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001668" start="12370" end="12382" title="Business 2.0" label="Business 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q54718" start="12561" end="12564" title="YLE" label="YLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q434667" start="12643" end="12661" title="Suuret Suomalaiset" label="100 Greatest Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743906" start="12705" end="12725" title="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc." label="The Britannica Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594782" start="12905" end="12909" title="SUSE S.A." label="SUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q189286" start="13177" end="13193" title="Linus&amp;#x27;s law" label="Linus&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576065" start="13196" end="13221" title="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate" label="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82529" start="13224" end="13260" title="List of pioneers in computer science" label="List of pioneers in computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q171186" start="13345" end="13352" title="Blogger (service)" label="Blogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728468" start="13430" end="13445" title="AllBusiness.com" label="AllBusiness.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17626" wikidata="Q178790" url="?curid=17626" title="Trade union">
<text>A trade union (British English) or labor union (American English), often simply referred to as a union, is an organization of workers whose purpose is to maintain or improve the conditions of their employment, such as attaining better wages and benefits, improving working conditions, improving safety standards, establishing complaint procedures, developing rules governing status of employees (rules governing promotions, just-cause conditions for termination) and protecting and increasing the bargaining power of workers.

Trade unions typically fund their head office and legal team functions through regularly imposed fees called &quot;union dues&quot;. The union representatives in the workforce are usually made up of workplace volunteers who are often appointed by members through internal democratic elections. The trade union, through an elected leadership and bargaining committee, bargains with the employer on behalf of its members, known as the rank and file, and negotiates labour contracts (collective bargaining agreements) with employers.

Unions may organize a particular section of skilled or unskilled workers (craft unionism), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism), or an attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism). The agreements negotiated by a union are binding on the rank-and-file members and the employer, and in some cases on other non-member workers. Trade unions traditionally have a constitution which details the governance of their bargaining unit and also have governance at various levels of government depending on the industry that binds them legally to their negotiations and functioning.

Originating in the United Kingdom, trade unions became popular in many countries during the Industrial Revolution. Trade unions may be composed of individual workers, professionals, past workers, students, apprentices or the unemployed. Trade union density, or the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union, is highest in the Nordic countries.

== Definition ==

Since the publication of the &quot;History of Trade Unionism&quot; (1894) by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, the predominant historical view is that a trade union &quot;is a continuous association of wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment&quot;. Karl Marx described trade unions thus: &quot;The value of labour-power constitutes the conscious and explicit foundation of the trade unions, whose importance for the ... working class can scarcely be overestimated. The trade unions aim at nothing less than to prevent the reduction of wages below the level that is traditionally maintained in the various branches of industry. That is to say, they wish to prevent the price of labour-power from falling below its value&quot; (&quot;Capital&quot; V1, 1867, p. 1069). Early socialists also saw trade unions as a way to democratize the workplace, in order to obtain political power.

A modern definition by the Australian Bureau of Statistics states that a trade union is &quot;an organisation consisting predominantly of employees, the principal activities of which include the negotiation of rates of pay and conditions of employment for its members&quot;.

Recent historical research by Bob James puts forward the view that trade unions are part of a broader movement of benefit societies, which includes medieval guilds, Freemasons, Oddfellows, friendly societies, and other fraternal organizations.

==History==
=== Trade guilds ===
Following the unification of the city-states in Assyria and Sumer by Sargon of Akkad into a single empire , a common Mesopotamian standard for length, area, volume, weight, and time used by artisan guilds in each city was promulgated by Naram-Sin of Akkad (–2218 BC), Sargon&#x27;s grandson, including for shekels. &quot;Codex Hammurabi&quot; Law 234 () stipulated a 2-shekel prevailing wage for each 60-gur (300-bushel) vessel constructed in an employment contract between a shipbuilder and a ship-owner. Law 275 stipulated a ferry rate of 3-gerah per day on a charterparty between a ship charterer and a shipmaster. Law 276 stipulated a 2-gerah per day freight rate on a contract of affreightment between a charterer and shipmaster, while Law 277 stipulated a -shekel per day freight rate for a 60-gur vessel. In 1816, an archaeological excavation in Minya, Egypt (under an Eyalet of the Ottoman Empire) produced a Nerva–Antonine dynasty-era tablet from the ruins of the Temple of Antinous in Antinoöpolis, that prescribed the rules and membership dues of a burial society &quot;collegium&quot; established in Lanuvium, in approximately 133 AD during the reign of Hadrian (117–138) of the Roman Empire.

A &quot;collegium&quot; was any association in ancient Rome that acted as a legal entity. Following the passage of the &quot;Lex Julia&quot; during the reign of Julius Caesar (49–44 BC), and their reaffirmation during the reign of Caesar Augustus (27 BC–14 AD), &quot;collegia&quot; required the approval of the Roman Senate or the Roman emperor in order to be authorized as legal bodies. Ruins at Lambaesis date the formation of burial societies among Roman Army soldiers and Roman Navy mariners to the reign of Septimius Severus (193–211) in 198 AD. In September 2011, archaeological investigations done at the site of the artificial harbor Portus in Rome revealed inscriptions in a shipyard constructed during the reign of Trajan (98–117) indicating the existence of a shipbuilders guild. Rome&#x27;s La Ostia port was home to a guildhall for a &quot;corpus naviculariorum&quot;, a &quot;collegium&quot; of merchant mariners. &quot;Collegium&quot; also included fraternities of Roman priests overseeing ritual sacrifices, practising augury, keeping scriptures, arranging festivals, and maintaining specific religious cults.

=== Modern trade unions ===
While a commonly held mistaken view holds modern trade unionism to be a product of Marxism, the earliest modern trade unions predate Marx&#x27;s &quot;Communist Manifesto&quot; (1848) by almost a century (and Marx&#x27;s writings themselves frequently address the prior existence of the workers&#x27; movements of his time.) The first recorded labour strike in the United States was by Philadelphia printers in 1786, who opposed a wage reduction and demanded $6 per week in wages. The origins of modern trade unions can be traced back to 18th-century Britain, where the Industrial Revolution drew masses of people, including dependents, peasants and immigrants, into cities. Britain had ended the practice of serfdom in 1574, but the vast majority of people remained as tenant-farmers on estates owned by the landed aristocracy. This transition was not merely one of relocation from rural to urban environs; rather, the nature of industrial work created a new class of &quot;worker&quot;. A farmer worked the land, raised animals and grew crops, and either owned the land or paid rent, but ultimately sold a &quot;product&quot; and had control over his life and work. As industrial workers, however, the workers sold their work as labour and took directions from employers, giving up part of their freedom and self-agency in the service of a master. The critics of the new arrangement would call this &quot;wage slavery&quot;, but the term that persisted was a new form of human relations: employment. Unlike farmers, workers often had less control over their jobs; without job security or a promise of an on-going relationship with their employers, they lacked some control over the work they performed or how it impacted their health and life. It is in this context that modern trade unions emerge.

In the cities, trade unions encountered much hostility from employers and government groups. In the United States, unions and unionists were regularly prosecuted under various restraint of trade and conspiracy laws, such as the Sherman Antitrust Act. This pool of unskilled and semi-skilled labour spontaneously organized in fits and starts throughout its beginnings, and would later be an important arena for the development of trade unions. Trade unions have sometimes been seen as successors to the guilds of medieval Europe, though the relationship between the two is disputed, as the masters of the guilds employed workers (apprentices and journeymen) who were not allowed to organize.

Trade unions and collective bargaining were outlawed from no later than the middle of the 14th century, when the Ordinance of Labourers was enacted in the Kingdom of England, but their way of thinking was the one that endured down the centuries, inspiring evolutions and advances in thinking which eventually gave workers more power. As collective bargaining and early worker unions grew with the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the government began to clamp down on what it saw as the danger of popular unrest at the time of the Napoleonic Wars. In 1799, the &quot;Combination Act&quot; was passed, which banned trade unions and collective bargaining by British workers. Although the unions were subject to often severe repression until 1824, they were already widespread in cities such as London. Workplace militancy had also manifested itself as Luddism and had been prominent in struggles such as the 1820 Rising in Scotland, in which 60,000 workers went on a general strike, which was soon crushed. Sympathy for the plight of the workers brought repeal of the acts in 1824, although the Combination Act 1825 restricted their activity to bargaining for wage increases and changes in working hours.

By the 1810s, the first labour organizations to bring together workers of divergent occupations were formed. Possibly the first such union was the General Union of Trades, also known as the Philanthropic Society, founded in 1818 in Manchester. The latter name was to hide the organization&#x27;s real purpose in a time when trade unions were still illegal.

===National general unions===

The first attempts at forming a national general union in the United Kingdom were made in the 1820s and 30s. The National Association for the Protection of Labour was established in 1830 by John Doherty, after an apparently unsuccessful attempt to create a similar national presence with the National Union of Cotton-spinners. The Association quickly enrolled approximately 150 unions, consisting mostly of textile related unions, but also including mechanics, blacksmiths, and various others. Membership rose to between 10,000 and 20,000 individuals spread across the five counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire within a year. To establish awareness and legitimacy, the union started the weekly &quot;Voice of the People&quot; publication, having the declared intention &quot;to unite the productive classes of the community in one common bond of union.&quot;

In 1834, the Welsh socialist Robert Owen established the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union. The organization attracted a range of socialists from Owenites to revolutionaries and played a part in the protests after the Tolpuddle Martyrs&#x27; case, but soon collapsed.

More permanent trade unions were established from the 1850s, better resourced but often less radical. The London Trades Council was founded in 1860, and the Sheffield Outrages spurred the establishment of the Trades Union Congress in 1868, the first long-lived national trade union center. By this time, the existence and the demands of the trade unions were becoming accepted by liberal middle-class opinion. In &quot;Principles of Political Economy&quot; (1871) John Stuart Mill wrote:

If it were possible for the working classes, by combining among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means. The multitudes who compose the working class are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubtless succeed in diminishing the hours of labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. They would also have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of general wages at the expense of profits.Beyond this claim, Mill also argued that, because individual workers had no basis for assessing the wages for a particular task, labour unions would lead to greater efficiency of the market system.

===Legalization, expansion and recognition===

British trade unions were finally legalized in 1872, after a &quot;Royal Commission on Trade Unions&quot; in 1867 agreed that the establishment of the organizations was to the advantage of both employers and employees.

This period also saw the growth of trade unions in other industrializing countries, especially the United States, Germany and France.

In the United States, the first effective nationwide labour organization was the Knights of Labor, in 1869, which began to grow after 1880. Legalization occurred slowly as a result of a series of court decisions. The Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions began in 1881 as a federation of different unions that did not directly enrol workers. In 1886, it became known as the American Federation of Labor or AFL.

In Germany, the Free Association of German Trade Unions was formed in 1897 after the conservative Anti-Socialist Laws of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck were repealed.

In France, labour organisation was illegal until the 1884 Waldeck Rousseau laws. The Fédération des bourses du travail was founded in 1887 and merged with the Fédération nationale des syndicats (National Federation of Trade Unions) in 1895 to form the General Confederation of Labour.

In a number of countries during the 20th century, including in Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom, legislation was passed to provide for the voluntary or statutory recognition of a union by an employer.

==Prevalence worldwide==

Union density has been steadily declining from the OECD average of 35.9% in 1998 to 27.9% in the year 2018. The main reasons for these developments are a decline in manufacturing, increased globalization, and governmental policies.

The decline in manufacturing is the most direct influence, as unions were historically beneficial and prevalent in the sector; for this reason, there may be an increase in developing nations as OECD nations continue to export manufacturing industries to these markets. The second reason is globalization, which makes it harder for unions to maintain standards across countries. The last reason is governmental policies. These come from both sides of the political spectrum. In the UK and US, it has been mostly right-wing proposals that make it harder for unions to form or that limit their power. On the other side, there are many social policies such as minimum wage, paid vacation, parental leave, etc., that decrease the need to be in a union.

The prevalence of labour unions can be measured by &quot;union density&quot;, which is expressed as a percentage of the total number of workers in a given location who are trade union members. The table below shows the percentage across OECD members.

Source: OECD

==Structure and politics==

Unions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, the UK and the US), or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism, found in Australia, Canada, Germany, Finland, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US). These unions are often divided into &quot;locals&quot;, and united in national federations. These federations themselves will affiliate with Internationals, such as the International Trade Union Confederation. However, in Japan, union organisation is slightly different due to the presence of enterprise unions, i.e. unions that are specific to a plant or company. These enterprise unions, however, join industry-wide federations which in turn are members of Rengo, the Japanese national trade union confederation.

In Western Europe, professional associations often carry out the functions of a trade union. In these cases, they may be negotiating for white-collar or professional workers, such as physicians, engineers or teachers. In Sweden the white-collar unions have a strong position in collective bargaining where they cooperate with blue-colar unions in setting the &quot;mark&quot; (the industry norm) in negotiations with the employers&#x27; association in manufacturing industry.

A union may acquire the status of a &quot;juristic person&quot; (an artificial legal entity), with a mandate to negotiate with employers for the workers it represents. In such cases, unions have certain legal rights, most importantly the right to engage in collective bargaining with the employer (or employers) over wages, working hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. The inability of the parties to reach an agreement may lead to industrial action, culminating in either strike action or management lockout, or binding arbitration. In extreme cases, violent or illegal activities may develop around these events.
In some regions, unions may face active repression, either by governments or by extralegal organizations, with many cases of violence, some having lead to deaths, having been recorded historically.

Unions may also engage in broader political or social struggle. Social Unionism encompasses many unions that use their organizational strength to advocate for social policies and legislation favourable to their members or to workers in general. As well, unions in some countries are closely aligned with political parties. Many Labour parties were founded as the electoral arms of trade unions.

Unions are also delineated by the service model and the organizing model. The service model union focuses more on maintaining worker rights, providing services, and resolving disputes. Alternately, the organizing model typically involves full-time union organizers, who work by building up confidence, strong networks, and leaders within the workforce; and confrontational campaigns involving large numbers of union members. Many unions are a blend of these two philosophies, and the definitions of the models themselves are still debated. Informal workers often face unique challenges when trying to participate in trade union movements as formal trade union organizations recognized by the state and employers may not accommodate for the employment categories common in the informal economy. Simultaneously, the lack of regular work locations and loopholes relating to false self-employment add barriers and costs for the trade unions when trying to organize the informal economy. This has been a significant threshold to labour organizing in low-income countries, where the labour force mostly works in the informal economy.

In the United Kingdom, the perceived left-leaning nature of trade unions (and their historical close alignment with the Labour Party) has resulted in the formation of a reactionary right-wing trade union called Solidarity which is supported by the far-right BNP. In Denmark, there are some newer apolitical &quot;discount&quot; unions who offer a very basic level of services, as opposed to the dominating Danish pattern of extensive services and organizing.

In contrast, in several European countries (e.g. Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland), religious unions have existed for decades. These unions typically distanced themselves from some of the doctrines of orthodox Marxism, such as the preference of atheism and from rhetoric suggesting that employees&#x27; interests always are in conflict with those of employers. Some of these Christian unions have had some ties to centrist or conservative political movements, and some do not regard strikes as acceptable political means for achieving employees&#x27; goals. In Poland, the biggest trade union Solidarity emerged as an anti-communist movement with religious nationalist overtones and today it supports the right-wing Law and Justice party.

Although their political structure and autonomy varies widely, union leaderships are usually formed through democratic elections. Some research, such as that conducted by the Australian Centre for Industrial Relations Research and Training, argues that unionized workers enjoy better conditions and wages than those who are not unionized.

=== International unions ===
The oldest global trade union organizations include the World Federation of Trade Unions created in 1945. The largest trade union federation in the world is the Brussels-based International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), created in 2006, which has approximately 309 affiliated organizations in 156 countries and territories, with a combined membership of 166 million. National and regional trade unions organizing in specific industry sectors or occupational groups also form global union federations, such as UNI Global, IndustriALL, the International Transport Workers Federation, the International Federation of Journalists, the International Arts and Entertainment Alliance and Public Services International.

== Labour law ==

Union law varies from country to country, as does the function of unions. For example, German and Dutch unions have played a greater role in management decisions through participation in supervisory boards and co-determination than other countries. Moreover, in the United States, collective bargaining is most commonly undertaken by unions directly with employers, whereas in Austria, Denmark, Germany or Sweden, unions most often negotiate with employers associations, a form of sectoral bargaining.

Concerning labour market regulation in the EU, Gold (1993) and Hall (1994) have identified three distinct systems of labour market regulation, which also influence the role that unions play:
* &quot;In the Continental European System of labour market regulation, the government plays an important role as there is a strong legislative core of employee rights, which provides the basis for agreements as well as a framework for discord between unions on one side and employers or employers&#x27; associations on the other. This model was said to be found in EU core countries such as Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Italy, and it is also mirrored and emulated to some extent in the institutions of the EU, due to the relative weight that these countries had in the EU until the EU expansion by the inclusion of 10 new Eastern European member states in 2004.
* In the Anglo-Saxon System of labour market regulation, the government&#x27;s legislative role is much more limited, which allows for more issues to be decided between employers and employees and any union or employers&#x27; associations which might represent these parties in the decision-making process. However, in these countries, collective agreements are not widespread; only a few businesses and a few sectors of the economy have a strong tradition of finding collective solutions in labour relations. Ireland and the UK belong to this category, and in contrast to the EU core countries above, these countries first joined the EU in 1973.
* In the Nordic System of labour market regulation, the government&#x27;s legislative role is limited in the same way as in the Anglo-Saxon system. However, in contrast to the countries in the Anglo-Saxon system category, this is a much more widespread network of collective agreements, which covers most industries and most firms. This model was said to encompass Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Here, Denmark joined the EU in 1973, whereas Finland and Sweden joined in 1995.&quot;

The United States takes a more laissez-faire approach, setting some minimum standards but leaving most workers&#x27; wages and benefits to collective bargaining and market forces. Thus, it comes closest to the above Anglo-Saxon model. Also, the Eastern European countries that have recently entered into the EU come closest to the Anglo-Saxon model.

In contrast, in Germany, the relation between individual employees and employers is considered to be asymmetrical. In consequence, many working conditions are not negotiable due to a strong legal protection of individuals. However, the German flavor or works legislation has as its main objective to create a balance of power between employees organized in unions and employers organized in employers&#x27; associations. This allows much wider legal boundaries for collective bargaining, compared to the narrow boundaries for individual negotiations. As a condition to obtain the legal status of a trade union, employee associations need to prove that their leverage is strong enough to serve as a counterforce in negotiations with employers. If such an employee&#x27;s association is competing against another union, its leverage may be questioned by unions and then evaluated in labour court. In Germany, only very few professional associations obtained the right to negotiate salaries and working conditions for their members, notably the medical doctor&#x27;s association and the pilots association . The engineer&#x27;s association Verein Deutscher Ingenieure does not strive to act as a union, as it also represents the interests of engineering businesses.

Beyond the classification listed above, unions&#x27; relations with political parties vary. In many countries unions are tightly bonded, or even share leadership, with a political party intended to represent the interests of the working class. Typically, this is a left-wing, socialist, or social democratic party, but many exceptions exist, including some of the aforementioned Christian unions. In the United States, trade unions are almost always aligned with the Democratic Party with a few exceptions. For example, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters has supported Republican Party candidates on a number of occasions and the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) endorsed Ronald Reagan in 1980. In the United Kingdom trade union movement&#x27;s relationship with the Labour Party frayed as party leadership embarked on privatization plans at odds with what unions see as the worker&#x27;s interests. However, it has strengthened once more after the Labour party&#x27;s election of Ed Miliband, who beat his brother David Miliband to become leader of the party after Ed secured the trade union votes. Additionally, in the past, there was a group known as the Conservative Trade Unionists, or CTU, formed of people who sympathized with right wing Tory policy but were Trade Unionists.

=== Shop types ===
Companies that employ workers with a union generally operate on one of several models:
* A closed shop (US) or a &quot;pre-entry closed shop&quot; (UK) employs only people who are already union members. The compulsory hiring hall is an example of a closed shop—in this case the employer must recruit directly from the union, as well as the employee working strictly for unionized employers.
* A union shop (US) or a &quot;post-entry closed shop&quot; (UK) employs non-union workers as well but sets a time limit within which new employees must join a union.
* An agency shop requires non-union workers to pay a fee to the union for its services in negotiating their contract. This is sometimes called the Rand formula.
* An open shop does not require union membership in employing or keeping workers. Where a union is active, workers who do not contribute to a union may include those who approve of the union contract (free riders) and those who do not. In the United States, state level right-to-work laws mandate the open shop in some states. In Germany only open shops are legal; that is, all discrimination based on union membership is forbidden. This affects the function and services of the union.

An EU case concerning Italy stated that, &quot;The principle of trade union freedom in the Italian system implies recognition of the right of the individual not to belong to any trade union (&quot;negative&quot; freedom of association/trade union freedom), and the unlawfulness of discrimination liable to cause harm to non-unionized employees.&quot;

In the United Kingdom, previous to this EU jurisprudence, a series of laws introduced during the 1980s by Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s government restricted closed and union shops. All agreements requiring a worker to join a union are now illegal. In the United States, the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947 outlawed the closed shop.

In 2006, the European Court of Human Rights found Danish closed-shop agreements to be in breach of Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It was stressed that Denmark and Iceland were among a limited number of contracting states that continue to permit the conclusion of closed-shop agreements.

==Impact==
=== Economics ===

The academic literature shows substantial evidence that trade unions reduce economic inequality. The economist Joseph Stiglitz has asserted that, &quot;Strong unions have helped to reduce inequality, whereas weaker unions have made it easier for CEOs, sometimes working with market forces that they have helped shape, to increase it.&quot; Evidence indicates that those who are &quot;not&quot; members of unions also see higher wages. Researchers suggest that unions set industrial norms as firms try to stop further unionization or losing workers to better-paying competitors. The decline in unionization since the 1960s in the United States has been associated with a pronounced rise in income and wealth inequality and, since 1967, with loss of middle class income. Right-to-work laws have been linked to greater economic inequality in the United States.

The Hoover Institution think tank has asserted that the economic inequality argument made in favor of trade unions &quot;misfires on several fronts. Those high union wages could not survive in the face of foreign competition or new nonunionized firms. The only way a union can provide gains for its members is to extract some fraction of the profits that firms enjoy when they hold monopoly positions.&quot; The think tank has also asserted that the decline of trade unions in the United States &quot;cannot drive widespread inequality for the entire population, which is also affected by a rise in the knowledge economy as well as a general aging of the population.&quot;

Research from Norway has found that high unionization rates lead to substantial increases in firm productivity, as well as increases in workers&#x27; wages. Research from Belgium also found productivity gains, although smaller. However, other research in the United States has found that unions can harm profitability, employment and business growth rates. UK research on employment, wages, productivity, and investment found union density improved all metrics - but only until a limit. Forming U-shaped curves, after an optimal density, more unionisation &quot;worsened&quot; employment, wages, etc. Research from the Anglosphere indicates that unions can provide wage premiums and reduce inequality while reducing employment growth and restricting employment flexibility. Some trade unions oppose approaches which increase productivity, such as automation.

In the United States, the outsourcing of labour to Asia, Latin America, and Africa has been partially driven by increasing costs of union partnership, which gives other countries a comparative advantage in labour, making it more efficient to perform labour-intensive work there. Trade unions have been accused of benefiting insider workers and those with secure jobs at the cost of outsider workers, consumers of the goods or services produced, and the shareholders of the unionized business. Economist Milton Friedman sought to show that unionization produces higher wages (for the union members) at the expense of fewer jobs, and that, if some industries are unionized while others are not, wages will tend to decline in non-unionized industries. Friedrich Hayek criticized unions in chapter 18 of his publication &quot;The Constitution of Liberty&quot;.

Trade unions frequently advocate for seniority-based compensation and against meritocracy.

=== Politics ===
In the United States, the weakening of unions has been linked to more favourable electoral outcomes for the Republican Party. Legislators in areas with high unionization rates are more responsive to the interests of the poor, whereas areas with lower unionization rates are more responsive to the interests of the rich. Higher unionization rates increase the likelihood of parental leave policies being adopted. Republican-controlled states are less likely to adopt more restrictive labour policies when unions are strong in the state.

Research in the United States found that American congressional representatives were more responsive to the interests of the poor in districts with higher unionization rates. Another 2020 American study found an association between US state level adoption of parental leave legislation and trade union strength.

In the United States, unions have been linked to lower racial resentment among whites. Membership in unions increases political knowledge, in particular among those with less formal education.

According to American socialist magazine &quot;Jacobin&quot;, &quot;Labor unions have long occupied a paradoxical position within Marxist theory. They are an essential expression of the working class taking shape as a collective actor and an essential vehicle for working-class action. ... At the same time, unions are an imperfect and incomplete vehicle for the working class to achieve one of Marxist theory&#x27;s central goals: overthrowing capitalism. Unions by their very existence affirm and reinforce capitalist class society. As organizations which primarily negotiate wages, benefits, and working conditions with employers, unions only exist in relation to capitalists.&quot;

Public-sector trade unions have been associated with increased cost of government.

=== Health ===
In the United States, higher union density has been associated with lower suicide/overdose deaths. Decreased unionization rates in the United States have been linked to an increase in occupational fatalities.

== See also ==

* Critique of work
* Digital Product Passport
* Excess profits tax
* Labor federation competition in the United States
* Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act
* Labour inspectorate
* List of trade unions
* Police union
* Profit margin
* Progressive Librarians Guild
* Project Labor Agreement
* Salt (union organizing)
* Union busting
** Strikebreaker
* Workplace politics

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* &quot;St. James Encyclopedia of Labor History Worldwide : Major Events in Labor History and Their Impact&quot; ed by Neil Schlager (2 vol. 2004)
===Britain===

* Aldcroft, D. H. and Oliver, M. J., eds. &quot;Trade Unions and the Economy, 1870–2000.&quot; (2000).
* Campbell, A., Fishman, N., and McIlroy, J. eds. &quot;British Trade Unions and Industrial Politics: The Post-War Compromise 1945–64&quot; (1999).
* 
* 
* 
* Wrigley, Chris, ed. &quot;British Trade Unions, 1945–1995&quot; (Manchester University Press, 1997)
* 
===Europe===

* Berghahn, Volker R., and Detlev Karsten. &quot;Industrial Relations in West Germany&quot; (Bloomsbury Academic, 1988).
* European Commission, Directorate General for Employment, Social Affairs &amp; Inclusion: &quot;Industrial Relations in Europe 2010.&quot;
* Gumbrell-McCormick, Rebecca, and Richard Hyman. &quot;Trade unions in western Europe: Hard times, hard choices&quot; (Oxford UP, 2013).
* Kjellberg, Anders. &quot;The Decline in Swedish Union Density since 2007&quot;, &quot;Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies&quot; (NJWLS) Vol. 1. No 1 (August 2011), pp. 67–93.
* Kjellberg, Anders (2017) &quot;The Membership Development of Swedish Trade Unions and Union Confederations Since the End of the Nineteenth Century&quot; (Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility). Research Reports 2017:2. Lund: Department of Sociology, Lund University.
* Markovits, Andrei. &quot;The Politics of West German Trade Unions: Strategies of Class and Interest Representation in Growth and Crisis&quot; (Routledge, 2016).
* McGaughey, Ewan, &#x27;Democracy or Oligarchy? Models of Union Governance in the UK, Germany and US&#x27; (2017) ssrn.com
* Misner, Paul. &quot;Catholic Labor Movements in Europe. Social Thought and Action, 1914–1965&quot; (2015). online review
* Mommsen, Wolfgang J., and Hans-Gerhard Husung, eds. &quot;The development of trade unionism in Great Britain and Germany, 1880–1914&quot; (Taylor &amp; Francis, 1985).
* Ribeiro, Ana Teresa. &quot;Recent Trends in Collective Bargaining in Europe.&quot; &quot;E-Journal of International and Comparative Labour Studies&quot; 5.1 (2016). online 
* Upchurch, Martin, and Graham Taylor. &quot;The Crisis of Social Democratic Trade Unionism in Western Europe: The Search for Alternatives&quot; (Routledge, 2016).
===United States===

* Arnesen, Eric, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of U.S. Labor and Working-Class History&quot; (2006), 3 vol; 2064pp; 650 articles by experts excerpt and text search
* Beik, Millie, ed. &quot;Labor Relations: Major Issues in American History&quot; (2005) over 100 annotated primary documents excerpt and text search
* Boris, Eileen, and Nelson Lichtenstein, eds. &quot;Major Problems In The History Of American Workers: Documents and Essays&quot; (2002)
* Brody, David. &quot;In Labor&#x27;s Cause: Main Themes on the History of the American Worker&quot; (1993) excerpt and text search
* Guild, C. M. (2021). Union Library Workers Blog: The Years 2019–2020 in Review. &quot;Progressive Librarian&quot;, 48, 110–165.
* Dubofsky, Melvyn, and Foster Rhea Dulles. &quot;Labor in America: A History&quot; (2004), textbook, based on earlier textbooks by Dulles.
* Osnos, Evan, &quot;Ruling-Class Rules: How to thrive in the power elite – while declaring it your enemy&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, 29 January 2024
* Taylor, Paul F. &quot;The ABC-CLIO Companion to the American Labor Movement&quot; (1993) 237pp; short encyclopedia
* Zieger, Robert H., and Gilbert J. Gall, &quot;American Workers, American Unions: The Twentieth Century&quot;(3rd ed. 2002) excerpt and text search
===Other===

* Alexander, Robert Jackson, and Eldon M. Parker. &quot;A history of organized labor in Brazil&quot; (Greenwood, 2003).
* Dean, Adam. 2022. &quot;Opening Up By Cracking Down: Labor Repression and Trade Liberalization in Democratic Developing Countries&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Hodder, A. and L. Kretsos, eds. &quot;Young Workers and Trade Unions: A Global View&quot; (Palgrave-Macmillan, 2015). Review: 
* Kester, Gérard. &quot;Trade unions and workplace democracy in Africa&quot; (Routledge, 2016).
* Lenti, Joseph U. &quot;Redeeming the Revolution: The State and Organized Labor in Post-Tlatelolco Mexico&quot; (University of Nebraska Press, 2017). 
* Levitsky, Steven, and Scott Mainwaring. &quot;Organized labor and democracy in Latin America&quot;. &quot;Comparative Politics&quot; (2006): 21–42, , .
* Lipton, Charles (1967). &quot;The Trade Union Movement of Canada: 1827–1959&quot;. (3rd ed. Toronto, Ont.: New Canada Publications, 1973).
* Orr, Charles A. &quot;Trade Unionism in Colonial Africa&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern African Studies&quot;, 4 (1966), pp. 65–81
* Panitch, Leo &amp; Swartz, Donald (2003). &quot;From consent to coercion: The assault on trade union freedoms&quot; (third edition. Ontario: Garamound Press).
* Taylor, Andrew. &quot;Trade Unions and Politics: A Comparative Introduction&quot; (Macmillan, 1989).
* Visser, Jelle. &quot;Union membership statistics in 24 countries.&quot; &quot;Monthly Labor Review&quot;. 129 (2006): 38+ online
* Visser, Jelle. &quot;ICTWSS: Database on institutional characteristics of trade unions, wage setting, state intervention and social pacts in 34 countries between 1960 and 2007&quot;. Institute for Advanced Labour Studies, AIAS, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam (2011). online
==External links==

* Australian Council of Trade Unions
* LabourStart international trade union news service
* RadioLabour
* New Unionism Network 
* Trade union membership 1993–2003 – European Industrial Relations Observatory report on membership trends in 26 European countries
* Trade union membership 2003–2008 – European Industrial Relations Observatory report on membership trends in 28 European countries
* Trade Union Ancestors – Listing of 5,000 UK trade unions with histories of main organisations, trade union &quot;family trees&quot; and details of union membership and strikes since 1900.
* TUC History online – History of the British union movement
* Short history of the UGT in Catalonia
* Younionize Global Union Directory
* &quot;Retaliation for Union Activity and Collection Action Rights&quot;, Workplace Fairness
* &quot;Labor Notes&quot; magazine
* &quot;A History of Labor Unions from Colonial Times to 2009&quot;, from the Mises Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="2" end="13" title="Trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="15" end="30" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="35" end="46" title="Trade union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="48" end="64" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="97" end="102" title="Trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="198" end="208" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="235" end="239" title="wage" label="wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q678774" start="245" end="253" title="Employee benefits" label="benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q268378" start="265" end="272" title="Work (human activity)" label="working"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625018" start="497" end="513" title="bargaining power" label="bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518641" start="664" end="684" title="union representative" label="union representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="693" end="702" title="workforce" label="workforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q628858" start="726" end="735" title="workplace" label="workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="990" end="1006" title="Labour and employment law" label="labour contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269553" start="1133" end="1147" title="craft unionism" label="craft unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532401" start="1198" end="1211" title="general union" label="general union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317913" start="1285" end="1304" title="industrial unionism" label="industrial unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="1484" end="1496" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1717" end="1731" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1790" end="1811" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="1865" end="1877" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749879" start="1880" end="1892" title="Retiree" label="past workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="1894" end="1902" title="students" label="students"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="1904" end="1914" title="apprentice" label="apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="1923" end="1933" title="unemployed" label="unemployed"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="2031" end="2047" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739811" start="2103" end="2128" title="History of Trade Unionism" label="History of Trade Unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332442" start="2145" end="2151" title="Sidney Webb" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q242666" start="2156" end="2169" title="Beatrice Webb" label="Beatrice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="2361" end="2370" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="2884" end="2894" title="socialists" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="2929" end="2940" title="Democratization" label="democratize"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="3020" end="3051" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445536" start="3383" end="3400" title="benefit society" label="benefit societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="3426" end="3432" title="guilds" label="guilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3434" end="3444" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425508" start="3446" end="3456" title="independent Order of Odd Fellows" label="Oddfellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976354" start="3458" end="3476" title="Friendly Society" label="friendly societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149265" start="3488" end="3511" title="fraternal organisations" label="fraternal organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="3595" end="3602" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="3607" end="3612" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="3616" end="3631" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631579" start="3655" end="3685" title="Ancient Mesopotamian units of measurement" label="a common Mesopotamian standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q297506" start="3784" end="3802" title="Naram-Sin of Akkad" label="Naram-Sin of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404428" start="3853" end="3859" title="shekel" label="shekel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3862" end="3897" title="Code of Hammurabi#Laws" label="&amp;quot;Codex Hammurabi&amp;quot; Law 234"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242338" start="3923" end="3938" title="prevailing wage" label="prevailing wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q216658" start="3960" end="3966" title="bushel" label="bushel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548818" start="4090" end="4095" title="gerah" label="gerah"/>
<link wikidata="Q60966862" start="4109" end="4121" title="charterparty" label="charterparty"/>
<link wikidata="Q353578" start="4132" end="4146" title="Chartering (shipping)" label="ship charterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q927345" start="4202" end="4214" title="freight rate" label="freight rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158907" start="4220" end="4245" title="Affreightment" label="contract of affreightment"/>
<link wikidata="Q310117" start="4400" end="4412" title="Minya, Egypt" label="Minya, Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q491507" start="4423" end="4429" title="Egypt Eyalet" label="Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="4464" end="4486" title="Nerva–Antonine dynasty" label="Nerva–Antonine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4520" end="4538" title="Antinous#Deification and the cult of Antinous" label="Temple of Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q124281" start="4542" end="4554" title="Antinoöpolis" label="Antinoöpolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998806" start="4607" end="4621" title="burial society" label="burial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237621" start="4628" end="4637" title="Collegium (ancient Rome)" label="collegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832670" start="4659" end="4667" title="Lanuvium" label="Lanuvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="4713" end="4720" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="4829" end="4841" title="Legal person" label="legal entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267783" start="4878" end="4887" title="Lex Julia" label="Lex Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="4984" end="4999" title="Augustus" label="Caesar Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="5065" end="5077" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309744" start="5151" end="5160" title="Lambaesis" label="Lambaesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q540867" start="5230" end="5240" title="Roman navy" label="Roman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="5266" end="5283" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037271" start="5396" end="5402" title="Portus" label="Portus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="5479" end="5485" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="5557" end="5570" title="Ostia Antica" label="La Ostia port"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="5734" end="5747" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="5759" end="5775" title="Sacrificium Romanam" label="ritual sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q779777" start="5789" end="5795" title="augury" label="augury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="5992" end="5999" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40591" start="6060" end="6079" title="The Communist Manifesto" label="Communist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6274" end="6287" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6295" end="6307" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="6479" end="6500" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198163" start="6534" end="6544" title="dependant" label="dependents"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="6618" end="6625" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="6679" end="6693" title="Tenant farmer" label="tenant-farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931961" start="6718" end="6736" title="landed aristocracy" label="landed aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650487" start="7316" end="7328" title="wage slavery" label="wage slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="7939" end="7960" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="8213" end="8218" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8223" end="8238" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355455" start="8516" end="8538" title="Ordinance of Labourers" label="Ordinance of Labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="8558" end="8576" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="8937" end="8952" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985061" start="8973" end="8988" title="Combination Act" label="Combination Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9198" end="9204" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159675" start="9256" end="9263" title="Luddism" label="Luddism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799261" start="9312" end="9323" title="1820 Rising" label="1820 Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="9371" end="9385" title="general strike" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827543" start="9499" end="9519" title="Combination Act 1825" label="Combination Act 1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="9842" end="9852" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532401" start="10040" end="10053" title="general union" label="general union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970593" start="10112" end="10161" title="National Association for the Protection of Labour" label="National Association for the Protection of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229648" start="10189" end="10201" title="John Doherty (trade unionist)" label="John Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25141659" start="10406" end="10428" title="Textile and clothing trade unions" label="textile related unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="10585" end="10595" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="10597" end="10605" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="10607" end="10617" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="10619" end="10634" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="10639" end="10653" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q920343" start="10743" end="10762" title="Voice of the People (newspaper)" label="Voice of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q179374" start="10932" end="10943" title="Robert Owen" label="Robert Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594825" start="10960" end="11000" title="Grand National Consolidated Trades Union" label="Grand National Consolidated Trades Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="11040" end="11050" title="socialists" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769933" start="11128" end="11145" title="Tolpuddle Martyrs" label="Tolpuddle Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934093" start="11285" end="11306" title="London Trades Council" label="London Trades Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492717" start="11336" end="11354" title="Sheffield Outrages" label="Sheffield Outrages"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="11388" end="11409" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300373" start="11440" end="11467" title="national trade union center" label="national trade union center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="11559" end="11566" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946782" start="11598" end="11629" title="Principles of Political Economy" label="Principles of Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="11643" end="11659" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12603" end="12610" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834943" start="12670" end="12702" title="Royal Commission on Trade Unions" label="Royal Commission on Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416650" start="13039" end="13055" title="Knights of Labor" label="Knights of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440868" start="13175" end="13222" title="Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions" label="Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="13342" end="13370" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q514098" start="13396" end="13435" title="Free Association of German Trade Unions" label="Free Association of German Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="13465" end="13477" title="conservativism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q693331" start="13478" end="13497" title="Anti-Socialist Laws" label="Anti-Socialist Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="13512" end="13529" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518852" start="13599" end="13625" title="1884 Waldeck Rousseau laws" label="1884 Waldeck Rousseau laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049335" start="13631" end="13664" title="Fédération des bourses du travail" label="Fédération des bourses du travail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125638" start="13798" end="13829" title="General Confederation of Labour (France)" label="General Confederation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134331" start="14076" end="14089" title="Union density" label="Union density"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="14127" end="14131" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="14230" end="14254" title="Deindustrialization" label="decline in manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="14266" end="14279" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="14481" end="14499" title="Developing country" label="developing nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="14965" end="14977" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338673" start="14979" end="14992" title="paid vacation" label="paid vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="15295" end="15299" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="15318" end="15322" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269553" start="15413" end="15427" title="craft unionism" label="craft unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="15452" end="15461" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532401" start="15577" end="15590" title="general union" label="general union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317913" start="15753" end="15772" title="industrial unionism" label="industrial unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11851202" start="15924" end="15930" title="Local union" label="locals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619375" start="15961" end="15972" title="List of federations of trade unions" label="federations"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="16023" end="16036" title="International organization" label="International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="16051" end="16090" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="International Trade Union Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16104" end="16109" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425458" start="16341" end="16346" title="RENGO" label="Rengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="16401" end="16415" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="16417" end="16441" title="professional association" label="professional association"/>
<link wikidata="Q155076" start="16917" end="16932" title="juristic person" label="juristic person"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="17132" end="17153" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221208" start="17224" end="17258" title="employment contract" label="terms and conditions of employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q628191" start="17323" end="17340" title="industrial action" label="industrial action"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="17364" end="17377" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q159377" start="17392" end="17399" title="Lockout (industry)" label="lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774493" start="17622" end="17639" title="Anti-union violence" label="cases of violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508210" start="17769" end="17784" title="Social Movement Unionism" label="Social Unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="18009" end="18026" title="political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576368" start="18033" end="18047" title="List of Labour parties" label="Labour parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455768" start="18135" end="18148" title="service model" label="service model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094501" start="18157" end="18173" title="organizing model" label="organizing model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886765" start="18349" end="18364" title="union organizer" label="union organizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="18641" end="18657" title="Informal economy" label="Informal workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067612" start="18972" end="18993" title="false self-employment" label="false self-employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="19146" end="19166" title="Developing country" label="low-income countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="19350" end="19362" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19441" end="19451" title="Solidarity – The Union for British Workers" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="19488" end="19491" title="British National Party" label="BNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="19761" end="19772" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="19777" end="19788" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="19917" end="19924" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="20268" end="20274" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="20300" end="20310" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="20325" end="20339" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019152" start="20354" end="20375" title="religious nationalism" label="religious nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="20423" end="20438" title="Law and Justice" label="Law and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="20566" end="20574" title="election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="20872" end="20904" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="World Federation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="20977" end="20985" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="20992" end="21031" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="International Trade Union Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570909" start="21295" end="21318" title="global union federation" label="global union federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q676372" start="21329" end="21339" title="UNI Global Union" label="UNI Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027458" start="21341" end="21352" title="IndustriALL Global Union" label="IndustriALL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665560" start="21358" end="21400" title="International Transport Workers Federation" label="International Transport Workers Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26750" start="21406" end="21445" title="International Federation of Journalists" label="International Federation of Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188949" start="21501" end="21530" title="Public Services International" label="Public Services International"/>
<link wikidata="Q759969" start="21738" end="21755" title="supervisory board" label="supervisory board"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000498" start="21761" end="21777" title="co-determination" label="co-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q627272" start="21998" end="22020" title="Employers&amp;#x27; organization" label="employers associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134321" start="22032" end="22051" title="Sectoral collective bargaining" label="sectoral bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="22885" end="22899" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="23435" end="23442" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="24092" end="24105" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q529564" start="25549" end="25576" title="Verein Deutscher Ingenieure" label="Verein Deutscher Ingenieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="25941" end="25950" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="25952" end="25961" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="25966" end="25981" title="social democrat" label="social democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="26143" end="26159" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q655029" start="26200" end="26238" title="International Brotherhood of Teamsters" label="International Brotherhood of Teamsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="26253" end="26269" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774478" start="26314" end="26363" title="Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (1968)" label="Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="26381" end="26394" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="26476" end="26488" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="26528" end="26541" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="26690" end="26701" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q272670" start="26724" end="26738" title="David Miliband" label="David Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127331" start="26867" end="26895" title="Conservative Trade Unionists" label="Conservative Trade Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102436" start="27103" end="27114" title="closed shop" label="closed shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769836" start="27230" end="27241" title="hiring hall" label="hiring hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368004" start="27407" end="27417" title="union shop" label="union shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911320" start="27575" end="27586" title="agency shop" label="agency shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077582" start="27717" end="27729" title="Rand formula" label="Rand formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096412" start="27736" end="27745" title="open shop" label="open shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q499215" start="27932" end="27943" title="free riders" label="free riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333460" start="28001" end="28018" title="right-to-work law" label="right-to-work law"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="28840" end="28856" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="28905" end="28935" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="29009" end="29069" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="29104" end="29111" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="29335" end="29354" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="29370" end="29385" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="29505" end="29508" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q950001" start="29948" end="29954" title="income inequality in the United States" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978032" start="29959" end="29976" title="wealth inequality in the United States" label="wealth inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745499" start="30007" end="30019" title="American middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333460" start="30028" end="30046" title="Right-to-work laws" label="Right-to-work laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="30122" end="30140" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="31411" end="31422" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="31639" end="31649" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215551" start="31833" end="31854" title="comparative advantage" label="comparative advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="32155" end="32170" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="32401" end="32416" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108155" start="32474" end="32501" title="The Constitution of Liberty" label="The Constitution of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421669" start="32547" end="32575" title="Lockstep compensation" label="seniority-based compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="32588" end="32599" title="meritocracy" label="meritocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119666" start="33710" end="33717" title="Jacobin (magazine)" label="Jacobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257291" start="34350" end="34375" title="Public-sector trade union" label="Public-sector trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789468" start="34677" end="34693" title="Critique of work" label="Critique of work"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538259" start="34696" end="34720" title="Digital Product Passport" label="Digital Product Passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419534" start="34723" end="34741" title="Excess profits tax" label="Excess profits tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467212" start="34744" end="34793" title="Labor federation competition in the United States" label="Labor federation competition in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998950" start="34796" end="34841" title="Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act" label="Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137655" start="34844" end="34863" title="Labour inspectorate" label="Labour inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599034" start="34866" end="34886" title="List of trade unions" label="List of trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399674" start="34889" end="34901" title="Police union" label="Police union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187906" start="34904" end="34917" title="Profit margin" label="Profit margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248765" start="34920" end="34948" title="Progressive Librarians Guild" label="Progressive Librarians Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249182" start="34951" end="34974" title="Project Labor Agreement" label="Project Labor Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405802" start="34977" end="35000" title="Salt (union organizing)" label="Salt (union organizing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456341" start="35003" end="35016" title="Union busting" label="Union busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="35020" end="35033" title="Strikebreaker" label="Strikebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918654" start="35036" end="35054" title="Workplace politics" label="Workplace politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415510" start="38338" end="38349" title="Evan Osnos" label="Osnos, Evan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="38455" end="38469" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="41483" end="41498" title="Mises Institute" label="Mises Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17627" wikidata="Q1723907" url="?curid=17627" title="Liberal">
<text>Liberal or liberalism may refer to:
==Politics==
* Generally, a supporter of the political philosophy liberalism. Liberals may be politically left or right but tend to be centrist.
* An adherent of a Liberal Party (See also Liberal parties by country)
* Classical liberalism
* Liberalism (international relations)
* Sexually liberal feminism
* Social liberalism

==Arts, entertainment and media==
* &quot;El Liberal&quot;, a Spanish newspaper published 1879–1936
* &quot;The Liberal&quot;, a British political magazine published 2004–2012
* &quot;Liberalism&quot; (book), a 1927 book by Ludwig von Mises
* &quot;Liberal&quot;, a song by Band-Maid from the 2019 album &quot;Conqueror&quot;

==Places in the United States==
* Liberal, Indiana
* Liberal, Kansas
* Liberal, Missouri
* Liberal, Oregon

==Religion==
* Religious liberalism
* Liberal Christianity
* Liberalism and progressivism within Islam
* Liberal Judaism (disambiguation)

==See also==
* 
* Liberal arts (disambiguation)
* Neoliberalism, a political-economic philosophy
* The Liberal Wars, a civil war in Portugal in the early 19th century</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1723907" start="0" end="7" title="Liberal" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723907" start="11" end="21" title="Liberal" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="102" end="112" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40062" start="200" end="213" title="Liberal Party" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540884" start="224" end="250" title="Liberal parties by country" label="Liberal parties by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="254" end="274" title="Classical liberalism" label="Classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822951" start="277" end="313" title="Liberalism (international relations)" label="Liberalism (international relations)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064997" start="316" end="341" title="Sex-positive feminism" label="Sexually liberal feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="344" end="361" title="Social liberalism" label="Social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327138" start="405" end="415" title="El Liberal" label="El Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405254" start="471" end="482" title="The Liberal" label="The Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540860" start="541" end="570" title="Liberalism (book)" label="&amp;quot;Liberalism&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q71272175" start="673" end="682" title="Conqueror (Band-Maid album)" label="Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197816" start="724" end="740" title="Liberal, Indiana" label="Liberal, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003630" start="743" end="758" title="Liberal, Kansas" label="Liberal, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q963616" start="761" end="778" title="Liberal, Missouri" label="Liberal, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540565" start="781" end="796" title="Liberal, Oregon" label="Liberal, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237985" start="813" end="833" title="Religious liberalism" label="Religious liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="836" end="856" title="Liberal Christianity" label="Liberal Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520581" start="859" end="900" title="Liberalism and progressivism within Islam" label="Liberalism and progressivism within Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q63621718" start="903" end="935" title="Liberal Judaism (disambiguation)" label="Liberal Judaism (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105100492" start="955" end="984" title="Liberal arts (disambiguation)" label="Liberal arts (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="987" end="1000" title="Neoliberalism" label="Neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237867" start="1040" end="1052" title="Liberal Wars" label="Liberal Wars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17628" wikidata="Q193155" url="?curid=17628" title="Louisiana Purchase">
<text>The Louisiana Purchase () was the acquisition of the territory of Louisiana by the United States from the French First Republic in 1803. This consisted of most of the land in the Mississippi River&#x27;s drainage basin west of the river. In return for fifteen million dollars, or approximately eighteen dollars per square mile, the United States nominally acquired a total of now in the Central United States. However, France only controlled a small fraction of this area, most of which was inhabited by Native Americans; effectively, for the majority of the area, the United States bought the preemptive right to obtain Indian lands by treaty or by conquest, to the exclusion of other colonial powers.

The Kingdom of France had controlled the Louisiana territory from 1682 until it was ceded to Spain in 1762. In 1800, Napoleon Bonaparte, the First Consul of the French Republic, regained ownership of Louisiana in exchange for territories in Tuscany as part of a broader effort to re-establish a French colonial empire in North America. However, France&#x27;s failure to suppress a revolt in Saint-Domingue, coupled with the prospect of renewed warfare with the United Kingdom, prompted Napoleon to consider selling Louisiana to the United States. Acquisition of Louisiana was a long-term goal of President Thomas Jefferson, who was especially eager to gain control of the crucial Mississippi River port of New Orleans. Jefferson tasked James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston with purchasing New Orleans. Negotiating with French Treasury Minister François Barbé-Marbois, the U.S. representatives quickly agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana after it was offered. Overcoming the opposition of the Federalist Party, Jefferson and Secretary of State James Madison persuaded Congress to ratify and fund the Louisiana Purchase.

The Louisiana Purchase extended United States sovereignty across the Mississippi River, nearly doubling the nominal size of the country. The purchase included land from fifteen present U.S. states and two Canadian provinces, including the entirety of Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska; large portions of North Dakota and South Dakota; the area of Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado east of the Continental Divide; the portion of Minnesota west of the Mississippi River; the northeastern section of New Mexico; northern portions of Texas; New Orleans and the portions of the present state of Louisiana west of the Mississippi River; and small portions of land within Alberta and Saskatchewan. At the time of the purchase, the territory of Louisiana&#x27;s non-native population was around 60,000 inhabitants, of whom half were enslaved Africans. The western borders of the purchase were later settled by the 1819 Adams–Onís Treaty with Spain, while the northern borders of the purchase were adjusted by the Treaty of 1818 with the British.

==Background==
Throughout the second half of the 18th century, the French colony of Louisiana became a pawn for European political intrigue. The colony was the most substantial presence of France&#x27;s overseas empire, with other possessions consisting of a few small settlements along the Mississippi and other main rivers. France ceded the territory to Spain in 1762 in the secret Treaty of Fontainebleau. Following French defeat in the Seven Years&#x27; War, Spain gained control of the territory west of the Mississippi, and the British received the territory to the east of the river.

Following the establishment of the United States, the Americans controlled the area east of the Mississippi and north of New Orleans. The main issue for the Americans was free transit of the Mississippi out to sea. As the lands were being gradually settled by American migrants, many Americans, including Jefferson, assumed that the territory would be acquired &quot;piece by piece&quot;. The risk of another power taking it from a weakened Spain made a &quot;profound reconsideration&quot; of this policy necessary. New Orleans was already important for shipping agricultural goods to and from the areas of the United States west of the Appalachian Mountains. Pinckney&#x27;s Treaty, signed with Spain on October 27, 1795, gave American merchants &quot;right of deposit&quot; in New Orleans, granting them use of the port to store goods for export. The treaty also recognized American rights to navigate the entire Mississippi, which had become vital to the growing trade of the western territories.

In 1798, Spain revoked the treaty allowing American use of New Orleans, greatly upsetting Americans. In 1801, Spanish Governor Don Juan Manuel de Salcedo took over from the Marquess of Casa Calvo, and restored the American right to deposit goods. However, in 1800, Spain had ceded the Louisiana territory back to France as part of Napoleon&#x27;s secret Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. The subsequent 1801 Treaty of Aranjuez established that Spain&#x27;s cession of Louisiana was a &quot;restoration&quot; of the territory to France, not a retrocession. The territory nominally remained under Spanish control, until a transfer of power to France on November 30, 1803, just three weeks before the formal cession of the territory to the United States on December 20, 1803.

==Negotiation==
While the treaty between Spain and France went largely unnoticed in 1800, fear of an eventual French invasion spread across America when, in 1801, Napoleon sent a military force to nearby Saint-Domingue. Though Jefferson urged moderation, Federalists sought to use this against Jefferson and called for hostilities against France. Undercutting them, Jefferson threatened an alliance with Britain, although relations were uneasy in that direction. In 1801, Jefferson supported France in its plan to take back Saint-Domingue (present-day Haiti), which was then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion. However, there was a growing concern in the U.S. that Napoleon would send troops to New Orleans after quelling the rebellion. In hopes of securing control of the mouth of the Mississippi, Jefferson sent Livingston to Paris in 1801 with the authorization to purchase New Orleans.

In January 1802, France sent General Charles Leclerc, Napoleon&#x27;s brother-in-law, on an expedition to Saint-Domingue to reassert French control over the colony, which had become essentially autonomous under Louverture. Louverture, as a French general, had fended off incursions from other European powers, but had also begun to consolidate power for himself on the island. Before the revolution, France had derived enormous wealth from Saint-Domingue at the cost of the lives and freedom of the enslaved. Napoleon wanted the territory&#x27;s revenues and productivity for France restored. Alarmed over the French actions and its intention to re-establish an empire in North America, Jefferson declared neutrality in relation to the Caribbean, refusing credit and other assistance to the French, but allowing war contraband to get through to the rebels to prevent France from regaining a foothold.

In 1803, Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, a French nobleman, began to help negotiate with France at the request of Jefferson. Du Pont was living in the United States at the time and had close ties to Jefferson as well as the prominent politicians in France. He engaged in back-channel diplomacy with Napoleon on Jefferson&#x27;s behalf during a visit to France and originated the idea of the much larger Louisiana Purchase as a way to defuse potential conflict between the United States and Napoleon over North America.

Throughout this time, Jefferson had up-to-date intelligence on Napoleon&#x27;s military activities and intentions in North America. Part of his evolving strategy involved giving du Pont some information that was withheld from Livingston. Intent on avoiding possible war with France, Jefferson sent James Monroe to Paris in 1803 to negotiate a settlement, with instructions to go to London to negotiate an alliance if the talks in Paris failed. Spain procrastinated until late 1802 in executing the treaty to transfer Louisiana to France, which allowed American hostility to build. Also, Spain&#x27;s refusal to cede Florida to France meant that Louisiana would be indefensible.

Napoleon needed peace with Britain to take possession of Louisiana. Otherwise, Louisiana would be an easy prey for a potential invasion from Britain or the U.S. But in early 1803, continuing war between France and Britain seemed unavoidable. On March 11, 1803, Napoleon began planning an invasion of Great Britain.

In Saint-Domingue, Leclerc&#x27;s forces took Louverture prisoner, but their expedition soon faltered in the face of fierce resistance and disease. By early 1803, Napoleon decided to abandon his plans to rebuild France&#x27;s New World empire. Without sufficient revenues from sugar colonies in the Caribbean, Louisiana had little value to him. Spain had not yet completed the transfer of Louisiana to France, and war between France and the UK was imminent. Out of anger towards Spain and the unique opportunity to sell something that was useless and not truly his yet, Napoleon decided to sell the entire territory.

Although the foreign minister Talleyrand opposed the plan, on April 10, 1803, Napoleon told the Treasury Minister François Barbé-Marbois that he was considering selling the Louisiana Territory to the United States. On April 11, 1803, just days before Monroe&#x27;s arrival, Barbé-Marbois offered Livingston all of Louisiana for $15 million, which averages to less than three cents per acre (7¢/ha). The total of $15 million is equivalent to about $ million in dollars, or cents per acre. The American representatives were prepared to pay up to $10 million for New Orleans and its environs but were dumbfounded when the vastly larger territory was offered for $15 million. Jefferson had authorized Livingston only to purchase New Orleans. However, Livingston was certain that the United States would accept the offer.

The Americans thought that Napoleon might withdraw the offer at any time, preventing the United States from acquiring New Orleans, so they agreed and signed the Louisiana Purchase Treaty on April 30, 1803 (10 Floréal XI in the French Republican calendar) at the Hôtel Tubeuf in Paris. The signers were Robert Livingston, James Monroe, and François Barbé-Marbois. After the signing Livingston famously stated, &quot;We have lived long, but this is the noblest work of our whole lives ... From this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank.&quot; On July 4, 1803, the treaty was announced, but the documents did not arrive in Washington, D.C. until July 14. The Louisiana Territory was vast, stretching from the Gulf of Mexico in the south to Rupert&#x27;s Land in the north, and from the Mississippi River in the east to the Rocky Mountains in the west. Acquiring the territory nearly doubled the size of the United States.

In November 1803, France withdrew its 7,000 surviving troops from Saint-Domingue (more than two-thirds of its troops died there) and gave up its ambitions in the Western Hemisphere. In 1804, Haiti declared its independence; but fearing a slave revolt at home, Jefferson and the rest of Congress refused to recognize the new republic, the second in the Western Hemisphere, and imposed a trade embargo against it. This, together with the successful French demand for an indemnity of 150 million francs in 1825, severely hampered Haiti&#x27;s ability to repair its economy after decades of war.

==Domestic opposition and constitutionality==


After Monroe and Livingston had returned from France with news of the purchase, an official announcement of the purchase was made on July 4, 1803. This gave Jefferson and his cabinet until October, when the treaty had to be ratified, to discuss the constitutionality of the purchase. Jefferson considered a constitutional amendment to justify the purchase; however, his cabinet convinced him otherwise. Jefferson justified the purchase by rationalizing, &quot;it is the case of a guardian, investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory; &amp; saying to him when of age, I did this for your good.&quot; Jefferson ultimately came to the conclusion before the ratification of the treaty that the purchase was to protect the citizens of the United States therefore making it constitutional.

Henry Adams and other historians have argued that Jefferson acted hypocritically with the Louisiana Purchase, because of his position as a strict constructionist regarding the Constitution, by stretching the intent of that document to justify his purchase. The American purchase of the Louisiana territory was not accomplished without domestic opposition. Jefferson&#x27;s philosophical consistency was in question and many people believed he and others, including James Madison, were doing something they surely would have argued against with Alexander Hamilton. The Federalists strongly opposed the purchase, because of the cost involved, their belief that France would not have been able to resist U.S. and British encroachment into Louisiana, and Jefferson&#x27;s perceived hypocrisy.

Both Federalists and Jeffersonians were concerned over the purchase&#x27;s constitutionality. Many members of the House of Representatives opposed the purchase. Majority Leader John Randolph led the opposition. The House called for a vote to deny the request for the purchase, but it failed by two votes, 59–57. The Federalists even tried to prove the land belonged to Spain, not France, but available records proved otherwise. The Federalists also feared that the power of the Atlantic seaboard states would be threatened by the new citizens in the West, whose political and economic priorities were bound to conflict with those of the merchants and bankers of New England. There was also concern that an increase in the number of slave-holding states created out of the new territory would exacerbate divisions between North and South. A group of Northern Federalists led by Senator Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts went so far as to explore the idea of a separate northern confederacy.

The opposition of New England Federalists to the Louisiana Purchase was primarily economic self-interest, not any legitimate concern over constitutionality or whether France indeed owned Louisiana or was required to sell it back to Spain should it desire to dispose of the territory. The Northerners were not enthusiastic about Western farmers gaining another outlet for their crops that did not require the use of New England ports. Also, many Federalists were speculators in lands in upstate New York and New England and were hoping to sell these lands to farmers, who might go west instead if the Louisiana Purchase went through. They also feared that this would lead to Western states being formed, which would likely be Republican, and dilute the political power of New England Federalists.

Another concern was whether it was proper to grant citizenship to the French, Spanish, and free black people living in New Orleans, as the treaty would dictate. Critics in Congress worried whether these &quot;foreigners&quot;, unacquainted with democracy, could or should become citizens.

Spain protested the transfer on two grounds: First, France had previously promised in a note not to alienate Louisiana to a third party and, second, France had not fulfilled the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso by having the King of Etruria recognized by all European powers. The French government replied that these objections were baseless as the promise not to alienate Louisiana was not in the treaty of San Ildefonso itself and therefore had no legal force, and the Spanish government had ordered Louisiana to be transferred in October 1802 despite knowing for months that Britain had not recognized the King of Etruria in the Treaty of Amiens. Madison, in response to Spain&#x27;s objections, noted that the United States had first approached Spain about purchasing the property, but had been told by Spain itself that the U.S. would have to deal with France for the territory.

Henry Adams claimed &quot;The sale of Louisiana to the United States was trebly invalid; if it were French property, Bonaparte could not constitutionally alienate it without the consent of the French Chambers; if it were Spanish property, he could not alienate it at all; if Spain had a right of reclamation, his sale was worthless.&quot; The sale, of course, was not &quot;worthless&quot;—the U.S. actually did take possession. Furthermore, the Spanish prime minister had authorized the U.S. to negotiate with the French government regarding &quot;the acquisition of territories which may suit their interests.&quot; Spain turned the territory over to France in a ceremony in New Orleans on November 30, a month before France turned the city over to American officials.

Other historians counter the above arguments regarding Jefferson&#x27;s alleged hypocrisy by asserting that countries change their borders in two ways: (1) conquest, or (2) an agreement between nations, otherwise known as a treaty. The Louisiana Purchase was the latter, a treaty. Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution specifically grants the president the power to negotiate treaties, which is what Jefferson did.

Madison (the &quot;Father of the Constitution&quot;) assured Jefferson that the Louisiana Purchase was well within even the strictest interpretation of the Constitution. Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin added that because the power to negotiate treaties was specifically granted to the president, the only way extending the country&#x27;s territory by treaty could &quot;not&quot; be a presidential power would be if it were specifically excluded by the Constitution (which it was not). Jefferson, as a strict constructionist, was right to be concerned about staying within the bounds of the Constitution, but felt the power of these arguments and was willing to &quot;acquiesce with satisfaction&quot; if the Congress approved the treaty. The Senate quickly ratified the treaty, and the House, with equal readiness, authorized the required funding. The fledgling United States did not have $15 million in its treasury; instead, it borrowed the sum from British and Dutch banks, at an annual interest rate of six percent. (See below.)

The United States Senate consented to ratification of the treaty with a vote of 24 to seven on October 20. On the following day, October 21, 1803, the Senate authorized Jefferson to take possession of the territory and establish a temporary military government. In legislation enacted on October 31, Congress made temporary provisions for local civil government to continue as it had under French and Spanish rule and authorized the president to use military forces to maintain order. Plans were also set forth for several missions to explore and chart the territory, the most famous being the Lewis and Clark Expedition.

==Formal transfers and initial organization==
France turned over New Orleans, the historic colonial capital, on December 20, 1803, at the Cabildo, with a flag-raising ceremony in the Plaza de Armas, now Jackson Square. Just three weeks earlier, on November 30, 1803, Spanish officials had formally conveyed the colonial lands and their administration to France.

On March 9 and 10, 1804, another ceremony, commemorated as Three Flags Day, was conducted in St. Louis, to transfer ownership of Upper Louisiana from Spain to France, and then from France to the United States. From March 10 to September 30, 1804, Upper Louisiana was supervised as a military district, under its first civil commandant, Amos Stoddard, who was appointed by the War Department.

Effective October 1, 1804, the purchased territory was organized into the Territory of Orleans (most of which would become the state of Louisiana) and the District of Louisiana, which was temporarily under control of the governor and judicial system of the Indiana Territory. The following year, the District of Louisiana was renamed the Territory of Louisiana. New Orleans was the administrative capital of the Orleans Territory, and St. Louis was the capital of the Louisiana Territory.

==Financing==

To pay for the land, the American government used a mix of sovereign bonds and the assumption of French debts. Earlier in 1803, Francis Baring and Company of London had become the U.S. government&#x27;s official banking agent in London following the failure of Bird, Savage &amp; Bird. Because of this favored position, the U.S. asked Barings to handle the transaction. Barings had a close relationship with Hope &amp; Co. of Amsterdam, and the two banking houses worked together to facilitate and underwrite the purchase. Hopes brought to the transaction experience with issuing sovereign bonds and Barings brought its American connections.

Francis Baring son Alexander and Pierre Labouchère from Hopes arrived in Paris in April 1803 to assist with the negotiations. With the bankers&#x27; help, the French and American negotiators settled on a price of 80 million francs ($15 million), down from an initial price of 100 million francs, a sum the Americans could not afford and the financers could not provide. In the final agreement, the value of the U.S. currency was set at francs per U.S. dollar. In dollars, the $15 million purchase price is equivalent to about $ million.

As part of the deal, the U.S. assumed responsibility for up to 20 million francs ($3.75 million) of French debts owed to U.S. citizens. The remaining 60 million francs ($11.25 million) were financed through U.S. government bonds carrying 6% interest, redeemable between 1819 and 1822. In October 1803, the U.S. Treasury had some $5.86 million in specie on hand, $2 million of which would be used to pay a portion of the debts assumed from France as part of the purchase.

Because Napoleon wanted to receive his money as quickly as possible, Barings and Hopes purchased the bonds for 52 million francs, agreeing to an initial 6 million franc payment upon issuance of the bonds followed by 23 monthly payments of 2 million francs each. The first group of bonds were issued on January 16, 1804, but the banks had already provided a 10 million franc advance to France in July 1803. In need of funds, Napoleon pressed the banks to complete their purchase of the bonds as quickly as possible, and by April 1804 the banks transferred an additional 40.35 million francs to fully discharge their obligations to France. In the end, Barings and Hopes acquired the $11.25 million in bonds for just $9.44 million. The last of the bonds were paid off by the United States Treasury in 1823; with interest, the total cost of the Louisiana Purchase bonds amounted to $23,313,567.73.

Although the War of the Third Coalition, which brought France into a war with the United Kingdom, began before the purchase was completed, the British government initially allowed the deal to proceed as it was better for the neutral Americans to own the territory than the hostile French. However, by December 1803, the British directed Barings to halt future payments to France. Barings relayed the order to Hopes, which agreed but under the condition that Baring bear the costs of the change and that its Louisiana stock be reallocated to Hopes. Hopes also required Baring to refrain from trading in Louisiana stock without its consent. The final payments were made to France in April 1804.

==Boundaries==
A dispute soon arose between Spain and the United States regarding the extent of Louisiana. The territory&#x27;s boundaries had not been defined in the 1762 Treaty of Fontainebleau that ceded it from France to Spain, nor in the 1801 Third Treaty of San Ildefonso ceding it back to France, nor the 1803 Louisiana Purchase agreement ceding it to the United States.

The U.S. claimed that Louisiana included the entire western portion of the Mississippi River drainage basin to the crest of the Rocky Mountains and land extending to the Rio Grande and West Florida. Spain insisted that Louisiana comprised no more than the western bank of the Mississippi River and the cities of New Orleans and St. Louis. The dispute was ultimately resolved by the Adams–Onís Treaty of 1819, with the United States gaining most of what it had claimed in the west.

The relatively narrow Louisiana of New Spain had been a special province under the jurisdiction of the Captaincy General of Cuba, while the vast region to the west was in 1803 still considered part of the Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas. Louisiana had never been considered one of New Spain&#x27;s internal provinces. If the territory included all the tributaries of the Mississippi on its western bank, the northern reaches of the purchase extended into the equally ill-defined British possession—Rupert&#x27;s Land of British North America, now part of Canada. The purchase originally extended just beyond the 50th parallel. However, the territory north of the 49th parallel (including the Milk River and Poplar River watersheds) was ceded to the UK in exchange for parts of the Red River Basin south of 49th parallel in the Anglo-American Convention of 1818.

The eastern boundary of the Louisiana purchase was the Mississippi River, from its source to the 31st parallel, though the source of the Mississippi was, at the time, unknown. The eastern boundary below the 31st parallel was unclear. The U.S. claimed the land as far as the Perdido River, and Spain claimed that the border of its Florida Colony remained the Mississippi River. The Adams–Onís Treaty with Spain resolved the issue upon ratification in 1821. Today, the 31st parallel is the northern boundary of the western half of the Florida Panhandle, and the Perdido is the western boundary of Florida.

Because the western boundary was contested at the time of the purchase, President Jefferson immediately began to organize four missions to explore and map the new territory. All four started from the Mississippi River. The Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804) traveled up the Missouri River; the Red River Expedition (1806) explored the Red River basin; the Pike Expedition (1806) also started up the Missouri but turned south to explore the Arkansas River watershed. In addition, the Dunbar and Hunter Expedition (1804–1805) explored the Ouachita River watershed. The maps and journals of the explorers helped to define the boundaries during the negotiations leading to the Adams–Onís Treaty, which set the western boundary as follows: north up the Sabine River from the Gulf of Mexico to its intersection with the 32nd parallel, due north to the Red River, up the Red River to the 100th meridian, north to the Arkansas River, up the Arkansas River to its headwaters, due north to the 42nd parallel and due west to its previous boundary.

==Slavery==

Governing the Louisiana Territory was more difficult than acquiring it. Its European peoples primarily of ethnic French, Spanish and Mexican descent were largely Catholic; in addition, there was a large population of enslaved Africans, as Spain had continued the transatlantic slave trade. This was particularly true in the area of the present-day state of Louisiana, which also contained a large number of free people of color. Both present-day Arkansas and Missouri already had some slaveholders in the 18th and early 19th century.

During this period, south Louisiana received a large influx of French-speaking refugees fleeing the large slave revolt in Saint-Domingue, including planters who brought their slaves with them. Many Southern slaveholders feared that acquisition of the new territory might inspire American-held slaves to follow the example of those in Saint-Domingue and revolt. They wanted the U.S. government to establish laws allowing slavery in the newly acquired territory so they could be supported in taking their slaves there to undertake new agricultural enterprises, as well as to reduce the threat of future slave rebellions.

The Louisiana Territory was broken into smaller portions for administration, and the territories passed slavery laws similar to those in the southern states but incorporating provisions from the preceding French and Spanish rule (for instance, Spain had prohibited slavery of Native Americans in 1769, but some slaves of mixed African–Native American descent were still being held in St. Louis in Upper Louisiana when the U.S. took over). In a freedom suit that went from Missouri to the U.S. Supreme Court, slavery of Native Americans was finally ended in 1836. The institutionalization of slavery under U.S. law in the Louisiana Territory contributed to the American Civil War a half century later. As states organized within the territory, the status of slavery in each state became a matter of contention in Congress, as southern states wanted slavery extended to the west, and northern states just as strongly opposed new states being admitted as &quot;slave states&quot;. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 was a temporary solution.

==Asserting U.S. possession==
After the early explorations, the U.S. government sought to establish control of the region, since trade along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers was still dominated by British and French traders from Canada and allied Indians, especially the Sauk and Fox. The U.S. adapted the former Spanish facility at Fort Bellefontaine as a fur trading post near St. Louis in 1804 for business with the Sauk and Fox. In 1808, two military forts with trading factories were built, Fort Osage along the Missouri River in western present-day Missouri and Fort Madison along the Upper Mississippi River in eastern present-day Iowa. With tensions increasing with Great Britain, in 1809 Fort Bellefontaine was converted to a U.S. military fort and was used for that purpose until 1826.

During the War of 1812, aided by their Indian allies, the British defeated U.S. forces in the Upper Mississippi; the U.S. abandoned Forts Osage and Madison, as well as several other U.S. forts built during the war, including Fort Johnson and Fort Shelby. U.S. ownership of the whole Louisiana Purchase region was confirmed in the Treaty of Ghent (ratified in February 1815). The U.S. later built or expanded forts along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, including adding to Fort Bellefontaine, and constructing Fort Armstrong (1816) and Fort Edwards (1816) in Illinois, Fort Crawford (1816) in Wisconsin, Fort Snelling (1819) in Minnesota, and Fort Atkinson (1819) in Nebraska.

==Impact on Native Americans==
The Louisiana Purchase was negotiated between France and the United States, without consulting the various Indian tribes who lived on the land and who had not ceded the land to any colonial power. The four decades following the Louisiana Purchase was an era of court decisions removing many tribes from their lands east of the Mississippi for resettlement in the new territory, culminating in the Trail of Tears.

The purchase of the Louisiana Territory led to debates over the idea of indigenous land rights that persisted into the mid 20th century. The many court cases and tribal suits in the 1930s for historical damages flowing from the Louisiana Purchase led to the Indian Claims Commission Act (ICCA) in 1946. Felix S. Cohen, Interior Department lawyer who helped pass ICCA, is often quoted as saying, &quot;practically all of the real estate acquired by the United States since 1776 was purchased not from Napoleon or any other emperor or czar but from its original Indian owners&quot;. More recently, the total cost to the U.S. government of all subsequent treaties and financial settlements up to the year 2012 for the land acquired in the Louisiana Purchase has been estimated to be around $2.6 billion, or $ billion in dollars. This is equivalent to $418 million in 1803 dollars, so the $15 million originally paid to France was roughly 3.5 percent of the total amount paid for this land (to both France and the Indians).

==See also==
*Alaska Purchase
*Corps of Discovery
*Florida Purchase
*Foreign affairs of the Jefferson administration
*Franco-American alliance
*Historic regions of the United States
*List of French possessions and colonies
*Louisiana Purchase Historic State Park
*Territorial evolution of the United States
*Territories of the United States on stamps
*Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail

==Footnotes==
==References==
==Works Cited==
*
* Carr, James A. &quot;The Battle of New Orleans and the Treaty of Ghent.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 3.3 (1979): 273–282. doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7709.1979.tb00315.x
*
*
*
*, pp. 101–109.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
==Further reading==
*
* 
* 
*
*


==External links==
* Initial Point of the Louisiana Purchase Survey at the Historical Marker Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="4" end="22" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="53" end="75" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="territory of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="83" end="96" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="106" end="127" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="179" end="218" title="Mississippi River#Watershed" label="Mississippi River&amp;#x27;s drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140343" start="387" end="408" title="Central United States" label="Central United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="504" end="520" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="708" end="725" title="Early modern France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="781" end="793" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="it was ceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="797" end="802" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="821" end="839" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="882" end="900" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="regained ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="945" end="952" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="999" end="1021" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="1085" end="1109" title="Haitian Revolution" label="revolt in Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1165" end="1179" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1310" end="1326" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="1384" end="1401" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1410" end="1421" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="1440" end="1452" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="1457" end="1477" title="Robert R. Livingston (chancellor)" label="Robert R. Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q708732" start="1549" end="1571" title="François Barbé-Marbois" label="François Barbé-Marbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="1714" end="1730" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="1765" end="1778" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="2027" end="2037" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="2047" end="2065" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="2093" end="2101" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="2103" end="2111" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="2113" end="2117" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="2119" end="2127" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="2129" end="2135" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="2141" end="2149" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="2169" end="2181" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="2186" end="2198" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="2212" end="2219" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2221" end="2228" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2234" end="2242" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="2255" end="2273" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="2290" end="2299" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="2359" end="2369" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="2392" end="2397" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2443" end="2461" title="Louisiana" label="state of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="2527" end="2534" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="2539" end="2551" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868843" start="2687" end="2704" title="History of slavery in Louisiana" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="2773" end="2790" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2796" end="2801" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="2867" end="2881" title="Treaty of 1818" label="Treaty of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="3090" end="3119" title="French colonial empire" label="France&amp;#x27;s overseas empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628377" start="3285" end="3308" title="Treaty of Fontainebleau (1762)" label="Treaty of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="3341" end="3362" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="3392" end="3425" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="territory west of the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="4131" end="4152" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095499" start="4154" end="4176" title="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty" label="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187719" start="4626" end="4648" title="Juan Manuel de Salcedo" label="Juan Manuel de Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4668" end="4690" title="List of colonial governors of Louisiana#Spanish period" label="Marquess of Casa Calvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="4849" end="4878" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179531" start="4900" end="4918" title="Treaty of Aranjuez (1801)" label="Treaty of Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="5470" end="5484" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="5818" end="5823" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q205783" start="5858" end="5878" title="Toussaint Louverture" label="Toussaint Louverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="5887" end="5902" title="slave rebellion" label="slave rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q503201" start="6213" end="6236" title="Charles Leclerc (general, born 1772)" label="General Charles Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062411" start="6276" end="6304" title="Saint-Domingue expedition" label="expedition to Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q573712" start="7095" end="7127" title="Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours" label="Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="8224" end="8231" title="Spanish Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q729861" start="8563" end="8600" title="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s planned invasion of the United Kingdom" label="planning an invasion of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="9234" end="9250" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (France)" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q160499" start="9251" end="9261" title="Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord" label="Talleyrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q181974" start="10266" end="10292" title="French Republican calendar" label="French Republican calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145692" start="10301" end="10313" title="Hôtel Tubeuf" label="Hôtel Tubeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="10341" end="10358" title="Robert R. Livingston (chancellor)" label="Robert Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="10360" end="10372" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q708732" start="10378" end="10400" title="François Barbé-Marbois" label="François Barbé-Marbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10696" end="10712" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="10782" end="10796" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q738395" start="10813" end="10831" title="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="10896" end="10911" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="11234" end="11246" title="Slave rebellion" label="slave revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="11388" end="11395" title="Economic sanctions" label="embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062299" start="11432" end="11473" title="Haiti indemnity controversy" label="successful French demand for an indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996232" start="11558" end="11565" title="Economy of Haiti" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458390" start="12457" end="12468" title="Henry Adams" label="Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623615" start="12596" end="12618" title="Strict constructionism" label="strict constructionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="13001" end="13019" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="13025" end="13036" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341317" start="13424" end="13437" title="John Randolph of Roanoke" label="John Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="13725" end="13742" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Atlantic seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="13909" end="13920" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q435168" start="14132" end="14149" title="Timothy Pickering" label="Timothy Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q223793" start="15556" end="15563" title="Kingdom of Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="15955" end="15971" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q590176" start="16408" end="16416" title="Sénat conservateur" label="Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q500046" start="17590" end="17605" title="Albert Gallatin" label="Albert Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="18147" end="18153" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="18191" end="18196" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="19033" end="19059" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720883" start="19196" end="19207" title="the Cabildo" label="the Cabildo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19216" end="19228" title="Flag#Hoisting the flag" label="flag-raising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157436" start="19265" end="19279" title="Jackson Square (New Orleans)" label="Jackson Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765976" start="19484" end="19499" title="Three Flags Day" label="Three Flags Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="19518" end="19527" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="19554" end="19569" title="Illinois Country" label="Upper Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054507" start="19749" end="19759" title="commandant" label="commandant"/>
<link wikidata="Q474313" start="19761" end="19774" title="Amos Stoddard" label="Amos Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518439" start="19892" end="19912" title="Territory of Orleans" label="Territory of Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384581" start="19973" end="19994" title="District of Louisiana" label="District of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q777763" start="20075" end="20092" title="Indiana Territory" label="Indiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="20156" end="20178" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Territory of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q790455" start="20451" end="20477" title="Barings Bank" label="Francis Baring and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q107145040" start="20584" end="20607" title="Bird, Savage &amp;amp; Bird" label="Bird, Savage &amp;amp; Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627524" start="20731" end="20745" title="Hope &amp;amp; Co." label="Hope &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5565890" start="20966" end="20980" title="Sir Francis Baring, 1st Baronet" label="Francis Baring"/>
<link wikidata="Q652514" start="20985" end="20994" title="Alexander Baring, 1st Baron Ashburton" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="21850" end="21856" title="coin" label="specie"/>
<link wikidata="Q249232" start="22884" end="22910" title="War of the Third Coalition" label="War of the Third Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="24037" end="24051" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="24114" end="24124" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425202" start="24129" end="24141" title="West Florida" label="West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="24326" end="24343" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="24529" end="24554" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="Captaincy General of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622232" start="24658" end="24677" title="Provincias Internas" label="Provincias Internas"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="24961" end="24982" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209320" start="25053" end="25066" title="50th parallel north" label="50th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217739" start="25133" end="25143" title="Milk River (Alberta–Montana)" label="Milk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229424" start="25148" end="25160" title="Poplar River (Montana–Saskatchewan)" label="Poplar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408452" start="25222" end="25237" title="Red River Basin" label="Red River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="25247" end="25260" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="25268" end="25301" title="Treaty of 1818" label="Anglo-American Convention of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703473" start="25401" end="25414" title="31st parallel north" label="31st parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q877319" start="25423" end="25452" title="Lake Itasca" label="the source of the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294510" start="25578" end="25591" title="Perdido River" label="Perdido River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="25837" end="25854" title="Florida Panhandle" label="Florida Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="26132" end="26158" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="26182" end="26196" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304841" start="26202" end="26229" title="Red River Expedition (1806)" label="Red River Expedition (1806)"/>
<link wikidata="Q581638" start="26264" end="26279" title="Pike Expedition" label="Pike Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="26348" end="26362" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q106912322" start="26391" end="26419" title="Dunbar and Hunter Expedition" label="Dunbar and Hunter Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041614" start="26445" end="26459" title="Ouachita River" label="Ouachita River"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="26656" end="26668" title="Sabine River (Texas–Louisiana)" label="Sabine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135260" start="26722" end="26735" title="32nd parallel north" label="32nd parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="26754" end="26763" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420440" start="26789" end="26803" title="100th meridian west" label="100th meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="26892" end="26905" title="42nd parallel north" label="42nd parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27121" end="27129" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="27176" end="27193" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="27222" end="27247" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="27366" end="27386" title="free people of color" label="free people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="27642" end="27650" title="Planter class" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500839" start="28558" end="28570" title="freedom suit" label="freedom suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="28602" end="28620" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="28774" end="28792" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="29072" end="29084" title="Slave states and free states" label="slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="29096" end="29115" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="29425" end="29429" title="Sauk people" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="29434" end="29437" title="Meskwaki" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077777" start="29487" end="29505" title="Fort Belle Fontaine" label="Fort Bellefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471780" start="29650" end="29660" title="Fort Osage" label="Fort Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q986316" start="29722" end="29734" title="Fort Madison, Iowa" label="Fort Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898800" start="29745" end="29768" title="Upper Mississippi River" label="Upper Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="29962" end="29973" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438661" start="30176" end="30188" title="Fort Johnson" label="Fort Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472025" start="30193" end="30204" title="Fort Shelby (Wisconsin)" label="Fort Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="30281" end="30296" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438434" start="30465" end="30479" title="Fort Armstrong (Illinois)" label="Fort Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q576165" start="30491" end="30503" title="Warsaw, Illinois" label="Fort Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077822" start="30524" end="30537" title="Fort Crawford" label="Fort Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q480993" start="30559" end="30572" title="Fort Snelling" label="Fort Snelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748471" start="30598" end="30611" title="Fort Atkinson (Nebraska)" label="Fort Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="30941" end="30949" title="Indian removal" label="removing"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="31061" end="31075" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005571" start="31150" end="31172" title="indigenous land rights" label="indigenous land rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986583" start="31336" end="31360" title="Indian Claims Commission" label="Indian Claims Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442319" start="31381" end="31395" title="Felix S. Cohen" label="Felix S. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="32113" end="32128" title="Alaska Purchase" label="Alaska Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172576" start="32130" end="32148" title="Corps of Discovery" label="Corps of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="32150" end="32166" title="Florida Purchase" label="Florida Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206678" start="32168" end="32215" title="Foreign affairs of the Jefferson administration" label="Foreign affairs of the Jefferson administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838107" start="32217" end="32241" title="Franco-American alliance" label="Franco-American alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605186" start="32243" end="32280" title="Historic regions of the United States" label="Historic regions of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884701" start="32282" end="32321" title="List of French possessions and colonies" label="List of French possessions and colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872230" start="32323" end="32361" title="Louisiana Purchase Historic State Park" label="Louisiana Purchase Historic State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="32363" end="32405" title="Territorial evolution of the United States" label="Territorial evolution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934244" start="32407" end="32449" title="Territories of the United States on stamps" label="Territories of the United States on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123048" start="32451" end="32490" title="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail" label="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q21815238" start="32861" end="32887" title="Historical Marker Database" label="Historical Marker Database"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17629" wikidata="Q584987" url="?curid=17629" title="Labor theory of value">
<text>The labor theory of value (LTV) is a theory of value that argues that the exchange value of a good or service is determined by the total amount of &quot;socially necessary labor&quot; required to produce it. The contrasting system is typically known as the subjective theory of value.

The LTV is usually associated with Marxian economics, although it originally appeared in the theories of earlier classical economists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo, and later in anarchist economics. Smith saw the price of a commodity as a reflection of how much labour it can &quot;save&quot; the purchaser. The LTV is central to Marxist theory, which holds that capitalists&#x27; expropriation of the surplus value produced by the working class is exploitative. Modern mainstream economics rejects the LTV and uses a theory of value based on subjective preferences.

== Definitions of value and labor ==
According to the LTV, value refers to the amount of socially necessary labor to produce a marketable commodity; According to Ricardo and Marx, this includes the labor components necessary to develop any real capital (i.e., physical assets used to produce other assets). Including these indirect labour components, sometimes described as &quot;dead labour,&quot; provides the &quot;real price,&quot; or &quot;natural price&quot; of a commodity. However, Adam Smith&#x27;s version of labor value does not implicate the role of past labor in the commodity itself or in the tools (capital) required to produce it.

=== Distinctions of economically pertinent labor ===
&quot;Value in use&quot; is the usefulness or utility of a commodity. A classical paradox often comes up when considering this type of value.

In a passage of Adam Smith&#x27;s &quot;An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations&quot;, he discusses the concepts of value in use and value in exchange, and notices how they tend to differ:Value &quot;in exchange&quot; is the relative proportion with which this commodity exchanges for another commodity (in other words, its price in the case of money). It is relative to labor as explained by Adam Smith: The value of any commodity, [...] to the person who possesses it, and who means not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities (&quot;Wealth of Nations&quot; Book 1, chapter V).

According to the classical economists, value is the labor embodied in a commodity under a given structure of production. Marx called this the &quot;socially necessary labor&quot; but it is sometimes also called the &quot;real cost&quot;, &quot;absolute value.&quot;

== Relation between values and prices ==
While the LTV posits that value is primarily determined by labor, it recognizes that the actual price of a commodity is influenced in the short-term by the profit motive and market conditions, including supply and demand and the extent of monopolization. Adherents to the LTV conceptualize value (i.e., socially necessary labour time) as a &quot;center of gravity&quot; for price over the long-term.

In Book 1, chapter VI, Adam Smith writes:
The real value of all the different component parts of price, it must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves itself into profit.

The final sentence explains how Smith sees value of a product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer, as opposite to Marx who sees the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer. And we value things, price them, based on how much labor we can avoid or command, and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things for a profit.

The demonstration of the relation between commodities&#x27; unit values and their respective prices is known in Marxian terminology as the transformation problem or the transformation of values into prices of production. The transformation problem has probably generated the greatest bulk of debate about the LTV. The problem with transformation is to find an algorithm where the magnitude of value added by labor, in proportion to its duration and intensity, is sufficiently accounted for after this value is distributed through prices that reflect an equal rate of return on capital advanced. If there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after transformation, then the relation between values (proportional to labor) and prices (proportional to total capital advanced) is incomplete. Various solutions and impossibility theorems have been offered for the transformation, but the debate has not reached any clear resolution.

LTV does not deny the role of supply and demand influencing price, but suggests that value and price are equivalent when supply-demand equilibrium is met. In &quot;Value, Price and Profit&quot; (1865), Karl Marx quotes Adam Smith:
It suffices to say that if supply and demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices, that is to say, with their values as determined by the respective quantities of labor required for their production.

The LTV seeks to explain the level of this equilibrium. This could be explained by a &quot;cost of production&quot; argument—pointing out that all costs are ultimately labor costs, but this does not account for profit, and it is vulnerable to the charge of tautology in that it explains prices by prices. Marx later called this &quot;Smith&#x27;s adding up theory of value&quot;.

Smith argues that labor values are the natural measure of exchange for direct producers like hunters and fishermen. Marx, on the other hand, uses a measurement analogy, arguing that for commodities to be comparable they must have a common element or substance by which to measure them, and that labor is a common substance of what Marx eventually calls &quot;commodity-values&quot;.

== Labor process ==
Since the term &quot;value&quot; is understood in the LTV as denoting something created by labor, and its &quot;magnitude&quot; as something proportional to the quantity of labor performed, it is important to explain how the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it creates.

The value of a commodity increases in proportion to the duration and intensity of labor performed on average for its production. Part of what the LTV means by &quot;socially necessary&quot; is that the value only increases in proportion to this labor as it is performed with average skill and average productivity. So though workers may labor with greater skill or more productivity than others, these more skillful and more productive workers thus produce more value through the production of greater quantities of the finished commodity. Each unit still bears the same value as all the others of the same class of commodity. By working sloppily, unskilled workers may drag down the average skill of labor, thus increasing the average labor time necessary for the production of each unit commodity. But these unskillful workers cannot hope to sell the result of their labor process at a higher price (as opposed to value) simply because they have spent more time than other workers producing the same kind of commodities.

However, production not only involves labor, but also certain means of labor: tools, materials, power plants and so on. These means of labor—also known as means of production—are often the product of another labor process as well. So the labor process inevitably involves these means of production that already enter the process with a certain amount of value. Labor also requires other means of production that are not produced with labor and therefore bear no value: such as sunlight, air, uncultivated land, unextracted minerals, etc. While useful, even crucial to the production process, these bring no value to that process. In terms of means of production resulting from another labor process, LTV treats the magnitude of value of these produced means of production as constant throughout the labor process. Due to the constancy of their value, these means of production are referred to, in this light, as constant capital.

Consider for example workers who take coffee beans, use a roaster to roast them, and then use a brewer to brew and dispense a fresh cup of coffee. In performing this labor, these workers add value to the coffee beans and water that compose the material ingredients of a cup of coffee. The worker also transfers the value of constant capital—the value of the beans; some specific depreciated value of the roaster and the brewer; and the value of the cup—to the value of the final cup of coffee. Again, on average, the worker can transfer no more than the value of these means of labor previously possessed to the finished cup of coffee. So the value of coffee produced in a day equals the sum of both the value of the means of labor—this constant capital—and the value newly added by the worker in proportion to the duration and intensity of their work.

Often this is expressed mathematically as:

where
* formula_1 is the constant capital of materials used in a period plus the depreciated portion of tools and plant used in the process. (A period is typically a day, week, year, or a single turnover: meaning the time required to complete one batch of coffee, for example.)
* formula_2 is the quantity of labor time (average skill and productivity) performed in producing the finished commodities during the period
* formula_3 is the value (or think &quot;worth&quot;) of the product of the period (formula_4 comes from the German word for value: &quot;wert&quot;)
Note: if the product resulting from the labor process is homogeneous (all similar in quality and traits, for example, all cups of coffee) then the value of the period&#x27;s product can be divided by the total number of items (use-values or formula_5) produced to derive the unit value of each item. formula_6 where formula_7 is the total items produced.

The LTV further divides the value added during the period of production, formula_2, into two parts. The first part is the portion of the process when the workers add value equivalent to the wages they are paid. For example, if the period in question is one week and these workers collectively are paid $1,000, then the time necessary to add $1,000 to—while preserving the value of—constant capital is considered the necessary labor portion of the period (or week): denoted formula_9. The remaining period is considered the surplus labor portion of the week: or formula_10. The value used to purchase labor-power, for example, the $1,000 paid in wages to these workers for the week, is called variable capital (formula_11). This is because in contrast to the constant capital expended on means of production, variable capital can add value in the labor process. The amount it adds depends on the duration, intensity, productivity and skill of the labor-power purchased: in this sense, the buyer of labor-power has purchased a commodity of variable use. Finally, the value added during the portion of the period when surplus labor is performed is called surplus value (formula_12). From the variables defined above, we find two other common expressions for the value produced during a given period:

and
The first form of the equation expresses the value resulting from production, focusing on the costs formula_13 and the surplus value appropriated in the process of production, formula_12. The second form of the equation focuses on the value of production in terms of the values added by the labor performed during the process formula_15.

== History ==
=== Origins ===
The labor theory of value has developed over many centuries. It had no single originator, but rather many different thinkers arrived at the same conclusion independently. Aristotle is claimed to hold to this view. Some writers trace its origin to Thomas Aquinas. In his &quot;Summa Theologiae&quot; (1265–1274) he expresses the view that &quot;value can, does and should increase in relation to the amount of labor which has been expended in the improvement of commodities.&quot; Scholars such as Joseph Schumpeter have cited Ibn Khaldun, who in his &quot;Muqaddimah&quot; (1377), described labor as the source of value, necessary for all earnings and capital accumulation. He argued that even if earning &quot;results from something other than a craft, the value of the resulting profit and acquired (capital) must (also) include the value of the labor by which it was obtained. Without labor, it would not have been acquired.&quot; Scholars have also pointed to Sir William Petty&#x27;s &quot;Treatise of Taxes&quot; of 1662 and to John Locke&#x27;s labor theory of property, set out in the &quot;Second Treatise on Government&quot; (1689), which sees labor as the ultimate source of economic value. Karl Marx himself credited Benjamin Franklin in his 1729 essay entitled &quot;A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency&quot; as being &quot;one of the first&quot; to advance the theory.

Adam Smith accepted the theory for pre-capitalist societies but saw a flaw in its application to contemporary capitalism. He pointed out that if the &quot;labor embodied&quot; in a product equaled the &quot;labor commanded&quot; (i.e. the amount of labor that could be purchased by selling it), then profit was impossible. David Ricardo (seconded by Marx) responded to this paradox by arguing that Smith had confused labor with wages. &quot;Labor commanded&quot;, he argued, would always be more than the labor needed to sustain itself (wages). The value of labor, in this view, covered not just the value of wages (what Marx called the value of labor power), but the value of the entire product created by labor.

Ricardo&#x27;s theory was a predecessor of the modern theory that equilibrium prices are determined solely by production costs associated with Neo-Ricardianism.

Based on the discrepancy between the wages of labor and the value of the product, the &quot;Ricardian socialists&quot;—Charles Hall, Thomas Hodgskin, John Gray, and John Francis Bray, and Percy Ravenstone—applied Ricardo&#x27;s theory to develop theories of exploitation.

Marx expanded on these ideas, arguing that workers work for a part of each day adding the value required to cover their wages, while the remainder of their labor is performed for the enrichment of the capitalist. The LTV and the accompanying theory of exploitation became central to his economic thought.

19th century American individualist anarchists based their economics on the LTV, with their particular interpretation of it being called &quot;Cost the limit of price&quot;. They, as well as contemporary individualist anarchists in that tradition, hold that it is unethical to charge a higher price for a commodity than the amount of labor required to produce it. Hence, they propose that trade should be facilitated by using notes backed by labor.

=== Adam Smith and David Ricardo ===
Adam Smith held that, in a primitive society, the amount of labor put into producing a good determined its exchange value, with exchange value meaning, in this case, the amount of labor a good can purchase. However, according to Smith, in a more advanced society the market price is no longer proportional to labor cost since the value of the good now includes compensation for the owner of the means of production: &quot;The whole produce of labour does not always belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of the stock which employs him.&quot; According to Whitaker, Smith is claiming that the &#x27;real value&#x27; of such a commodity produced in advanced society is measured by the labor which that commodity will command in exchange but &quot;[Smith] disowns what is naturally thought of as the genuine classical labor theory of value, that labor-cost regulates market-value. This theory was Ricardo&#x27;s, and really his alone.&quot;

Classical economist David Ricardo&#x27;s labor theory of value holds that the value of a good (how much of another good or service it exchanges for in the market) is proportional to how much labor was required to produce it, including the labor required to produce the raw materials and machinery used in the process. David Ricardo stated it as, &quot;The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour.&quot; In this connection Ricardo seeks to differentiate the quantity of labour necessary to produce a commodity from the wages paid to the laborers for its production. Therefore, wages did not always increase with the price of a commodity. However, Ricardo was troubled with some deviations in prices from proportionality with the labor required to produce them. For example, he said &quot;I cannot get over the difficulty of the wine, which is kept in the cellar for three or four years [i.e., while constantly increasing in exchange value], or that of the oak tree, which perhaps originally had not 2 s. expended on it in the way of labour, and yet comes to be worth £100.&quot; (Quoted in Whitaker) Of course, a capitalist economy stabilizes this discrepancy until the value added to aged wine is equal to the cost of storage. If anyone can hold onto a bottle for four years and become rich, that would make it hard to find freshly corked wine. There is also the theory that adding to the price of a luxury product increases its exchange-value by mere prestige.

The labor theory as an explanation for value contrasts with the subjective theory of value, which says that value of a good is not determined by how much labor was put into it but by its usefulness in satisfying a want and its scarcity. Ricardo&#x27;s labor theory of value is not a normative theory, as are some later forms of the labor theory, such as claims that it is &quot;immoral&quot; for an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes from the sales of all the goods he produces.

It is arguable to what extent these classical theorists held the labor theory of value as it is commonly defined. For instance, David Ricardo theorized that prices are determined by the amount of labor but found exceptions for which the labor theory could not account. In a letter, he wrote: &quot;I am not satisfied with the explanation I have given of the principles which regulate value.&quot; Adam Smith theorized that the labor theory of value holds true only in the &quot;early and rude state of society&quot; but not in a modern economy where owners of capital are compensated by profit. As a result, &quot;Smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value.&quot;

=== Anarchism ===
Pierre Joseph Proudhon&#x27;s mutualism and American individualist anarchists such as Josiah Warren, Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker adopted the labor theory of value of classical economics and used it to criticize capitalism while favoring a non-capitalist market system.

Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist, and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, &quot;The Peaceful Revolutionist&quot;, was the first anarchist periodical published. Cost the limit of price was a maxim coined by Warren, indicating a (prescriptive) version of the labor theory of value. Warren maintained that the just compensation for labor (or for its product) could only be an equivalent amount of labor (or a product embodying an equivalent amount). Thus, profit, rent, and interest were considered unjust economic arrangements. In keeping with the tradition of Adam Smith&#x27;s &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, the &quot;cost&quot; of labor is considered to be the subjective cost; i.e., the amount of suffering involved in it. He put his theories to the test by establishing an experimental &quot;labor for labor store&quot; called the Cincinnati Time Store at the corner of 5th and Elm Streets in what is now downtown Cincinnati, where trade was facilitated by notes backed by a promise to perform labor. &quot;All the goods offered for sale in Warren&#x27;s store were offered at the same price the merchant himself had paid for them, plus a small surcharge, in the neighborhood of 4 to 7 percent, to cover store overhead.&quot; The store stayed open for three years; after it closed, Warren could pursue establishing colonies based on Mutualism. These included &quot;Utopia&quot; and &quot;Modern Times&quot;. Warren said that Stephen Pearl Andrews&#x27; &quot;The Science of Society&quot;, published in 1852, was the most lucid and complete exposition of Warren&#x27;s own theories.

Mutualism is an economic theory and anarchist school of thought that advocates a society where each person might possess a means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank that would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate, just high enough to cover administration. Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value that holds that when labor or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying &quot;the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility&quot;. Mutualism originated from the writings of philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon.

Collectivist anarchism as defended by Mikhail Bakunin defended a form of labor theory of value when it advocated a system where &quot;all necessaries for production are owned in common by the labor groups and the free communes ... based on the distribution of goods according to the labor contributed&quot;.

=== Karl Marx ===
Contrary to popular belief, Marx never used the term &quot;labor theory of value&quot; in any of his works, but used the term law of value; Marx opposed &quot;ascribing a supernatural creative power to labor&quot;, arguing as such:
Labor is not the source of all wealth. Nature is just as much a source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth consists!) as labor, which is itself only the manifestation of a force of nature, human labor power.

Here, Marx was distinguishing between exchange value (the subject of the LTV) and use value. Marx used the concept of &quot;socially necessary labor time&quot; to introduce a social perspective distinct from his predecessors and neoclassical economics. Whereas most economists start with the individual&#x27;s perspective, Marx started with the perspective of society &quot;as a whole&quot;. &quot;Social production&quot; involves a complicated and interconnected division of labor of a wide variety of people who depend on each other for their survival and prosperity. &quot;Abstract&quot; labor refers to a characteristic of commodity-producing labor that is shared by all different kinds of heterogeneous (concrete) types of labor. That is, the concept abstracts from the &quot;particular&quot; characteristics of all of the labor and is akin to average labor.

&quot;Socially necessary&quot; labor refers to the quantity required to produce a commodity &quot;in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions or production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labor employed.&quot; That is, the value of a product is determined more by societal standards than by individual conditions. This explains why technological breakthroughs lower the price of commodities and put less advanced producers out of business. Finally, it is not labor per se that creates value, but labor power sold by free wage workers to capitalists. Another distinction is between productive and unproductive labor. Only wage workers of productive sectors of the economy produce value. According to Marx an increase in productiveness of the laborer does not affect the value of a commodity, but rather, increases the surplus value realized by the capitalist. Therefore, decreasing the cost of production does not decrease the value of a commodity, but allows the capitalist to produce more and increases the opportunity to earn a greater profit or surplus value, as long as there is demand for the additional units of production.

== Criticism ==

The Marxist labor theory of value has been criticized on several counts. Some argue that it predicts that profits will be higher in labor-intensive industries than in capital-intensive industries, which would be contradicted by measured empirical data inherent in quantitative analysis. This is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Great Contradiction&quot;. In volume 3 of &quot;Capital&quot;, Marx explains why profits are not distributed according to which industries are the most labor-intensive and why this is consistent with his theory. Whether or not this is consistent with the labor theory of value as presented in volume 1 has been a topic of debate. According to Marx, surplus value is extracted by the capitalist class as a whole and then distributed according to the amount of total capital, not just the variable component. In the example given earlier, of making a cup of coffee, the constant capital involved in production is the coffee beans themselves, and the variable capital is the value added by the coffee maker. The value added by the coffee maker is dependent on its technological capabilities, and the coffee maker can only add so much total value to cups of coffee over its lifespan. The amount of value added to the product is thus the amortization of the value of the coffeemaker. We can also note that not all products have equal proportions of value added by amortized capital. Capital intensive industries such as finance may have a large contribution of capital, while labor-intensive industries like traditional agriculture would have a relatively small one. Critics argue that this turns the LTV into a macroeconomic theory, when it was supposed to explain the exchange ratios of individual commodities in terms of their relation to their labor ratios (making it a microeconomic theory), yet Marx was now maintaining that these ratios must diverge from their labor ratios. Critics thus held that Marx&#x27;s proposed solution to the &quot;great contradiction&quot; was not so much a solution as it was sidestepping the issue. Most Economists generally believe that the theory is misguided &amp; that value is subjective.

Steve Keen argues that Marx&#x27;s idea that only labor can produce value rests on the idea that as capital depreciates over its use, then this is transferring its exchange-value to the product. Keen argues that it is not clear why the value of the machine should depreciate at the same rate it is lost. Keen uses an analogy with labor: If workers receive a subsistence wage and the working day exhausts the capacity to labor, it could be argued that the worker has &quot;depreciated&quot; by the amount equivalent to the subsistence wage. However this depreciation is not the limit of value a worker can add in a day (indeed this is critical to Marx&#x27;s idea that labor is fundamentally exploited). If it were, then the production of a surplus would be impossible. According to Keen, a machine could have a use-value greater than its exchange-value, meaning it could, along with labor, be a source of surplus. Keen claims that Marx almost reached such a conclusion in the &quot;Grundrisse&quot; but never developed it any further. Keen further observes that while Marx insisted that the contribution of machines to production is solely their use-value and not their exchange-value, he routinely treated the use-value and exchange-value of a machine as identical, despite the fact that this would contradict his claim that the two were unrelated. Marxists respond by arguing that use-value and exchange-value are incommensurable magnitudes; to claim that a machine can add &quot;more use-value&quot; than it is worth in value-terms is a category error. According to Marx, a machine by definition cannot be a source of &quot;human&quot; labor. Keen responds by arguing that the labor theory of value only works if the use-value and exchange-value of a machine are identical, as Marx argued that machines cannot create surplus value since as their use-value depreciates along with their exchange-value; they simply transfer it to the new product but create no new value in the process. Keen&#x27;s machinery argument can also be applied to slavery based modes of production, which also profit from extracting more use value from the laborers than they return to laborers.

In their work &quot;Capital as Power&quot;, Shimshon Bichler and Jonathan Nitzan argue that while Marxists have claimed to produce empirical evidence of the labor theory of value via numerous studies which show consistent correlations between values and prices, these studies do not actually provide evidence for it and are inadequate. According to the authors, these studies attempt to prove the LTV by showing that there is a positive correlation between market prices and labor values. However, the authors argue that these studies measure prices by looking at the price of total output (the unit price of a commodity multiplied by its total quantity) and do these for several sectors of the economy, estimate their total price and value from official statistics and measured for several years. However, Bichler and Nitzan argue that this method has statistical implications as correlations measured this way also reflect the co-variations of the associated quantities of unit values and prices. This means that the unit price and unit value of each sector are multiplied by the same value, which means that the greater the variability of output across different sectors, the tighter the correlation. This means that the overall correlation is substantially larger than the underlying correlation between unit values and unit prices; when sectors are controlled for their size, the correlations often drop to insignificant levels. Furthermore, the authors argue that the studies do not seem to actually attempt to measure the correlation between value and price. The authors argue that, according to Marx, the value of a commodity indicates the abstract labor time required for its production; however Marxists have been unable to identify a way to measure a unit (elementary particle) of abstract labor (indeed the authors argue that most have given up and little progress has been made beyond Marx&#x27;s original work) due to numerous difficulties. This means assumptions must be made and according to the authors, these involve circular reasoning:

Bichler and Nitzan argue that this amounts to converting prices into values and then determining if they correlate, which the authors argue proves nothing since the studies are simply correlating prices with themselves. Paul Cockshott disagreed with Bichler and Nitzan&#x27;s arguments, arguing that it was possible to measure abstract labour time using wage bills and data on working hours, while also arguing Bichler and Nitzan&#x27;s claims that the true value-price correlations should be much lower actually relied on poor statistical analysis itself. Most Marxists, however, reject Bichler and Nitzan&#x27;s interpretation of Marx, arguing that their assertion that individual commodities can have values, rather than prices of production, misunderstands Marx&#x27;s work. For example, Fred Moseley argues Marx understood &quot;value&quot; to be a &quot;macro-monetary&quot; variable (the total amount of labor added in a given year plus the depreciation of fixed capital in that year), which is then concretized at the level of individual prices of production, meaning that &quot;individual values&quot; of commodities do not exist.

The theory can also be sometimes found in non-Marxist traditions. For instance, mutualist theorist Kevin Carson&#x27;s &quot;Studies in Mutualist Political Economy&quot; opens with an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value.

Additionally, economist Joseph Schumpeter pointed out a couple of issues he believed undermined the validity of the labor theory of value. Firstly he wrote that labor theory of value failed to take into account the intrinsic differences in labor quality between individuals (a difference that, he believed, could not be properly encapsulated through the use of a value multiplier). Furthermore, he claims that labor theory of value, both in its Marxist and Ricardian formulations, would entail that labor be the sole input in an economy alongside all labor being homogenous in nature, a thesis which Schumpeter dismisses as unrealistic and one that could be resolved by Marginalism anyway. Schumpeter goes on to divert his attention towards the supposed self-contradictory nature of how labor theory of value allows for the justification of the Marxian exploitation thesis, highlighting that labor itself could not be valued since it was not itself produced by any labor and that the accumulation of surplus value described by Marx could not occur in a static, perfectly competitive market. Thus, although giving Marx the credit for seeing the need for change inherent in capitalist markets, Schumpeter nonetheless concludes that labor theory of value and its consequences remain problematic theories.

Some post-Keynesian economists have been highly critical of the labor theory of value. Joan Robinson, who herself was considered an expert on the writings of Karl Marx, wrote that the labor theory of value was largely a tautology and &quot;a typical example of the way metaphysical ideas operate&quot;.

In ecological economics, the labor theory of value has been criticized, where it is argued that labor is in fact energy over time. Such arguments generally fail to recognize that Marx is inquiring into social relations among human beings, which cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy, just as democracy cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy that a voter makes in getting to the polling place. However, echoing Joan Robinson, Alf Hornborg, an environmental historian, argues that both the reliance on &quot;energy theory of value&quot; and &quot;labor theory of value&quot; are problematic as they propose that use-values (or material wealth) are more &quot;real&quot; than exchange-values (or cultural wealth)—yet, use-values are culturally determined. For Hornborg, any Marxist argument that claims uneven wealth is due to the &quot;exploitation&quot; or &quot;underpayment&quot; of use-values is actually a tautological contradiction, since it must necessarily quantify &quot;underpayment&quot; in terms of exchange-value. The alternative would be to conceptualize unequal exchange as &quot;an asymmetric net transfer of material inputs in production (e.g., embodied labor, energy, land, and water), rather than in terms of an underpayment of material inputs or an asymmetric transfer of &#x27;value&#x27;&quot;. In other words, uneven exchange is characterised by incommensurability, namely: the unequal transfer of material inputs; competing value-judgements of the worth of labor, fuel, and raw materials; differing availability of industrial technologies; and the off-loading of environmental burdens on those with less resources.

==See also==
* Abstract labor and concrete labor
* Cost the limit of price
* Division of labor
* Labor notes (currency)
* Law of value
* Prices of production
* Producerism
* Productive and unproductive labor
* Social division of labor
* Surplus labor
* Surplus product
* Surplus value
* Transformation problem
* Value-form
* Anarchy of Production
Competing theories
* Anarcho-communism
* Entitlement theory
* Marginalism
* Neo-Ricardianism
* Subjective theory of value

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Bhaduri, Amit. 1969. &quot;On the Significance of Recent Controversies on Capital Theory: A Marxian View.&quot; &quot;Economic Journal&quot;. 79(315) September: 532–539.
* von Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen &quot;Karl Marx and the Close of His System&quot; (Classic criticism of Marxist economic theory).
* G.A. Cohen &#x27;The Labour Theory of Value and the Concept of Exploitation&#x27;, in his &quot;History Labour and Freedom&quot;.
* Duncan, Colin A.M. 1996. &quot;The Centrality of Agriculture: Between Humankind and The Rest of Nature.&quot; McGill–Queen&#x27;s University Press, Montreal.
* ——2000. The Centrality of Agriculture: History, Ecology and Feasible Socialism. Socialist Register, pp. 187–205.
* ——2004. Adam Smith&#x27;s green vision and the future of global socialism. In Albritton, R; Shannon Bell; John R. Bell; and R. Westra [Eds.] &quot;New Socialisms: Futures Beyond Globalization. &quot;New York/London, Routledge. pp. 90–104.
* Eldred, Michael (1984). &quot;Critique of Competitive Freedom and the Bourgeois-Democratic State: Outline of a Form-analytic Extension of Marx&#x27;s Uncompleted System&quot;. With an Appendix &#x27;Value-form Analytic Reconstruction of the Capital-Analysis&#x27; by Michael Eldred, Marnie Hanlon, Lucia Kleiber and Mike Roth, Kurasje, Copenhagen. Emended, digitized edition 2010 with a new Preface, lxxiii + 466 pp. .
* Ellerman, David P. (1992) Property &amp; Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy. Blackwell. Chapters 4, 5, and 13 critiques of LTV in favor of the labor theory of property.
* Engels, F. (1880). &quot;Socialism: Utopian and Scientific&quot;.
* Freeman, Alan: &quot;Price, value and profit – a continuous, general treatment&quot;. In: Alan Freeman, Guglielmo Carchedi (editors): &quot;Marx and Non-equilibrium Economics&quot;. Edward Elgar Publishing. Cheltenham, UK, Brookfield, US 1996. .
* Hagendorf, Klaus: &quot;The Labour Theory of Value. A Historical-Logical Analysis&quot;. Paris: EURODOS; 2008.
* Hagendorf, Klaus: &quot;Labour Values and the Theory of the Firm. Part I: The Competitive Firm&quot;. Paris: EURODOS; 2009.
* Hansen, Bue Rübner. (2011). &quot;Review of &quot;Capital as Power&quot; by Jonathan Nitzan and Shimson Bichler&quot;. &quot;Historical Materialism&quot; 19, no. 2: 144–159.
* Henderson, James M.; Quandt, Richard E. 1971: Microeconomic Theory – A Mathematical Approach. Second Edition/International Student Edition. McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
* Keen, Steven &quot;Use, Value, and Exchange: The Misinterpretation of Marx&quot; .
* ([Internet edition: 1999] [1887 English edition]).
* Moseley, Fred. (2016). &quot;Money and Totality&quot; Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
* Murray, Patrick. (2016). &quot;The Mismeasure of Wealth : Essays on Marx and Social Form&quot; Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
* Ormazabal, Kepa M. (2004). &quot;Smith On Labour Value&quot; Bilbo, Biscay, Spain: University of the Basque Country Working Paper.
* Parrington, Vernon Louis. &quot;The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin&quot;.
* Pokrovskii, Vladimir (2011). &quot;Econodynamics. The Theory of Social Production.&quot; Springer, Dordrecht-Heidelberg-London-New York.
* Rubin, Isaak Illich (1928). &quot;Essays on Marx&#x27;s Theory of Value&quot;
* Shaikh, Anwar (1998). &quot;The Empirical Strength of the Labour Theory of Value&quot; in &quot;Conference Proceedings of Marxian Economics: A Centenary Appraisal&quot;, Riccardo Bellofiore (ed.), Macmillan, London.
* Vianello, F. (1987). &quot;Labour theory of value&quot;, in: Eatwell, J. and Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (eds.): &quot;The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics&quot;, Macmillan e Stockton, London e New York, .
* Wolff, Jonathan (2003). &quot;Karl Marx&quot; in &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;.
* Ugalde, Elliot Goodell. &quot;In Defense of Marx&#x27;s Labour Theory of Value: Vancouver&#x27;s Housing&quot; Crisis&quot;.&quot; Cultural Logic: A Journal of Marxist Theory &amp; Practice 26 (2022): 69-101.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="4" end="25" title="Labor theory of value" label="labor theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="27" end="30" title="Labor theory of value" label="LTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q868257" start="37" end="52" title="theory of value (economics)" label="theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935127" start="74" end="88" title="exchange value" label="exchange value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518684" start="153" end="177" title="Socially necessary labour time" label="socially necessary labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966981" start="257" end="283" title="subjective theory of value" label="subjective theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q854537" start="321" end="338" title="Marxian economics" label="Marxian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="399" end="419" title="classical economics" label="classical economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="428" end="438" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="443" end="456" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="471" end="490" title="anarchist economics" label="anarchist economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q332425" start="695" end="708" title="surplus value" label="surplus value"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="725" end="738" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="742" end="754" title="Exploitation of labour" label="exploitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q73273" start="763" end="783" title="mainstream economics" label="mainstream economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416170" start="847" end="858" title="Preference (economics)" label="preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518684" start="950" end="974" title="Socially necessary labour time" label="socially necessary labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130337879" start="1101" end="1113" title="Constant capital" label="real capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="1351" end="1361" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="1608" end="1615" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q915342" start="1644" end="1651" title="Paradox of value" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="1745" end="1807" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="1931" end="1939" title="Trade" label="exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q160151" start="2052" end="2057" title="price" label="price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="2073" end="2078" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518684" start="2653" end="2677" title="Socially necessary labour time" label="socially necessary labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="3966" end="3973" title="Trade" label="trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646168" start="4135" end="4157" title="transformation problem" label="transformation problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="5144" end="5153" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="5161" end="5171" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753108" start="5527" end="5545" title="cost of production" label="cost of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q841606" start="5693" end="5702" title="Tautology (rhetoric)" label="tautology"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="7711" end="7730" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q332425" start="11462" end="11475" title="surplus value" label="surplus value"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="12228" end="12242" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="12257" end="12273" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="12478" end="12495" title="Joseph Schumpeter" label="Joseph Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="12507" end="12518" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259616" start="12537" end="12547" title="Muqaddimah" label="Muqaddimah"/>
<link wikidata="Q420062" start="12633" end="12653" title="capital accumulation" label="capital accumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q278699" start="12945" end="12962" title="Sir William Petty" label="Sir William Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="13015" end="13025" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533081" start="13033" end="13057" title="labor theory of property" label="labor theory of property"/>
<link wikidata="Q231949" start="13080" end="13109" title="Two Treatises of Government" label="Second Treatise on Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="13183" end="13192" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="13210" end="13227" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="13396" end="13406" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="13506" end="13516" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="13719" end="13732" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="13746" end="13750" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748888" start="14042" end="14053" title="labor power" label="labor power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623919" start="14221" end="14237" title="Cost-of-production theory of value" label="production costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q845033" start="14254" end="14270" title="Neo-Ricardianism" label="Neo-Ricardianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239232" start="14365" end="14385" title="Ricardian socialists" label="Ricardian socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567541" start="14392" end="14404" title="Charles Hall (economist)" label="Charles Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594969" start="14406" end="14421" title="Thomas Hodgskin" label="Thomas Hodgskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q461991" start="14423" end="14432" title="John Gray (19th century socialist)" label="John Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q595640" start="14438" end="14455" title="John Francis Bray" label="John Francis Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191870" start="14461" end="14477" title="Percy Ravenstone" label="Percy Ravenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="14531" end="14543" title="Exploitation of labour" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025357" start="14865" end="14898" title="American individualist anarchists" label="American individualist anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174823" start="14995" end="15018" title="Cost the limit of price" label="Cost the limit of price"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409498" start="15366" end="15383" title="Urgesellschaft" label="primitive society"/>
<link wikidata="Q868257" start="16388" end="16393" title="Value (economics)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="16399" end="16403" title="good (economics)" label="good"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="16501" end="16506" title="labour (economics)" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="16628" end="16641" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="17915" end="17921" title="luxury goods" label="luxury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935127" start="17944" end="17958" title="exchange-value" label="exchange-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966981" start="18042" end="18068" title="subjective theory of value" label="subjective theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233295" start="18261" end="18270" title="Normative economics" label="normative"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="18626" end="18639" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="18895" end="18905" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="19197" end="19219" title="Pierre Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="19227" end="19236" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025357" start="19241" end="19274" title="American individualist anarchists" label="American individualist anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q931005" start="19283" end="19296" title="Josiah Warren" label="Josiah Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q538091" start="19298" end="19314" title="Lysander Spooner" label="Lysander Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q505871" start="19319" end="19334" title="Benjamin Tucker" label="Benjamin Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="19372" end="19391" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="19524" end="19533" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174823" start="19675" end="19698" title="Cost the limit of price" label="Cost the limit of price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="19743" end="19755" title="linguistic prescription" label="prescriptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="19822" end="19826" title="Justice" label="just"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911" start="19968" end="19974" title="profit (economics)" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="19976" end="19980" title="economic rent" label="rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="19986" end="19994" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="20074" end="20084" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="20098" end="20119" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="20181" end="20191" title="subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120324" start="20353" end="20374" title="Cincinnati Time Store" label="Cincinnati Time Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470693" start="20887" end="20893" title="Utopia, Ohio" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20910" end="20922" title="past and present anarchist communities#Modern Times (1851 to late 1860s)" label="Modern Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178559" start="20947" end="20968" title="Stephen Pearl Andrews" label="Stephen Pearl Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="21121" end="21136" title="economics" label="economic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="21141" end="21168" title="anarchist school of thought" label="anarchist school of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="21228" end="21247" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="21345" end="21356" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="21840" end="21862" title="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223178" start="21865" end="21887" title="Collectivist anarchism" label="Collectivist anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27645" start="21903" end="21918" title="Mikhail Bakunin" label="Mikhail Bakunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375678" start="22318" end="22330" title="law of value" label="law of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935127" start="22696" end="22710" title="exchange value" label="exchange value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497178" start="22740" end="22749" title="use value" label="use value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518684" start="22782" end="22811" title="socially necessary labor time" label="socially necessary labor time"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="22887" end="22909" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="23122" end="23139" title="division of labor" label="division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333322" start="23228" end="23254" title="Abstract labor and concrete labor" label="&amp;quot;Abstract&amp;quot; labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="23285" end="23294" title="commodity" label="commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247853" start="24162" end="24195" title="productive and unproductive labor" label="productive and unproductive labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332425" start="25408" end="25421" title="surplus value" label="surplus value"/>
<link wikidata="Q527370" start="27867" end="27877" title="Grundrisse" label="Grundrisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735821" start="28425" end="28439" title="category error" label="category error"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="28926" end="28933" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131934963" start="29079" end="29095" title="Capital as Power" label="Capital as Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="31094" end="31112" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227535" start="31335" end="31349" title="Paul Cockshott" label="Paul Cockshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q95245357" start="31907" end="31919" title="Fred Moseley (economist)" label="Fred Moseley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497716" start="32161" end="32181" title="prices of production" label="prices of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="32336" end="32345" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="mutualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="32355" end="32367" title="Kevin Carson" label="Kevin Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="32381" end="32419" title="Studies in Mutualist Political Economy" label="Studies in Mutualist Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="32461" end="32472" title="marginalist" label="marginalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="32540" end="32557" title="Joseph Schumpeter" label="Joseph Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q60224" start="33824" end="33838" title="post-Keynesian" label="post-Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q234793" start="33906" end="33919" title="Joan Robinson" label="Joan Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049066" start="34126" end="34146" title="ecological economics" label="ecological economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333322" start="35793" end="35826" title="Abstract labour and concrete labour" label="Abstract labor and concrete labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174823" start="35829" end="35852" title="Cost the limit of price" label="Cost the limit of price"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="35855" end="35872" title="Division of labor" label="Division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376985" start="35875" end="35897" title="Labor notes (currency)" label="Labor notes (currency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375678" start="35900" end="35912" title="Law of value" label="Law of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497716" start="35915" end="35935" title="Prices of production" label="Prices of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247692" start="35938" end="35949" title="Producerism" label="Producerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247853" start="35952" end="35985" title="Productive and unproductive labour" label="Productive and unproductive labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551063" start="35988" end="36012" title="Social division of labor" label="Social division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451360" start="36015" end="36028" title="Surplus labour" label="Surplus labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q462052" start="36031" end="36046" title="Surplus product" label="Surplus product"/>
<link wikidata="Q332425" start="36049" end="36062" title="Surplus value" label="Surplus value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646168" start="36065" end="36087" title="Transformation problem" label="Transformation problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563467" start="36090" end="36100" title="Value-form" label="Value-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769407" start="36103" end="36124" title="Anarchy of Production" label="Anarchy of Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="36146" end="36163" title="Anarcho-communism" label="Anarcho-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380548" start="36166" end="36184" title="Entitlement theory" label="Entitlement theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="36187" end="36198" title="Marginalism" label="Marginalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q845033" start="36201" end="36217" title="Neo-Ricardianism" label="Neo-Ricardianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966981" start="36220" end="36246" title="Subjective theory of value" label="Subjective theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q311535" start="36473" end="36495" title="Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk" label="von Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen"/>
<link wikidata="Q553987" start="36596" end="36606" title="G.A. Cohen" label="G.A. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342750" start="38106" end="38129" title="Edward Elgar Publishing" label="Edward Elgar Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q95245357" start="38895" end="38908" title="Fred Moseley (economist)" label="Moseley, Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187315" start="39456" end="39475" title="Isaak Illich Rubin" label="Rubin, Isaak Illich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778061" start="39536" end="39549" title="Anwar Shaikh (Economist)" label="Shaikh, Anwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913876" start="39754" end="39766" title="Fernando Vianello" label="Vianello, F."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17630" wikidata="Q187127" url="?curid=17630" title="Lunar Society of Birmingham">
<text>The Lunar Society of Birmingham was a British dinner club and informal learned society of prominent figures in the Midlands Enlightenment, including industrialists, natural philosophers and intellectuals, who met regularly between 1765 and 1813 in Birmingham. At first called the Lunar Circle, &quot;Lunar Society&quot; became the formal name by 1775. The name arose because the society would meet during the full moon, as the extra light made the journey home easier and safer in the absence of street lighting. The members cheerfully referred to themselves as &quot;lunaticks&quot;, a contemporary spelling of lunatics. Venues included Erasmus Darwin&#x27;s home in Lichfield, Matthew Boulton&#x27;s home, Soho House, Bowbridge House in Derbyshire, and Great Barr Hall.

==Membership and status==
The Lunar Society evolved through various degrees of organisation over a period of up to fifty years, but was only ever an informal group. No constitution, minutes, publications or membership lists survive from any period, and evidence of its existence and activities is found only in the correspondence and notes of those associated with it. Historians therefore disagree on what qualifies as membership of the Lunar Society, who can be considered to have been members, and even when the society can be said to have existed. Josiah Wedgwood, for example, is described by some commentators as being one of five &quot;principal members&quot; of the society, while others consider that he &quot;cannot be recognized as [a] full member&quot; at all. Dates given for the establishment of the society range from &quot;sometime before 1760&quot; to 1775. Some historians argue that it had ceased to exist by 1791; others that it was still operating as late as 1813.

Despite this uncertainty, fourteen individuals have been identified as having verifiably attended Lunar Society meetings regularly over a long period during its most productive eras: these are Matthew Boulton, Erasmus Darwin, Thomas Day, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, Samuel Galton, Jr., Robert Augustus Johnson, James Keir, Joseph Priestley, William Small, Jonathan Stokes, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood, John Whitehurst and William Withering.

While the society&#x27;s meetings provided its name and social focus, however, they were relatively unimportant in its activities, and far more activity and communication took place outside the meetings themselves – members local to Birmingham were in almost daily contact, more distant ones in correspondence at least weekly. A more loosely defined group has therefore been identified over a wider geographical area and longer time period, who attended meetings occasionally and who corresponded or co-operated regularly with multiple other members on group activities. These include Joseph Pickford, Richard Kirwan, John Smeaton, Henry Moyes, John Michell, Pieter Camper, R. E. Raspe, John Baskerville, Thomas Beddoes, John Wyatt, William Thomson, Cyril Jackson, Jean-André Deluc, John Wilkinson, John Ash, Samuel More, Robert Bage, James Brindley, Ralph Griffiths, John Roebuck, Thomas Percival, Joseph Black, James Hutton, Benjamin Franklin, Joseph Banks, James Lind, William Herschel, Daniel Solander, John Warltire, George Fordyce, Alexander Blair, Samuel Parr, Louis Joseph d&#x27;Albert d&#x27;Ailly, William Emes, the seventh Duke of Chaulnes, Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond, Grossart de Virly, Johann Gottling. and Joseph Wright.

This lack of a defined membership has led some historians to criticise a Lunar Society &quot;legend&quot;, leading people to &quot;confuse it and its efforts with the general growth of intellectual and economic activities in the provinces of eighteenth century Britain&quot;. Others have seen this both as real and as one of the society&#x27;s main strengths: a paper read at the Science Museum in London in 1963 claimed that

==Development==
===Origins 1755–1765===

The origins of the Lunar Society lie in a pattern of friendships that emerged in the late 1750s. Matthew Boulton and Erasmus Darwin met some time between 1757 and 1758, possibly through family connections, as Boulton&#x27;s mother&#x27;s family were patients of Darwin; or possibly though shared friendships, as both were admirers of the printer John Baskerville and friends of the astronomer and geologist John Michell, a regular visitor to Darwin&#x27;s house in Lichfield. Darwin was a physician and poet who had studied at Cambridge and Edinburgh; Boulton had left school at fourteen and started work in his father&#x27;s business making metal goods in Birmingham at the age of 21. Despite their different backgrounds they shared a common interest in experiment and invention, and their activities would show Darwin&#x27;s theoretical understanding and Boulton&#x27;s practical experience to be complementary. Soon they were visiting each other regularly and conducting investigations into scientific subjects such as electricity, meteorology and geology.

Around the same time the Derby-based clockmaker John Whitehurst became a friend, first of Boulton and subsequently of Darwin, through his business supplying clock movements to Boulton&#x27;s ormolu manufacturing operation. Although older than both Boulton and Darwin, by 1758 Whitehurst was writing to Boulton telling excitedly of a pyrometer he had built, and looking forward to visiting Birmingham &quot;to spend one day with you in trying all necessary experiments&quot;.

Boulton, Darwin and Whitehurst were in turn introduced by Michell to Benjamin Franklin when he travelled to Birmingham in July 1758 &quot;to improve and increase Acquaintance among Persons of Influence&quot;, and Franklin returned in 1760 to conduct experiments with Boulton on electricity and sound. Although Michell seems to have withdrawn slightly from the group when he moved to Thornhill (near Dewsbury) in 1767, Franklin was to remain a common link among many of the early members.

===The Lunar Circle 1765–1775===
The nature of the group was to change significantly with the move to Birmingham in 1765 of the Scottish physician William Small, who had been Professor of Natural Philosophy at The College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. There he had taught and been a major influence over Thomas Jefferson, and had formed the focus of a local group of intellectuals. His arrival with a letter of introduction to Matthew Boulton from Benjamin Franklin was to have a galvanising effect on the existing circle, which began to explicitly identify itself as a group and actively started to attract new members.

The first of these was Josiah Wedgwood, who became a close friend of Darwin in 1765 while campaigning for the building of the Trent and Mersey Canal and subsequently closely modelled his large new pottery factory at Etruria, Staffordshire on Boulton&#x27;s Soho Manufactory. Another new recruit, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, met Darwin, Small and Boulton in 1766 through a shared interest in carriage design, and he in turn introduced his friend and fellow Rousseau-admirer Thomas Day, with whom he had studied at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In 1767 James Keir visited Darwin in Lichfield, where he was introduced to Boulton, Small, Wedgwood and Whitehurst and subsequently decided to move to Birmingham.

The Lunar Circle also attracted more distant involvement. Joseph Priestley, then living in Leeds and a close friend of John Michell, became associated with the Society in 1767 when Darwin and Wedgwood became involved with his work on electricity. In the same year James Watt visited Birmingham on the recommendation of his business patron John Roebuck, being shown around the Soho Manufactory by Small and Darwin in Boulton&#x27;s absence. Although neither Priestley nor Watt were to move to Birmingham for several years, both were to be in constant communication with the Birmingham members and central to the circle&#x27;s activities from 1767.

By 1768 the core group of nine individuals who would form the nucleus of the Lunar Society had come together with Small at their heart. The group at this time is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Lunar circle&quot;, though this is a later description used by historians, and the group themselves used a variety of less specific descriptions, including &quot;Birmingham Philosophers&quot; or simply &quot;fellow-schemers&quot;.

===The Lunar Society 1775–1780===
If William Small&#x27;s arrival in 1765 had been the catalyst to the development of the Lunar Circle as a cohesive group, his death – probably from malaria – in 1775 was to mark another change in its structure. Small had been the key link between the members, and in his absence those remaining moved to place the group on a more organised footing. Meetings were to be held on the Sunday nearest the full moon, lasting from two o&#x27;clock in the afternoon until eight o&#x27;clock in the evening. The first was probably that held on 31 December 1775, and the &quot;Lunar&quot; name is first recorded in 1776.

The era also saw significant changes in membership. William Withering – like Small, a physician – was already an acquaintance of Darwin, Boulton and Wedgwood when he moved from Stafford to Birmingham and became a member of the Society in 1776. John Whitehurst&#x27;s move to London in 1775 had a less dramatic effect: he kept in regular contact with other members of the society and remained an occasional attender of meetings.

The leading figure behind the establishment of the society as a more organised body during this early period seems to have been Matthew Boulton: his home at Soho House in Handsworth was the principal venue for meetings, and in 1776 he is recorded as planning &quot;to make many Motions to the Members respecting new Laws, and regulations, such as will tend to prevent the decline of a society which I hope will be lasting.&quot; This reliance on Boulton was also to prove a weakness, however, as the period coincided with the peak of his work building up his steam engine business and he was frequently absent. Although the 1770s was one of the society&#x27;s richest eras in terms of its collaborative achievements, the society&#x27;s meetings declined from regular occurrences in 1775 to infrequent ones by the end of the decade.

===Heyday of the Society 1780–1789===

In late 1780 the nature of the society was to change again with the move to Birmingham of Joseph Priestley. Priestley had been closely associated with the group&#x27;s activities for over a decade and was a strong advocate of the benefits of scientific societies. Shortly after his arrival Lunar meetings moved from Sunday afternoons to Mondays to accommodate Priestley&#x27;s duties as a clergyman, while the society&#x27;s dependence on Matthew Boulton was lessened by holding meetings at other members&#x27; houses in addition to Soho House. The result was to be the society&#x27;s most productive era.

Several other major new figures became associated with the society during this period. Samuel Galton, Jr., unusual as a Quaker who was also a gun-manufacturer, appears in the letters of other Lunar members as attending meetings from July 1781, and his daughter Mary Anne Schimmelpenninck was to provide one of the few first-hand accounts of the Lunar Society&#x27;s activities. The botanist and physician Jonathan Stokes, who had known William Withering as a child, moved to Stourbridge and started attending Lunar Society meetings from 1783. His contribution to the society was significant but short-lived: after collaborating with Withering on his &quot;Botanical Arrangement of British Plants&quot; the two quarrelled bitterly and Stokes severed his relations with the main Lunar members by 1788.

The society also lost several major figures over the period: Richard Lovell Edgeworth ceased regular involvement in the society&#x27;s activities when he returned to Ireland in 1782, John Whitehurst died in London in 1788, and Thomas Day died the following year. Most significantly, Erasmus Darwin moved to Derby in 1781, but although he complained of being &quot;cut off from the milk of science&quot;, he continued to attend Lunar Society meetings at least until 1788.

===Decline 1789–1813===

The outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 caused political strains between members of the society, but it was the Priestley riots of 1791 in Birmingham itself that saw a decisive falling off of the society&#x27;s spirit and activities. Joseph Priestley himself was driven from the town, leaving England entirely for the United States in 1794, William Withering&#x27;s house was invaded by rioters and Matthew Boulton and James Watt had to arm their employees to protect the Soho Manufactory. Lunar meetings were continued by the younger generation of the families of earlier Lunar members, including Gregory Watt, Matthew Robinson Boulton, Thomas Wedgwood and James Watt junior, and possibly Samuel Tertius Galton. Regular meetings are recorded into the nineteenth century – eight in 1800, five or six before August 1801 and at least one in 1802, while as late as 1809 Leonard Horner was describing &quot;the remnant of the Lunar Society&quot; as being &quot;very interesting&quot;. While individual members continued to produce work of importance, however, the collaborative activity that marked the heyday of the society was noticeably absent.

The society had definitely collapsed by 1813, however: in August of that year Samuel Galton, Jr. is recorded as having won a ballot for possession of the scientific books from the society&#x27;s library.

==Modern Lunar Societies==

Among memorials to the Society and its members are the Moonstones; two statues of Watt and a statue of &quot;Boulton, Watt and Murdoch&quot; by William Bloye; and the museum at Soho House – all in Birmingham.

A new Lunar Society was formed in Birmingham by a group led by Dame Rachel Waterhouse. Its aim was to play a leading part in the development of the city and the wider region. Clive Stone was elected as Chair of the Lunar Society in July 2023. The society was still in operation in 2024.

Outside Birmingham

In Australia, The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle was formed by leading digital entrepreneurs, software developers, educators, film producers, creatives, investors to encourage creative thinking and new ideas in a digital age.

===University of Birmingham Lunar Society===
In the latter part of the 20th century, the University of Birmingham Lunar Society met every Thursday to debate and discuss all manner of topics in the Guild bar. In 2011, steps were undertaken to reform the discussion society as an alternative to the more regulated debate options available at the university. This was agreed by the University&#x27;s Guild of Students in autumn 2012. The society now hosts symposiums every two weeks. Any member has always been welcome to suggest a topic for discussion. These meetings occur in a variety of environments from University rooms to local bars. In 2013 the society attempted to change the name of one of the rooms in the Guild of Students to &#x27;The Lunar Room&#x27; in honour of the original Birmingham Lunar Society. Like the Oxford Union, the society has always traditionally put a huge emphasis on freedom of speech. The society has similar aims to The Speculative Society of Edinburgh University. In 2019, the society was rebranded as the Devil&#x27;s Advocate Society, and retained the goals of the Lunar Society whilst changing much of its branding.

Today, the society is an informal academic association open to both undergraduate and graduate students, as well as professional academics, from the University of Birmingham.

== Archives ==
Historical material related to the Lunar Society is held in multiple collections. The University of Birmingham&#x27;s Cadbury Research Library holds a series of portraits of the original Lunar Society members. The Library of Birmingham holds a large collection of Joseph Priestley&#x27;s publications. Both archives also hold various letters of society members.

==See also==
* Scottish Enlightenment
* Science and invention in Birmingham
* Erasmus Darwin House
* Lunar Society Moonstones

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
==External links==
*Erasmus Darwin House, Lichfield
*Article in Science
*The Lunar Men who shaped the future (from the Birmingham Stories website)
*Soho House
*The modern Lunar Society
*Revolutionary Players website
*BBC Radio 4 &quot;In Our Time&quot; discussion
*The Lunar Society Italia
*The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187127" start="4" end="31" title="Lunar Society of Birmingham" label="Lunar Society of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="71" end="86" title="learned society" label="learned society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842534" start="115" end="137" title="Midlands Enlightenment" label="Midlands Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="165" end="185" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="248" end="258" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="409" end="418" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130829" start="612" end="619" title="lunatic" label="lunatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="638" end="652" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384953" start="660" end="664" title="Erasmus Darwin House" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="668" end="677" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="679" end="694" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810087" start="708" end="718" title="Soho House" label="Soho House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544221" start="755" end="770" title="Great Barr Hall" label="Great Barr Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="1325" end="1340" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="1953" end="1968" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="1970" end="1984" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722973" start="1986" end="1996" title="Thomas Day (writer)" label="Thomas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="1998" end="2022" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q741817" start="2024" end="2042" title="Samuel Galton, Jr." label="Samuel Galton, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1147463" start="2069" end="2079" title="James Keir" label="James Keir"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="2081" end="2097" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q983736" start="2099" end="2112" title="William Small" label="William Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q433405" start="2114" end="2129" title="Jonathan Stokes" label="Jonathan Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="2131" end="2141" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="2143" end="2158" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q709960" start="2160" end="2175" title="John Whitehurst" label="John Whitehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q715949" start="2180" end="2197" title="William Withering" label="William Withering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650396" start="2785" end="2800" title="Joseph Pickford" label="Joseph Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q901070" start="2802" end="2816" title="Richard Kirwan" label="Richard Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="2818" end="2830" title="John Smeaton" label="John Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858062" start="2832" end="2843" title="Henry Moyes" label="Henry Moyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="2845" end="2857" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q382682" start="2859" end="2872" title="Pieter Camper" label="Pieter Camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q213543" start="2874" end="2885" title="R. E. Raspe" label="R. E. Raspe"/>
<link wikidata="Q455265" start="2887" end="2903" title="John Baskerville" label="John Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422365" start="2905" end="2919" title="Thomas Beddoes" label="Thomas Beddoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265001" start="2921" end="2931" title="John Wyatt (inventor)" label="John Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="2933" end="2948" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200775" start="2950" end="2963" title="Cyril Jackson (priest)" label="Cyril Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123670" start="2965" end="2981" title="Jean-André Deluc" label="Jean-André Deluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204884" start="2983" end="2997" title="John Wilkinson (industrialist)" label="John Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14981882" start="2999" end="3007" title="John Ash (divine)" label="John Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412217" start="3009" end="3020" title="Samuel More" label="Samuel More"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341787" start="3022" end="3033" title="Robert Bage" label="Robert Bage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075823" start="3035" end="3049" title="James Brindley" label="James Brindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287569" start="3051" end="3066" title="Ralph Griffiths" label="Ralph Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382297" start="3068" end="3080" title="John Roebuck" label="John Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q549582" start="3082" end="3097" title="Thomas Percival" label="Thomas Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q272512" start="3099" end="3111" title="Joseph Black" label="Joseph Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q192927" start="3113" end="3125" title="James Hutton" label="James Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="3127" end="3144" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="3146" end="3158" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544534" start="3160" end="3170" title="James Lind (naturalist)" label="James Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="3172" end="3188" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39789" start="3190" end="3205" title="Daniel Solander" label="Daniel Solander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3207" end="3220" title="John Warltire" label="John Warltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q908230" start="3222" end="3236" title="George Fordyce" label="George Fordyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q30156054" start="3238" end="3253" title="Alexander Blair (writer)" label="Alexander Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412361" start="3255" end="3266" title="Samuel Parr" label="Samuel Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262367" start="3268" end="3307" title="Louis Joseph d&amp;#x27;Albert d&amp;#x27;Ailly" label="Louis Joseph d&amp;#x27;Albert d&amp;#x27;Ailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262367" start="3323" end="3351" title="Louis Joseph d&amp;#x27;Albert d&amp;#x27;Ailly" label="the seventh Duke of Chaulnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q809417" start="3353" end="3384" title="Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond" label="Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3386" end="3403" title="Grossart de Virly" label="Grossart de Virly"/>
<link wikidata="Q107655" start="3405" end="3420" title="Johann Gottling" label="Johann Gottling"/>
<link wikidata="Q214062" start="3426" end="3439" title="Joseph Wright of Derby" label="Joseph Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="3822" end="3836" title="Science Museum (London)" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="4007" end="4022" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="4027" end="4041" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q455265" start="4256" end="4272" title="John Baskerville" label="John Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="4317" end="4329" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="4375" end="4384" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4437" end="4446" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="4451" end="4460" title="University of Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="4567" end="4577" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="4945" end="4956" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="4996" end="5001" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q709960" start="5019" end="5034" title="John Whitehurst" label="John Whitehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748318" start="5162" end="5168" title="ormolu" label="ormolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q903715" start="5304" end="5313" title="pyrometer" label="pyrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="5516" end="5533" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q983736" start="6083" end="6096" title="William Small" label="William Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="6146" end="6179" title="The College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="The College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="6183" end="6205" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6259" end="6275" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319331" start="6600" end="6615" title="Josiah Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801" start="6703" end="6725" title="Trent and Mersey Canal" label="Trent and Mersey Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="6774" end="6781" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915922" start="6793" end="6815" title="Etruria, Staffordshire" label="Etruria, Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297915" start="6834" end="6850" title="Soho Manufactory" label="Soho Manufactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="6873" end="6897" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="7031" end="7039" title="Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q722973" start="7048" end="7058" title="Thomas Day (writer)" label="Thomas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135137" start="7088" end="7118" title="Corpus Christi College, Oxford" label="Corpus Christi College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147463" start="7128" end="7138" title="James Keir" label="James Keir"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="7342" end="7358" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="7375" end="7380" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="7548" end="7558" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382297" start="7623" end="7635" title="John Roebuck" label="John Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q715949" start="9059" end="9076" title="William Withering" label="William Withering"/>
<link wikidata="Q826782" start="9184" end="9192" title="Stafford" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="9564" end="9579" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810087" start="9593" end="9603" title="Soho House" label="Soho House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647672" start="9607" end="9617" title="Handsworth, West Midlands" label="Handsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="10398" end="10414" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q741817" start="11002" end="11020" title="Samuel Galton, Jr." label="Samuel Galton, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="11035" end="11041" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778952" start="11176" end="11202" title="Mary Anne Schimmelpenninck" label="Mary Anne Schimmelpenninck"/>
<link wikidata="Q433405" start="11320" end="11335" title="Jonathan Stokes" label="Jonathan Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q715949" start="11351" end="11368" title="William Withering" label="William Withering"/>
<link wikidata="Q661707" start="11390" end="11401" title="Stourbridge" label="Stourbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="11777" end="11801" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q722973" start="11943" end="11953" title="Thomas Day (writer)" label="Thomas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="11999" end="12013" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="12023" end="12028" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="12233" end="12250" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506756" start="12331" end="12346" title="Priestley riots" label="Priestley riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="12453" end="12469" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q715949" start="12560" end="12577" title="William Withering" label="William Withering"/>
<link wikidata="Q469269" start="12618" end="12633" title="Matthew Boulton" label="Matthew Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="12638" end="12648" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12817" end="12829" title="Gregory Watt" label="Gregory Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791148" start="12831" end="12855" title="Matthew Robinson Boulton" label="Matthew Robinson Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q933545" start="12857" end="12872" title="Thomas Wedgwood (photographer)" label="Thomas Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145219" start="12877" end="12894" title="James Watt junior" label="James Watt junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412761" start="12909" end="12930" title="Samuel Tertius Galton" label="Samuel Tertius Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525386" start="13086" end="13100" title="Leonard Horner" label="Leonard Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q741817" start="13442" end="13460" title="Samuel Galton, Jr." label="Samuel Galton, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6703796" start="13652" end="13662" title="Lunar Society Moonstones" label="Moonstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949742" start="13706" end="13731" title="Boulton, Watt and Murdoch" label="Boulton, Watt and Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005650" start="13741" end="13754" title="William Bloye" label="William Bloye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810087" start="13774" end="13784" title="Soho House" label="Soho House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279445" start="13875" end="13892" title="Rachel Waterhouse" label="Rachel Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="15165" end="15177" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765785" start="15290" end="15313" title="The Speculative Society" label="The Speculative Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="15529" end="15549" title="Learned society" label="academic association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="16064" end="16086" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Scottish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433642" start="16089" end="16124" title="Science and invention in Birmingham" label="Science and invention in Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384953" start="16127" end="16147" title="Erasmus Darwin House" label="Erasmus Darwin House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703796" start="16150" end="16174" title="Lunar Society Moonstones" label="Lunar Society Moonstones"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17633" wikidata="Q1016" url="?curid=17633" title="Libya">
<text>Libya, officially the State of Libya, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. It borders the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Egypt to the east, Sudan to the southeast, Chad to the south, Niger to the southwest, Algeria to the west, and Tunisia to the northwest, as well as maritime borders with Greece, Italy and Malta to the north. Libya comprises three historical regions: Tripolitania, Fezzan, and Cyrenaica. With an area of almost , it is the fourth-largest country in Africa and the Arab world, and the 16th-largest in the world. Libya claims 32,000 square kilometres of southeastern Algeria, south of the Libyan town of Ghat. The country&#x27;s official religion is Islam, with 96.6% of the Libyan population being Sunni Muslims. The official language of Libya is Arabic, with vernacular Libyan Arabic being spoken most widely. The majority of Libya&#x27;s population is Arab. The largest city and capital, Tripoli, is located in northwestern Libya and contains over a million of Libya&#x27;s seven million people.

Libya has been inhabited by Berbers since the late Bronze Age as descendants from Iberomaurusian and Capsian cultures. In classical antiquity, the Phoenicians established city-states and trading posts in western Libya, while several Greek cities were established in the East. Parts of Libya were variously ruled by Carthaginians, Numidians, Persians, and Greeks before the entire region becoming a part of the Roman Empire. Libya was an early centre of Christianity. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the area of Libya was mostly occupied by the Vandals until the 7th century when invasions brought Islam to the region. From then on, centuries of Arab migration to the Maghreb shifted the demographic scope of Libya in favour of Arabs. In the 16th century, the Spanish Empire and the Knights of St John occupied Tripoli until Ottoman rule began in 1551. Libya was involved in the Barbary Wars of the 18th and 19th centuries. Ottoman rule continued until the Italo-Turkish War, which resulted in the Italian occupation of Libya and the establishment of two colonies, Italian Tripolitania and Italian Cyrenaica (1911–1934), later unified in the Italian Libya colony from 1934 to 1943.

During World War II, Libya was an area of warfare in the North African Campaign. The Italian population then went into decline. Libya became independent as a kingdom in 1951. A bloodless military coup in 1969, initiated by a coalition led by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, overthrew King Idris I and created a republic. Gaddafi was often described by critics as a dictator, and was one of the world&#x27;s longest serving non-royal leaders, ruling for 42 years. He ruled until being overthrown and killed during the 2011 Libyan Civil War, which was part of the wider Arab Spring, with authority transferred to the National Transitional Council then to the elected General National Congress. Since 2011, Libya has been involved in a political and humanitarian crisis, and by 2014, two rival authorities claimed to govern Libya, which led to a second civil war, with parts of Libya split between the Tobruk and Tripoli-based governments as well as various tribal and Islamist militias. The two main warring sides signed a permanent ceasefire in 2020, and a unity government took authority to plan for democratic elections, though political rivalries continue to delay this. In March 2022, the House of Representatives ceased recognising the Government of National Unity and proclaimed an alternative government, the Government of National Stability (GNS). Both governments have been functioning simultaneously since then, which has led to dual power in Libya. The international community continues to recognise the unity government as the legitimate government of the country.

Libya is a developing country ranking 92nd by HDI, the highest score in mainland Africa, and has the 10th-largest proven oil reserves in the world. Libya is a member of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the African Union, the Arab League, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and OPEC.

== Etymology ==

The origin of the name &quot;Libya&quot; first appeared in an inscription of Ramesses II, written as &quot;&quot; in hieroglyphic. The name derives from a generalized identity given to a large confederacy of ancient east &quot;Libyan&quot; Berbers, North African people(s) and tribes who lived around the lush regions of Cyrenaica and Marmarica. An army of 40,000 men and a confederacy of tribes known as &quot;Great Chiefs of the Libu&quot; were led by King Meryey who fought a war against pharaoh Merneptah in year 5 (1208 BCE). This conflict was mentioned in the Great Karnak Inscription in the western delta during the 5th and 6th years of his reign and resulted in a defeat for Meryey. According to the Great Karnak Inscription, the military alliance comprised the Meshwesh, the Lukka, and the &quot;Sea Peoples&quot; known as the Ekwesh, Teresh, Shekelesh, and the Sherden.

The Great Karnak Inscription reads:

The name &quot;Libya&quot; was brought back into use in 1903 by Italian geographer Federico Minutilli. It was intended to supplant terms applied to Ottoman Tripolitania, the coastal region of what is today Libya, having been ruled by the Ottoman Empire from 1551 to 1911 as the Eyalet of Tripolitania.

Libya gained independence in 1951 as the United Libyan Kingdom ( &#x27;), changing its name to the Kingdom of Libya ( &#x27;), literally &quot;Libyan Kingdom&quot;, in 1963. Following a coup d&#x27;état led by Muammar Gaddafi in 1969, the name of the state was changed to the Libyan Arab Republic ( &#x27;). The official name was &quot;Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya&quot; from 1977 to 1986 (), and &quot;Great Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya&quot; (, &#x27; ) from 1986 to 2011.

The National Transitional Council, established in 2011, referred to the state as simply &quot;Libya&quot;. The UN formally recognized the country as &quot;Libya&quot; in September 2011 based on a request from the Permanent Mission of Libya citing the Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration of 3 August 2011. In November 2011, the ISO 3166-1 was altered to reflect the new country name &quot;Libya&quot; in English, &quot;Libye (la)&quot; in French.

In December 2017 the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations informed the United Nations that the country&#x27;s official name was henceforth the &quot;State of Libya&quot;; &quot;Libya&quot; remained the official short form, and the country continued to be listed under &quot;L&quot; in alphabetical lists.

== History ==
=== Ancient Libya ===

The coastal plain of Libya was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BC. The Afroasiatic ancestors of the Berber people are assumed to have spread into the area by the Late Bronze Age. The earliest known name of such a tribe was the Garamantes, based in Germa. The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya. By the 5th century BC, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilization, known as Punic, came into being.

In 630 BC, the ancient Greeks colonized the area around Barca in Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica. The area was home to the renowned philosophy school of the Cyrenaics. In 525 BC the Persian army of Cambyses II overran Cyrenaica, which for the next two centuries remained under Persian or Egyptian rule. Alexander the Great ended Persian rule in 331 BC and received tribute from Cyrenaica. Eastern Libya again fell under the control of the Greeks, this time as part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom.

After the fall of Carthage the Romans did not immediately occupy Tripolitania (the region around Tripoli), but left it instead under control of the kings of Numidia, until the coastal cities asked and obtained its protection. Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BC and joined it to Crete as a Roman province. As part of the Africa Nova province, Tripolitania was prosperous, and reached a golden age in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, when the city of Leptis Magna, home to the Severan dynasty, was at its height.

On the Eastern side, Cyrenaica&#x27;s first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius. It was heavily devastated during the Kitos War and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike. Although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decline. Libya was early to convert to Nicene Christianity and was the home of Pope Victor I; however, Libya was also home to many non-Nicene varieties of early Christianity, such as Arianism and Donatism.

=== Islamic Libya: 647–1556 ===

Under the command of Amr ibn al-As, the Rashidun army conquered Cyrenaica. In 647 an army led by Abdullah ibn Saad took Tripoli from the Byzantines definitively. The Fezzan was conquered by Uqba ibn Nafi in 663. The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule.

For the next several decades, Libya was under the purview of the Umayyad Caliph of Damascus until the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750, and Libya came under the rule of Baghdad. When Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab as his governor of Ifriqiya in 800, Libya enjoyed considerable local autonomy under the Aghlabid dynasty. By the 10th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya, and ruled the entire region in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor.

Ibn Ziri&#x27;s Berber Zirid dynasty ultimately broke away from the Shiite Fatimids, and recognized the Sunni Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs. In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from mainly two Arab Qaisi tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa. This act drastically altered the fabric of the Libyan countryside, and cemented the cultural and linguistic Arabisation of the region.

Zirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away. Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily. For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles among Ayyubids, the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya. Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of the Tunisian Hafsid Kingdom independent from the Almohads. In the 14th century, the Banu Thabit dynasty ruled Tripolitania before reverting to direct Hafsid control. By the 16th century, the Hafsids became increasingly caught up in the power struggle between Spain and the Ottoman Empire.

After Abbasid control was weakened, Cyrenaica was under Egypt-based states such as the Tulunids, Ikhshidids, Ayyubids, and Mamluks before Ottoman conquest in 1517. Fezzan acquired independence under Awlad Muhammad dynasty after Kanem rule. Ottomans finally conquered Fezzan between 1556 and 1577.

=== Ottoman Tripolitania: 1556–1911 ===

After a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights of St. John, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha took control of Libya in 1551. His successor Turgut Reis was named the Bey of Tripoli and later Pasha of Tripoli in 1556. By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a &quot;pasha&quot; appointed directly by the &quot;sultan&quot; in Constantinople/Istanbul. In the 1580s, the rulers of Fezzan gave their allegiance to the sultan, and although Ottoman authority was absent in Cyrenaica, a &quot;bey&quot; was stationed in Benghazi late in the next century to act as agent of the government in Tripoli. European slaves and large numbers of enslaved Blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli. In 1551, Turgut Reis enslaved almost the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo, some 5,000 people, sending them to Libya.

In time, real power came to rest with the pasha&#x27;s corps of janissaries. In 1611 the &quot;deys&quot; staged a coup against the pasha, and Dey Sulayman Safar was appointed as head of government. For the next hundred years, a series of &quot;deys&quot; effectively ruled Tripolitania. The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 1631–49) and Osman Saqizli (r. 1649–72), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region. The latter conquered also Cyrenaica.
Lacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military anarchy during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year. One such coup was led by Turkish officer Ahmed Karamanli. The Karamanlis ruled from 1711 until 1835 mainly in Tripolitania, and had influence in Cyrenaica and Fezzan as well by the mid-18th century. Ahmed&#x27;s successors proved to be less capable than himself, however, the region&#x27;s delicate balance of power allowed the Karamanli. The 1793–95 Tripolitanian civil war occurred in those years. In 1793, Turkish officer Ali Pasha deposed Hamet Karamanli and briefly restored Tripolitania to Ottoman rule. Hamet&#x27;s brother Yusuf (r. 1795–1832) re-established Tripolitania&#x27;s independence.

In the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. By 1819, the various treaties of the Napoleonic Wars had forced the Barbary states to give up piracy almost entirely, and Tripolitania&#x27;s economy began to crumble. As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons. Civil war soon resulted.

Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania. Order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and Gûma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858. The second period of direct Ottoman rule saw administrative changes, and greater order in the governance of the three provinces of Libya. Ottoman rule finally reasserted to Fezzan between 1850 and 1875 for earning income from Saharan commerce.

=== Italian colonization and Allied occupation (1911–1951) ===


After the Italo-Turkish War (1911–1912), Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies. From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa. From 1927 to 1934, the territory was split into two colonies, Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, run by Italian governors. Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population.

Omar Mukhtar rose to prominence as a resistance leader against Italian colonization and became a national hero despite his capture and execution on 16 September 1931. His face is currently printed on the Libyan ten dinar note in memory and recognition of his patriotism. Another prominent resistance leader, Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, continued to lead the Libyan resistance until the outbreak of the Second World War.

The so-called &quot;pacification of Libya&quot; by the Italians resulted in mass deaths of the indigenous people in Cyrenaica, killing approximately one quarter of Cyrenaica&#x27;s population of 225,000. Ilan Pappé estimates that between 1928 and 1932 the Italian military &quot;killed half the Bedouin population (directly or through disease and starvation in Italian concentration camps in Libya).&quot;
In 1934, Italy combined Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan and adopted the name &quot;Libya&quot; (used by the Ancient Greeks for all of North Africa except Egypt) for the unified colony, with Tripoli as its capital. The Italians emphasized infrastructure improvements and public works. In particular, they greatly expanded Libyan railway and road networks from 1934 to 1940, building hundreds of kilometres of new roads and railways and encouraging the establishment of new industries and dozens of new agricultural villages.

In June 1940, Italy entered World War II. Libya became the setting for the hard-fought North African Campaign that ultimately ended in defeat for Italy and its German ally in 1943.

From 1943 to 1951, Libya was under Allied occupation. The British military administered the two former Italian Libyan provinces of Tripolitana and Cyrenaïca, while the French administered the province of Fezzan. In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya.

=== Independent Kingdom (1951–1969) ===
A national assembly crafted a constitution that established a monarchy and extended an offer for the throne to Sayyid Idris, the Emir of Cyrenaica. Sayyid Idris held the esteemed position as the leader of the influential Senussi religious brotherhood, which was founded by his grandfather in the preceding century as a response to Western influence in the Arab world. This devout Islamic movement garnered significant support from the desert Bedouin and became a major political force in Libya. During the declining years of the Ottoman Empire, it effectively governed the Libyan interior.
Born in an oasis in Cyrenaica in 1890, Sayyid Idris assumed leadership of the Senussi at a young age. He spent a considerable period of exile in Egypt under Italian rule and returned to Libya after the Axis powers were ousted in 1943. On December 24, 1951, as King Idris I, he addressed the nation via radio from Benghazi. On November 21, 1949, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution stating that Libya should become independent before January 1, 1952. Idris represented Libya in the subsequent UN negotiations. By December 24, 1951, Libya declared its independence as the United Kingdom of Libya, a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under King Idris.

However, the new kingdom faced challenging prospects. It lacked significant industry and agricultural resources. The kingdom&#x27;s primary exports consisted of hides, wool, horses, and ostrich feathers. Despite having one of the lowest income per capita figures globally, it also suffered from one of the highest illiteracy rates. King Idris I, already in his sixties, had no direct heir to succeed him. His cousin, whom he had married in 1932, reportedly experienced numerous miscarriages, and their son, born in 1953, tragically died shortly after birth. Crown Prince Rida, Idris&#x27;s brother, was the designated heir, but the royal family was riddled with incessant disputes. King Idris&#x27;s devout Muslim piety, which solidified his support among the Bedouin population, clashed with the modernizing and urban intellectual currents in Libya. To address the rivalry between Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, Benghazi and Tripoli alternated as the capital every two years.

The swift emergence of a large number of bureaucrats resulted in a costly royal government. The discovery of significant oil reserves in 1959 and the subsequent income from petroleum sales enabled one of the world&#x27;s poorest nations to establish an extremely wealthy state. Although oil drastically improved the Libyan government&#x27;s finances, popular resentment began to build over the increased concentration of the nation&#x27;s wealth in the hands of King Idris and the national elite. This discontent continued to mount with the rise of Nasserism and Arab nationalism throughout North Africa and the Middle East.

=== Republic of Libya under Gaddafi (1969–2011) ===

On 1 September 1969, a group of rebel military officers led by Muammar Gaddafi launched a coup d&#x27;état against King Idris, which became known as the Al Fateh Revolution. Gaddafi was referred to as the &quot;Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution&quot; in government statements and the official Libyan press. He began dominating history and politics of Libya for the next four decades. Moving to reduce Italian influence, in October 1970 all Italian-owned assets were expropriated and the 12,000-strong Italian community was expelled from Libya alongside the smaller community of Italian Libyan Jews. The day became a national holiday known as &quot;Day of Revenge&quot;; it was later renamed the &quot;Day of Friendship&quot; because of improvement in Italy–Libya relations.

Libya&#x27;s increase in prosperity was accompanied by increased internal political repression, and political dissent was made illegal under Law 75 of 1973. Widespread surveillance of the population was carried out through Gaddafi&#x27;s Revolutionary Committees. Gaddafi also wanted to ease the strict social restrictions imposed on women by the previous regime, establishing the Revolutionary Women&#x27;s Formation to encourage reform. In 1970, a law was introduced affirming equality of the sexes and wage parity. In 1971, Gaddafi sponsored the creation of a Libyan General Women&#x27;s Federation. In 1972, a law was passed criminalizing the marriage of girls under the age of sixteen and making the woman&#x27;s consent a necessary prerequisite for a marriage.

On 25 October 1975, a coup attempt was launched by a group of 20 military officers, mostly from the city of Misrata. This resulted in the arrest and executions of the coup plotters. In March 1977, Libya officially became the &quot;Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya&quot;. Gaddafi officially passed power to the General People&#x27;s Committees and henceforth claimed to be no more than a symbolic figurehead. The new &quot;jamahiriya&quot; (Arab for &quot;republic&quot;) governance structure he established was officially referred to as &quot;direct democracy&quot;. Gaddafi, in his vision of democratic government and political philosophy, published &quot;The Green Book&quot; in 1975. His short book inscribed a representative mix of utopian socialism and Arab nationalism with a streak of Bedouin supremacy.In February 1977, Libya started delivering military supplies to Goukouni Oueddei and the People&#x27;s Armed Forces in Chad. The Chadian–Libyan War began in earnest when Libya&#x27;s support of rebel forces in northern Chad escalated into an invasion. Later that same year, Libya and Egypt fought a four-day border war that came to be known as the Egyptian–Libyan War. Both nations agreed to a ceasefire under the mediation of the Algerian president Houari Boumédiène. Hundreds of Libyans lost their lives in the country&#x27;s support for Idi Amin&#x27;s Uganda in its war against Tanzania. Gaddafi financed various other groups from anti-nuclear movements to Australian trade unions. On 2 March 1977, Libya officially became Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

Libya adopted its plain green national flag on 19 November 1977. The country had the only plain-coloured flag in the world until 2011, when Libya adopted its current flag. From 1977 onward, per capita income in the country rose to more than US$11,000, the fifth-highest in Africa, while the Human Development Index became the highest in Africa and greater than that of Saudi Arabia. This was achieved without borrowing any foreign loans, keeping Libya debt-free. The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country. In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs. Much of Libya&#x27;s income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of paramilitaries and terrorist groups around the world.

An American airstrike led by then US president Ronald Reagan intended to kill Gaddafi failed in 1986. Libya was finally put under sanctions by the United Nations after the bombing of a commercial flight at Lockerbie in 1988 killed 270 people. In the 1990s, the government&#x27;s rule was threatened by militant Islamism and an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate Gaddafi. The government responded with repressive measures. Riots and Islamic activisim were crushed by Revolutionary Guard Corps. Nevertheless, Cyrenaica between 1995 and 1998 was politically unstable, due to the tribal allegiances of the local troops. In 2003, Gaddafi announced that all of his regime&#x27;s weapons of mass destruction were disassembled, and that Libya was transitioning toward nuclear power.

=== First Libyan Civil War and the fall of Gaddafi (2011) ===
The first civil war came during the Arab Spring movements which overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt. Libya first experienced protests against Gaddafi&#x27;s regime on 15 February 2011, with a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February. Libya&#x27;s authoritarian regime led by Muammar Gaddafi put up much more of a resistance compared to the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia. While overthrowing the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia was a relatively quick process, Gaddafi&#x27;s campaign posed significant stalls on the uprising in Libya. The first announcement of a competing political authority appeared online and declared the Interim Transitional National Council as an alternative government. One of Gaddafi&#x27;s senior advisors responded by posting a tweet, wherein he resigned, defected, and advised Gaddafi to flee. By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli. On 27 February 2011, the National Transitional Council was established to administer the areas of Libya under rebel control. On 10 March 2011, the United States and many other nations recognised the council headed by Mahmoud Jibril as acting prime minister and as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people and withdrawing the recognition of Gaddafi&#x27;s regime.

Pro-Gaddafi forces were able to respond militarily to rebel pushes in Western Libya and launched a counterattack along the coast toward Benghazi, the &quot;de facto&quot; centre of the uprising. The town of Zawiya, from Tripoli, was bombarded by air force planes and army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, &quot;exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict.&quot; Organizations of the United Nations, including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations Human Rights Council, condemned the crackdown as violating international law, with the latter body expelling Libya outright in an unprecedented action. On 17 March 2011 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973, with a 10–0 vote and five abstentions including Russia, China, India, Brazil and Germany. The resolution sanctioned the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of &quot;all means necessary&quot; to protect civilians within Libya. On 19 March, the first act of NATO allies to secure the no-fly zone began by destroying Libyan air defenses when French military jets entered Libyan airspace on a reconnaissance mission heralding attacks on enemy targets.

In the weeks that followed, US American forces were in the forefront of NATO operations against Libya. More than 8,000 US personnel in warships and aircraft were deployed in the area. At least 3,000 targets were struck in 14,202 strike sorties, 716 of them in Tripoli and 492 in Brega. The US air offensive included flights of B-2 Stealth bombers, each bomber armed with sixteen 2000-pound bombs, flying out of and returning to their base in Missouri in the continental United States. The support provided by the NATO air forces contributed to the ultimate success of the revolution. By 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed Martyrs&#x27; Square in honour of those killed since 17 February 2011. On 20 October 2011, the last heavy fighting of the uprising came to an end in the city of Sirte. The Battle of Sirte was both the last decisive battle and the last one in general of the First Libyan Civil War where Gaddafi was captured and killed by NATO-backed forces on 20 October 2011. Sirte was the last Gaddafi loyalist stronghold and his place of birth. The defeat of loyalist forces was celebrated on 23 October 2011, three days after the fall of Sirte. At least 30,000 Libyans died in the civil war. In addition, the National Transitional Council estimated 50,000 wounded.

=== Interwar period and the Second Libyan Civil War (2011–2020) ===

Following the defeat of loyalist forces, Libya was torn among numerous rival, armed militias affiliated with distinct regions, cities and tribes, while the central government had been weak and unable to effectively exert its authority over the country. Competing militias pitted themselves against each other in a political struggle between Islamist politicians and their opponents. On 7 July 2012, Libyans held their first parliamentary elections since the end of the former regime. On 8 August, the National Transitional Council officially handed power over to the wholly-elected General National Congress, which was then tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum. On 25 August 2012, in what Reuters reported as &quot;the most blatant sectarian attack&quot; since the end of the civil war, unnamed organized assailants bulldozed a Sufi mosque with graves in the centre of the Libyan capital Tripoli. It was the second such razing of a Sufi site in two days. Numerous acts of vandalism and destruction of heritage were carried out by suspected Islamist militias, including the removal of the Nude Gazelle Statue and the destruction and desecration of World War II-era British grave sites near Benghazi. Many other cases of heritage vandalism were reported to be carried out by Islamist-related radical militias and mobs that either destroyed, robbed, or looted a number of historic sites.

On 11 September 2012, Islamist militants mounted an attack on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, killing the US ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens, and three others. The incident generated outrage in the United States and Libya. On 7 October 2012, Libya&#x27;s Prime Minister-elect Mustafa A.G. Abushagur was ousted after failing a second time to win parliamentary approval for a new cabinet. On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate. Zeidan was sworn in after his cabinet was approved by the GNC. On 11 March 2014, after having been ousted by the GNC for his inability to halt a rogue oil shipment, Prime Minister Zeidan stepped down, and was replaced by Prime Minister Abdullah al-Thani.

The Second Civil War began in May 2014 following fighting between rival parliaments with tribal militias and jihadist groups soon taking advantage of the power vacuum. Most notably, radical Islamist fighters seized Derna in 2014 and Sirte in 2015 in the name of the Islamic State. In February 2015, neighbouring Egypt launched airstrikes against IS in support of the Tobruk government. In June 2014, elections were held to the House of Representatives, a new legislative body intended to take over from the General National Congress. The elections were marred by violence and low turnout, with voting stations closed in some areas. Secularists and liberals did well in the elections, to the consternation of Islamist lawmakers in the GNC, who reconvened and declared a continuing mandate for the GNC, refusing to recognise the new House of Representatives. Armed supporters of the General National Congress occupied Tripoli, forcing the newly elected parliament to flee to Tobruk.

In January 2015, meetings were held with the aim to find a peaceful agreement between the rival parties in Libya. The so-called Geneva-Ghadames talks were supposed to bring the GNC and the Tobruk government together at one table to find a solution of the internal conflict. However, the GNC actually never participated, a sign that internal division not only affected the &quot;Tobruk Camp&quot;, but also the &quot;Tripoli Camp&quot;. Meanwhile, terrorism within Libya steadily increased, also affecting neighbouring countries. The terrorist attack against the Bardo Museum in Tunisia on 18 March 2015 was reportedly carried out by two Libyan-trained militants. During 2015 an extended series of diplomatic meetings and peace negotiations were supported by the United Nations, as conducted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG), Spanish diplomat Bernardino León. UN support for the SRSG-led process of dialogue carried on in addition to the usual work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). In July 2015 SRSG Leon reported to the UN Security Council on the progress of the negotiations, which at that point had just achieved a political agreement on 11 July setting out &quot;a comprehensive framework... includ[ing] guiding principles... institutions and decision-making mechanisms to guide the transition until the adoption of a permanent constitution.&quot;
Talks, negotiations and dialogue continued on during mid-2015 at various international locations, culminating at Skhirat in Morocco in early September.

Also in 2015, as part of the ongoing support from the international community, the UN Human Rights Council requested a report about the Libyan situation and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra&#x27;ad Al Hussein, established an investigative body (OIOL) to report on human rights and rebuilding the Libyan justice system. Chaos-ridden Libya emerged as a major transit point for people trying to reach Europe. Between 2013 and 2018, nearly 700,000 migrants reached Italy by boat, many of them from Libya. In May 2018 Libya&#x27;s rival leaders agreed to hold parliamentary and presidential elections following a meeting in Paris. In April 2019, Khalifa Haftar launched Operation Flood of Dignity, in an offensive by the Libyan National Army aimed to seize Western territories from the Government of National Accord (GNA). In June 2019, forces allied to Libya&#x27;s UN-recognized Government of National Accord successfully captured Gharyan, a strategic town where military commander Khalifa Haftar and his fighters were based. According to a spokesman for GNA forces, Mustafa al-Mejii, dozens of LNA fighters under Haftar were killed, while at least 18 were taken prisoner. In March 2020, UN-backed government of Fayez Al-Sarraj commenced Operation Peace Storm. The government initiated the bid in response to the state of assaults carried by Field Marshal Haftar&#x27;s LNA. &quot;We are a legitimate, civilian government that respects its obligations to the international community, but is committed primarily to its people and has an obligation to protect its citizens,&quot; Sarraj said in line with his decision. On 28 August 2020, the &quot;BBC Africa Eye&quot; and &quot;BBC Arabic Documentaries&quot; revealed that a drone operated by the United Arab Emirates (UAE) killed 26 young cadets at a military academy in Tripoli, on 4 January. Most of the cadets were teenagers and none of them were armed. The Chinese-made drone Wing Loong II fired Blue Arrow 7 missile, which was operated from UAE-run Al-Khadim Libyan air base. In February, these drones stationed in Libya were moved to an air base near Siwa in the western Egyptian desert. &quot;The Guardian&quot; probed and discovered the blatant violation of UN arms embargo by the UAE and Turkey on 7 October 2020. As per the reporting, both the nations sent large-scale military cargo planes to Libya in support of their respective parties. On 23 October 2020, a permanent ceasefire was signed to end the war.

=== Post-civil war years (2020–present) ===
In December 2021, the country&#x27;s first presidential election was scheduled, but was delayed to June 2022 and later postponed further.

Fathi Bashagha was appointed prime minister by the parliament in February 2022 to lead a transitional administration, but standing prime minister Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh refused to hand over power as of April 2022. In protest against the Dbeibah government, tribal leaders from the desert town of Ubari shut down the El Sharara oil field, Libya&#x27;s largest oil field, on 18 April 2022. The shut down threatened to cause oil shortages domestically in Libya, and preclude the state-run National Oil Corp. from exploiting the high oil prices on the international market resulting from the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On 2 July, the House of Representatives was burned down by protesters.

On September 10, 2023, catastrophic floods due to dam failures generated by Storm Daniel devastated the port city of Derna, killing more than 5,900 and possibly as many as 24,000. The floods were the worst natural disaster in Libya&#x27;s modern history.

In November 2024, the Government of National Unity would instate a morality police to crack-down on &quot;weird haircuts&quot;, enforce “modest” clothing, and require male guardians for women.

== Geography ==


Libya extends over , making it the 16th-largest nation in the world by size. Libya is bounded to the north by the Mediterranean Sea, the west by Tunisia and Algeria, the southwest by Niger, the south by Chad, the southeast by Sudan, and the east by Egypt. Libya lies between latitudes 19° and 34°N, and longitudes 9° and 26°E.

At , Libya&#x27;s coastline is the longest of any African country bordering the Mediterranean. The portion of the Mediterranean Sea north of Libya is often called the Libyan Sea. The climate is mostly extremely dry and desertlike in nature. However, the northern regions enjoy a milder Mediterranean climate.

Six ecoregions lie within Libya&#x27;s borders: Saharan halophytics, Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe, Mediterranean woodlands and forests, North Saharan steppe and woodlands, Tibesti-Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands, and West Saharan montane xeric woodlands.

Natural hazards come in the form of hot, dry, dust-laden sirocco (known in Libya as the &quot;gibli&quot;). This is a southern wind blowing from one to four days in spring and autumn. There are also dust storms and sandstorms. Oases can also be found scattered throughout Libya, the most important of which are Ghadames and Kufra. Libya is one of the sunniest and driest countries in the world due to prevailing presence of desert environment.

Libya was a pioneer state in North Africa in species protection, with the creation in 1975 of the El Kouf protected area. The fall of Muammar Gaddafi&#x27;s regime favoured intense poaching: &quot;Before the fall of Gaddafi even hunting rifles were forbidden. But since 2011, poaching has been carried out with weapons of war and sophisticated vehicles in which one can find up to 200 gazelle heads killed by militiamen who hunt to pass the time. We are also witnessing the emergence of hunters with no connection to the tribes that traditionally practice hunting. They shoot everything they find, even during the breeding season. More than 500,000 birds are killed in this way each year, when protected areas have been seized by tribal chiefs who have appropriated them. The animals that used to live there have all disappeared, hunted when they are edible or released when they are not,&quot; explains zoologist Khaled Ettaieb.

=== Libyan Desert ===
The Libyan Desert, which covers most of Libya, is one of the most arid and sun-baked places on earth. In places, decades may pass without seeing any rainfall at all, and even in the highlands rainfall seldom happens, once every 5–10 years. At Uweinat, the last recorded rainfall was in September 1998.

Likewise, the temperature in the Libyan Desert can be extreme; on 13 September 1922, the town of &#x27;Aziziya, which is located southwest of Tripoli, recorded an air temperature of , considered to be a world record. In September 2012, however, the world record figure of 58 °C was determined to be invalid by the World Meteorological Organization.

There are a few scattered uninhabited small oases, usually linked to the major depressions, where water can be found by digging to a few feet in depth. In the west there is a widely dispersed group of oases in unconnected shallow depressions, the Kufra group, consisting of Tazerbo, Rebianae and Kufra. Aside from the scarps, the general flatness is only interrupted by a series of plateaus and massifs near the centre of the Libyan Desert, around the convergence of the Egyptian-Sudanese-Libyan borders.

Slightly further to the south are the massifs of Arkenu, Uweinat, and Kissu. These granite mountains are ancient, having formed long before the sandstones surrounding them. Arkenu and Western Uweinat are ring complexes very similar to those in the Aïr Mountains. Eastern Uweinat (the highest point in the Libyan Desert) is a raised sandstone plateau adjacent to the granite part further west.

The plain to the north of Uweinat is dotted with eroded volcanic features. With the discovery of oil in the 1950s also came the discovery of a massive aquifer underneath much of Libya. The water in the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System pre-dates the last Ice ages and the Sahara Desert itself. This area also contains the Arkenu structures, which were once thought to be two impact craters.

== Politics ==

The politics of Libya has been in a tumultuous state since the start of the Arab Spring and the NATO intervention related Libyan Crisis in 2011; the crisis resulted in the collapse of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the killing of Muammar Gaddafi, amidst the First Civil War and the foreign military intervention. The crisis was deepened by the factional violence in the aftermath of the First Civil War, resulting in the outbreak of the Second Civil War in 2014. The control over the country is currently split between the House of Representatives (HoR) in Tobruk and the Government of National Unity (GNU) in Tripoli and their respective supporters, as well as various jihadist groups and tribal elements controlling different parts of the country.

The former legislature was the General National Congress, which had 200 seats. The General National Congress (2014), a largely unrecognised rival parliament based in the &quot;de jure&quot; capital of Tripoli, claims to be a legal continuation of the GNC. On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in parliamentary elections, the first free elections in almost 40 years. Around thirty women were elected to become members of parliament. Early results of the vote showed the National Forces Alliance, led by former interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril, as front runner. The Justice and Construction Party, affiliated to the Muslim Brotherhood, has done less well than similar parties in Egypt and Tunisia. It won 17 out of 80 seats that were contested by parties, but about 60 independents have since joined its caucus. As of January 2013, there was mounting public pressure on the National Congress to set up a drafting body to create a new constitution. Congress had not yet decided whether the members of the body would be elected or appointed. On 30 March 2014, the General National Congress voted to replace itself with a new House of Representatives. The new legislature allocates 30 seats for women, will have 200 seats overall (with individuals able to run as members of political parties) and allows Libyans of foreign nationalities to run for office.

Following the 2012 elections, Freedom House improved Libya&#x27;s rating from Not Free to Partly Free, and now considers the country to be an electoral democracy. Gaddafi merged civil and sharia courts in 1973. Civil courts now employ sharia judges who sit in regular courts of appeal and specialize in sharia appellate cases. Laws regarding personal status are derived from Islamic law. At a meeting of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs on 2 December 2014, UN Special Representative Bernardino León described Libya as a non-state. An agreement to form a national unity government was signed on 17 December 2015. Under the terms of the agreement, a nine-member Presidency Council and a seventeen-member interim Government of National Accord would be formed, with a view to holding new elections within two years. The House of Representatives would continue to exist as a legislature and an advisory body, to be known as the State Council, will be formed with members nominated by the General National Congress (2014). The formation of an interim unity government was announced on 5 February 2021, after its members were elected by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF). Seventy-four members of the LPDF cast ballots for four-member slates which would fill positions including the Prime Minister and the head of the Presidential Council. After no slates reached a 60% vote threshold, the two leading teams competed in a run-off election. Mohamed al-Menfi, a former ambassador to Greece, became head of the Presidential Council.

Meanwhile, the LPDF confirmed that Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh, a businessman, would be the transitional Prime Minister. All of the candidates who ran in this election, including the members of the winning slate, promised to appoint women to 30% of all senior government positions. The politicians elected to lead the interim government initially agreed not to stand in the national elections scheduled for 24 December 2021. However, Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh announced his candidature for president despite the ban in November 2021. The Appeals Court in Tripoli rejected appeals for his disqualification, and allowed Dbeibeh back on the candidates&#x27; list, along with a number of other disqualified candidates, originally scheduled for December 24. Even more controversially, the court also reinstated Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, a son of the former dictator, as a presidential candidate. On 22 December 2021, Libya&#x27;s Election Commission called for the postponement of the election until 24 January 2022. Earlier, a parliamentary commission said it would be &quot;impossible&quot; to hold the election on 24 December 2021. The UN called on Libya&#x27;s interim leaders to &quot;expeditiously address all legal and political obstacles to hold elections, including finalising the list of presidential candidates&quot;. However, at the last minute, the election was postponed indefinitely and the international community agreed to continue its support and recognition of the interim government headed by Mr Dbeibeh. According to new election rules, a new prime minister has 21 days to form a cabinet that must be endorsed by the various governing bodies within Libya. After this cabinet is agreed upon, the unity government will replace all &quot;parallel authorities&quot; within Libya, including the Government of National Accord in Tripoli and the administration led by General Haftar.

=== Foreign relations ===

Libya&#x27;s foreign policies have fluctuated since 1951. As a Kingdom, Libya maintained a definitively pro-Western stance, and was recognized as belonging to the conservative traditionalist bloc in the League of Arab States (the present-day Arab League), of which it became a member in 1953. The government was also friendly towards Western countries such as the United Kingdom, United States, France, Italy, Greece, and established full diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in 1955. Although the government supported Arab causes, including the Moroccan and Algerian independence movements, it took little active part in the Arab-Israeli dispute or the tumultuous inter-Arab politics of the 1950s and early 1960s. The Kingdom was noted for its close association with the West, while it steered a conservative course at home.

After the 1969 coup, Muammar Gaddafi closed American and British bases and partly nationalized foreign oil and commercial interests in Libya. Gaddafi was known for backing a number of leaders viewed as anathema to Westernization and political liberalism, including Ugandan President Idi Amin, Central African Emperor Jean-Bédel Bokassa, Ethiopian strongman Haile Mariam Mengistu, Liberian President Charles Taylor, and Yugoslav President Slobodan Milošević.

Relations with the West were strained by a series of incidents for most of Gaddafi&#x27;s rule, including the killing of London policewoman Yvonne Fletcher, the bombing of a West Berlin nightclub frequented by US servicemen, and the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which led to UN sanctions in the 1990s, though by the late 2000s, the United States and other Western powers had normalised relations with Libya. Gaddafi&#x27;s decision to abandon the pursuit of weapons of mass destruction after the Iraq War saw Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein overthrown and put on trial led to Libya being hailed as a success for Western soft power initiatives in the War on Terror. In October 2010, Gaddafi apologized to African leaders on behalf of Arab nations for their involvement in the trans-Saharan slave trade.

Libya is included in the European Union&#x27;s European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer. Libyan authorities rejected European Union&#x27;s plans aimed at stopping migration from Libya. In 2017, Libya signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

=== Military ===
Libya&#x27;s previous national army was defeated in the Libyan Civil War and disbanded. The Tobruk based House of Representatives who claim to be the legitimate government of Libya have attempted to reestablish a military known as the Libyan National Army. Led by Khalifa Haftar, they control much of eastern Libya. In May 2012, an estimated 35,000 personnel had joined its ranks. The internationally recognised Government of National Accord established in 2015 has its own army that replaced the LNA, but it consists largely of undisciplined and disorganised militia groups.

As of November 2012, it was deemed to be still in the embryonic stage of development. President Mohammed el-Megarif promised that empowering the army and police force is the government&#x27;s biggest priority. President el-Megarif also ordered that all of the country&#x27;s militias must come under government authority or disband.

Militias have so far refused to be integrated into a central security force. Many of these militias are disciplined, but the most powerful of them answer only to the executive councils of various Libyan cities. These militias make up the so-called Libyan Shield, a parallel national force, which operates at the request, rather than at the order, of the defence ministry.

=== Administrative divisions ===
Historically, the area of Libya was considered three provinces (or states), Tripolitania in the northwest, Barka (Cyrenaica) in the east, and Fezzan in the southwest. It was the conquest by Italy in the Italo-Turkish War that united them in a single political unit.

Since 2007, Libya has been divided into 22 districts (Shabiyat):
In 2022, 18 provinces were declared by the Libyan Government of National Unity (Libyan Observer): the eastern coast, Jabal Al-Akhdar, Al-Hizam, Benghazi, Al-Wahat, Al-Kufra, Al-Khaleej, Al-Margab, Tripoli, Al-Jafara, Al-Zawiya, West Coast, Gheryan, Zintan, Nalut, Sabha, Al-Wadi, and Murzuq Basin.

=== Human rights ===

According to Human Rights Watch annual report 2016, journalists are still being targeted by the armed groups in Libya. The organization added that Libya ranked very low in the 2015 Press Freedom Index, 154th out of 180 countries. For the 2021 Press Freedom Index its score dropped to 165th out of 180 countries. Homosexuality is illegal in Libya.

== Economy ==
The Libyan economy depends primarily upon revenues from the oil sector, which account for over half of GDP and 97% of exports. Libya holds the largest proven oil reserves in Africa and is an important contributor to the global supply of light, sweet crude. During 2010, when oil averaged at $80 a barrel, oil production accounted for 54% of GDP. Apart from petroleum, the other natural resources are natural gas and gypsum. The International Monetary Fund estimated Libya&#x27;s real GDP growth at 122% in 2012 and 16.7% in 2013, after a 60% plunge in 2011.

The World Bank defines Libya as an &#x27;Upper Middle Income Economy&#x27;, along with only seven other African countries. Substantial revenues from the energy sector, coupled with a small population, give Libya one of the highest per capita GDPs in Africa. This allowed the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya state to provide an extensive level of social security, particularly in the fields of housing and education.
Libya faces many structural problems including a lack of institutions, weak governance, and chronic structural unemployment. The economy displays a lack of economic diversification and significant reliance on immigrant labour. Libya has traditionally relied on unsustainably high levels of public sector hiring to create employment. In the mid-2000s, the government employed about 70% of all national employees.

Unemployment rose from 8% in 2008 to 21% in 2009, according to the census figures. According to an Arab League report, based on data from 2010, unemployment for women stands at 18% while for the figure for men is 21%, making Libya the only Arab country where there are more unemployed men than women. Libya has high levels of social inequality, high rates of youth unemployment and regional economic disparities. Water supply is also a problem, with some 28% of the population not having access to safe drinking water in 2000.
Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Libya, which includes Cairo-Dakar Highway and Tripoli-Cape Town Highway. These routes have further contributed in the economic development of Libya.

Libya imports up to 90% of its cereal consumption requirements, and imports of wheat in 2012/13 was estimated at 1 million tonnes. The 2012 wheat production was estimated at 200,000 tonnes. The government hopes to increase food production to 800,000 tonnes of cereals by 2020. However, natural and environmental conditions limit Libya&#x27;s agricultural production potential. Before 1958, agriculture was the country&#x27;s main source of revenue, making up about 30% of GDP. With the discovery of oil in 1958, the size of the agriculture sector declined rapidly, comprising less than 5% GDP by 2005.

The country joined OPEC in 1962. Libya is not a WTO member, but negotiations for its accession started in 2004. In the early 1980s, Libya was one of the wealthiest countries in the world; its GDP per capita was higher than some developed countries.
In the early 2000s officials of the Jamahiriya era carried out economic reforms to reintegrate Libya into the global economy. UN sanctions were lifted in September 2003, and Libya announced in December 2003 that it would abandon programs to build weapons of mass destruction. Other steps have included applying for membership of the World Trade Organization, reducing subsidies, and announcing plans for privatization.

Authorities privatized more than 100 government owned companies after 2003 in industries including oil refining, tourism and real estate, of which 29 were 100% foreign owned. Many international oil companies returned to the country, including oil giants Shell and ExxonMobil. After sanctions were lifted there was a gradual increase of air traffic, and by 2005 there were 1.5 million yearly air travellers. Libya had long been a notoriously difficult country for Western tourists to visit due to stringent visa requirements.

In 2007, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the second-eldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, was involved in a green development project called the Green Mountain Sustainable Development Area, which sought to bring tourism to Cyrene and to preserve Greek ruins in the area. In August 2011, it was estimated that it would take at least 10 years to rebuild Libya&#x27;s infrastructure. Even before the 2011 war, Libya&#x27;s infrastructure was in a poor state due to &quot;utter neglect&quot; by Gaddafi&#x27;s administration, according to the NTC. By October 2012, the economy had recovered from the 2011 conflict, with oil production returning to near normal levels. Oil production was more than 1.6 million barrels per day before the war. By October 2012, the average oil production has surpassed 1.4 million bpd. The resumption of production was made possible due to the quick return of major Western companies, like TotalEnergies, Eni, Repsol, Wintershall and Occidental. In 2016, an announcement from the company said the company aims 900,000 barrel per day in the next year. Oil production has fallen from 1.6 million barrel per day to 900,000 in four years of war.

The Great Man-Made River is the world&#x27;s largest irrigation project. The project utilizes a pipeline system that pumps fossil water from the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System from down south in Libya to cities in the populous Libyan northern Mediterranean coast including Tripoli and Benghazi. The water provides 70% of all freshwater used in Libya. During the second Libyan civil war, lasting from 2014 to 2020, the water infrastructure suffered neglect and occasional breakdowns. By 2017, 60% of the Libyan population were malnourished. Since then, 1.3 million people are waiting for emergency humanitarian aid, out of a total population of 7.1 million.

In March 2024, Libya is actively promoting business development and encouraging both domestic and foreign investment. This strategic initiative is aimed at securing long-term economic stability and prosperity for Libya by diversifying its economic foundation. Embracing green industries like renewable energy, energy efficiency, sustainable agriculture, and eco-tourism holds the potential to generate fresh employment prospects across a spectrum of sectors, thereby addressing unemployment challenges, particularly among the youth demographic.

== Demographics ==
Libya is a large country with a relatively small population concentrated very narrowly along the coast. Its population density is about in the two northern regions of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, but falls to less than elsewhere. Ninety percent of the people live along the coast in less than 10% of the area.

About 88% of the population is urban, mostly concentrated in the three largest cities, Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata. Libya has a population of about million, 27.7% of whom are under the age of 15. In 1984 the population was 3.6 million, an increase from the 1.54 million reported in 1964.

The population of Libya is primarily of Arab ancestry. Arabs comprise 92% of the population, while Berbers comprise 5%, though other estimates put this percentage at 10%, representing approximately 600,000 people. Among the Berber groups are the minority Berber populations of Zuwarah and the Nafusa Mountains. Southern Libya, primarily Sebha, Kufra, Ghat, Ghadamis and Murzuk, is also inhabited by two other ethnic groups; the Tuareg and Toubou. Libya is one of the world&#x27;s most tribal countries. There are about 140 tribes and clans in Libya. Also living in Libya are an estimated 750,000 Egyptian workers, down from more than 2 million prior to the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi in 2011.

Family life is important for Libyan families, the majority of whom live in apartment blocks and other independent housing units, with modes of housing depending on their income and wealth. Although the Arab Libyans traditionally lived nomadic Bedouin lifestyles in tents, they have predominately settled in towns and cities.

Because of this, their old ways of life are gradually fading out. An unknown small number of Libyans still live in the desert as their families have done for centuries. Most of the population has occupations in industry and services, and a small percentage is in agriculture.

According to the UNHCR, there were around 8,000 registered refugees, 5,500 unregistered refugees, and 7,000 asylum seekers of various origins in Libya in January 2013. Additionally, 47,000 Libyan nationals were internally displaced and 46,570 were internally displaced returnees.

=== Health ===

In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.88% of the country&#x27;s GDP. In 2009, there were 18.71 physicians and 66.95 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 74.95 years in 2011, or 72.44 years for males and 77.59 years for females.

In 2023, the Libyan health ministry announced the launch of the National Strategy for Primary Healthcare 2023–2028 to improve services provided by group clinics and health centres. A unique health number allotted to each citizen will facilitate access to medical records. Before Storm Daniel, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimated that around 60,000 people were in need of humanitarian aid in Derna and environs. Since the storm many of the hospitals and primary health facilities in Derna and eastern Libya have been rendered partially or completely nonfunctional.

Libya&#x27;s 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI) score is &lt;mark&gt;19.2&lt;/mark&gt;, which indicates a moderate level of hunger. Libya ranks 83rd out of 127 countries.

=== Education ===
Libya&#x27;s population includes 1.7 million students, over 270,000 of whom study at the tertiary level. Basic education in Libya is free for all citizens, and is compulsory up to the secondary level. The adult literacy rate in 2010 was 89.2%.

After Libya&#x27;s independence in 1951, its first university – the University of Libya – was established in Benghazi by royal decree. In the 1975–76 academic year the number of university students was estimated to be 13,418. , this number has increased to more than 200,000, with another 70,000 enrolled in the higher technical and vocational sector. The rapid increase in the number of students in the higher education sector has been mirrored by an increase in the number of institutions of higher education.

Since 1975 the number of public universities has grown from two to twelve and since their introduction in 1980, the number of higher technical and vocational institutes has grown to 84. Since 2007 some new private universities such as the Libyan International Medical University have been established. Although before 2011 a small number of private institutions were given accreditation, the majority of Libya&#x27;s higher education has always been financed by the public budget. In 1998 the budget allocation for education represented 38.2% of Libya&#x27;s national budget.

In 2024, the Ministry of Education announced the launch of the Full-Day School Project in which 12 schools in different parts of the country will have longer school days. The project aims to provide 800 hours of instruction per year to 3,300 elementary school students.

=== Ethnicity ===
The original inhabitants of Libya belonged predominantly to Berber ethnic groups; however, the long series of foreign invasions and migrations – particularly by Arabs – had a profound and lasting ethnic, linguistic, and cultural influence on Libyan demographics. Centuries of large-scale Arab migration to the Maghreb since the 7th century shifted the demographics of Libya in favour of Arabs. Some Turks settled in Libya during the rule of the Ottoman Empire.

Most of Libya&#x27;s inhabitants are Arab, with many tracing their ancestry to Bedouin Arab tribes like Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal, plus Turkish and Berber minorities. The Turkish minority are often called &quot;Kouloughlis&quot; and are concentrated in and around villages and towns. There are some ethnic minorities, such as the Berber Tuareg and the Black African Tebou.

Most Italian settlers, at their height numbering over half a million, left after Italian Libya&#x27;s independence in 1947. More repatriated in 1970 after the accession of Muammar Gaddafi, but a few hundred returned in the 2000s.

=== Foreign labour ===
As of 2023 the IOM estimates that approximately 10% of Libya&#x27;s population (upwards of 700,000 people) constituted foreign labour. Prior to the 2011 revolution, official and unofficial figures of migrant labour ranged from 25% to 40% of the population (between 1.5 and 2.4 million people). Historically, Libya hosted millions of low- and high-skilled Egyptian migrants, in particular.

It is difficult to estimate the total number of immigrants in Libya because the census figures, official counts and typically more accurate unofficial estimates all differ. In the 2006 census, around 359,540 foreign nationals were resident in Libya out of a population of over 5.5 million (6.35% of the population). Almost half of these were Egyptians, followed by Sudanese and Palestinian immigrants.
During the 2011 revolution, 768,362 immigrants fled Libya as calculated by the IOM, around 13% of the population at the time, although many more stayed on in the country.

If consular records prior to the revolution are used to estimate the immigrant population, as many as 2 million Egyptian migrants were recorded by the Egyptian embassy in Tripoli in 2009, followed by 87,200 Tunisians, and 68,200 Moroccans by their respective embassies. Turkey recorded the evacuation of 25,000 workers during the 2011 uprising. The number of Asian migrants before the revolution were just over 100,000 (60,000 Bangladeshis, 20,000 Filipinos, 18,000 Indians, 10,000 Pakistanis, as well as Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Thai and other workers). This would put the immigrant population at almost 40% before the revolution and is a figure more consistent with government estimates in 2004 which put the regular and irregular migrant numbers at 1.35 to 1.8 million (25–33% of the population at the time).

Libya&#x27;s native population of Arabs-Berbers as well as Arab migrants of various nationalities collectively make up 97% of the population .

=== Languages ===

According to the CIA, the official language of Libya is Arabic. The local Libyan Arabic variety is spoken alongside Modern Standard Arabic. Various Berber languages are also spoken, including Tamasheq, Ghadamis, Nafusi, Suknah and Awjilah. The Libyan Amazigh High Council (LAHC) has declared the Amazigh (Berber or Tamazight) language to be official in the cities and districts inhabited by the Berbers in Libya.
In addition, English is widely understood in the major cities, while the former colonial language of Italian is also used in commerce and by the remaining Italian population.

=== Religion ===

About 97% of the population in Libya are Muslims, most of whom belong to the Sunni branch. Small numbers of Ibadi Muslims live in the country.

Before the 1930s, the Senussi Sunni Sufi movement was the primary Islamic movement in Libya. This was a religious revival adapted to desert life. Its &quot;zawaaya&quot; (lodges) were found in Tripolitania and Fezzan, but Senussi influence was strongest in Cyrenaica. Rescuing the region from unrest and anarchy, the Senussi movement gave the Cyrenaican tribal people a religious attachment and feelings of unity and purpose. This Islamic movement was eventually destroyed by the Italian invasion. Gaddafi asserted that he was a devout Muslim, and his government was taking a role in supporting Islamic institutions and in worldwide proselytising on behalf of Islam.

The International Religious Freedom Report 2004 noted that &quot;bishops, priests and nuns wear religious dress freely in public and report virtually no discrimination,&quot; while also &quot;enjoying good relations with the Government&quot;. The report also indicated that members of minority religions said &quot;they do not face harassment by authorities or the Muslim majority on the basis of their religious practices&quot;. The International Christian Concern does not list Libya as a country where there is &quot;persecution or severe discrimination against Christians&quot;. Since the fall of Gaddafi, ultra-conservative strains of Islam have reasserted themselves in places. Derna in eastern Libya, historically a hotbed of jihadist thought, came under the control of militants aligned with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in 2014. Jihadist elements have also spread to Sirte and Benghazi, among other areas, as a result of the Second Libyan Civil War.

Prior to independence, Libya was home to more than 140,000 Christians (mostly of Italian and Maltese ancestry). Many Christian settlers left to Italy or Malta after the independence. Small foreign communities of Christians remained. Coptic Orthodox Christianity, the predominant Christian church of Egypt, is the largest and most historic Christian denomination in Libya. There are about 60,000 Egyptian Copts in Libya. There are three Coptic Churches in Libya, one in Tripoli, one in Benghazi, and one in Misurata.

The Coptic Church has grown in recent years in Libya, due to the growing immigration of Egyptian Copts to Libya. There are an estimated 40,000 Roman Catholics in Libya who are served by two bishops, one in Tripoli (serving the Italian community) and one in Benghazi (serving the Maltese community). There is also a small Anglican community, made up mostly of African immigrant workers in Tripoli which is part of the Anglican Diocese of Egypt. People have been arrested on suspicion of being Christian missionaries, as proselytising is illegal. Christians have also faced the threat of violence from radical Islamists in some parts of the country, with a well-publicised video released by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in February 2015 depicting the mass beheading of Christian Copts. Libya was ranked fourth on Open Doors&#x27; 2022 World Watch List, an annual ranking of the 50 countries where Christians face the most extreme persecution.

Libya was once the home of one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world, dating back to at least 300 BC. In 1942, the Italian Fascist authorities set up forced labour camps south of Tripoli for the Jews, including Giado (about 3,000 Jews), Gharyan, Jeren, and Tigrinna. In Giado some 500 Jews died of weakness, hunger, and disease. In 1942, Jews who were not in the concentration camps were heavily restricted in their economic activity and all men between 18 and 45 years were drafted for forced labour. In August 1942, Jews from Tripolitania were interned in a concentration camp at Sidi Azaz. In the three years after November 1945, more than 140 Jews were murdered, and hundreds more wounded, in a series of pogroms. By 1948, about 38,000 Jews remained in the country. Upon Libyan independence in 1951, most of the Jewish community emigrated.

=== Largest cities ===
== Culture ==

Many Arabic speaking Libyans consider themselves as part of a wider Arab community. This was strengthened by the spread of Pan-Arabism in the mid-20th century, and their reach to power in Libya where they instituted Arabic as the only official language of the state. Under Gaddafi&#x27;s rule, the teaching and even use of indigenous Berber language was strictly forbidden. In addition to banning foreign languages previously taught in academic institutions, leaving entire generations of Libyans with limitations in their comprehension of the English language. Both the spoken Arabic dialects and Berber, still retain words from Italian, that were acquired before and during the &quot;Libia Italiana&quot; period.

Libyans have a heritage in the traditions of the previously nomadic Bedouin Arabic speakers and sedentary Berber tribes. Most Libyans associate themselves with a particular family name originating from tribal or conquest based heritage.

Reflecting the &quot;nature of giving&quot; ( &quot;&quot;, Berber languages: ⴰⵏⴰⴽⴽⴰⴼ Anakkaf ), amongst the Libyan people as well as the sense of hospitality, recently the state of Libya made it to the top 20 on the world giving index in 2013. According to CAF, in a typical month, almost three-quarters (72%) of all Libyans helped somebody they did not know – the third highest level across all 135 countries surveyed.

There are few theatres or art galleries due to the decades of cultural repression under the Gaddafi regime and lack of infrastructure development under the regime of dictatorship. For many years there have been no public theatres, and only very few cinemas showing foreign films. The tradition of folk culture is still alive and well, with troupes performing music and dance at frequent festivals, both in Libya and abroad.

A large number of Libyan television stations are devoted to political review, Islamic topics and cultural phenomena. A number of TV stations air various styles of traditional Libyan music. Tuareg music and dance are popular in Ghadames and the south. Libyan television broadcasts air programs mostly in Arabic though usually have time slots for English and French programs. A 1996 analysis by the Committee to Protect Journalists found Libya&#x27;s media was the most tightly controlled in the Arab world during the country&#x27;s dictatorship. hundreds of TV stations have begun to air due to the collapse of censorship from the old regime and the initiation of &quot;free media&quot;.

Many Libyans frequent the country&#x27;s beach and they also visit Libya&#x27;s archaeological sites—especially Leptis Magna, which is widely considered to be one of the best preserved Roman archaeological sites in the world. The most common form of public transport between cities is the bus, though many people travel by automobile. There are no railway services in Libya, but these are planned for construction in the near future (see rail transport in Libya).

Libya&#x27;s capital, Tripoli, has many museums and archives. These include the Government Library, the Ethnographic Museum, the Archaeological Museum, the National Archives, the Epigraphy Museum and the Islamic Museum. The Red Castle Museum located in the capital near the coast and right in the city centre, built in consultation with UNESCO, may be the country&#x27;s most famous.

=== Cuisine ===
Libyan cuisine is a mixture of the different Italian, Bedouin and traditional Arab culinary influences. Pasta is the staple food in the Western side of Libya, whereas rice is generally the staple food in the east.

Common Libyan foods include several variations of red (tomato) sauce based pasta dishes (similar to the Italian Sugo all&#x27;arrabbiata dish); rice, usually served with lamb or chicken (typically stewed, fried, grilled, or boiled in-sauce); and couscous, which is steam cooked whilst held over boiling red (tomato) sauce and meat (sometimes also containing courgettes/zucchini and chickpeas), which is typically served along with cucumber slices, lettuce and olives.

Bazeen, a dish made from barley flour and served with red tomato sauce, is customarily eaten communally, with several people sharing the same dish, usually by hand. This dish is commonly served at traditional weddings or festivities. Asida is a sweet version of Bazeen, made from white flour and served with a mix of honey, ghee or butter. Another popular way to serve Asida is with rub (fresh date syrup) and olive oil. Usban is animal tripe stitched and stuffed with rice and vegetables cooked in tomato based soup or steamed. Shurba is a red tomato sauce-based soup, usually served with small grains of pasta.

A very common snack eaten by Libyans is known as &quot;khubs bi&#x27; tun&quot;, literally meaning &quot;bread with tuna fish&quot;, usually served as a baked baguette or pita bread stuffed with tuna fish that has been mixed with harissa (chili sauce) and olive oil. Many snack vendors prepare these sandwiches and they can be found all over Libya. Libyan restaurants may serve international cuisine, or may serve simpler fare such as lamb, chicken, vegetable stew, potatoes and macaroni. Due to severe lack of infrastructure, many under-developed areas and small towns do not have restaurants and instead food stores may be the only source to obtain food products. Alcohol consumption is illegal.

There are four main ingredients of traditional Libyan food: olives (and olive oil), dates, grains and milk. Grains are roasted, ground, sieved and used for making bread, cakes, soups and bazeen. Dates are harvested, dried and can be eaten as they are, made into syrup or slightly fried and eaten with bsisa and milk. After eating, Libyans often drink black tea. This is normally repeated a second time (for the second glass of tea), and in the third round of tea, it is served with roasted peanuts or roasted almonds known as &quot;shay bi&#x27;l-luz&quot; (mixed with the tea in the same glass).

=== Sport ===
Football is the most popular sport in Libya. The country hosted the 1982 African Cup of Nations and almost qualified for the 1986 FIFA World Cup. The national team almost won the 1982 AFCON; they lost to Ghana on penalties 7–6. In 2014, Libya won the African Nations Championship after beating Ghana in the finals. Although the national team has never won a major competition or qualified for a World Cup, there is still lots of passion for the sport and the quality of football is improving. It also participated in many Summer Olympics, such as the 2016 Summer Olympics, the 2008 Summer Olympics and more.

Horse racing is also a popular sport in Libya. It is a tradition of many special occasions and holidays.

== See also ==
* Outline of Libya
* Index of Libya-related articles

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
== External links ==

* Key Development Forecasts for Libya from International Futures 
* Information Portal – Official Libya Information Portal
* Government – official website of Government of National Unity of Libya
* Statistics and Census – official website of Bureau of Statistics and Census
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="0" end="5" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="22" end="36" title="Libya" label="State of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="58" end="65" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="76" end="88" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="105" end="122" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="137" end="142" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088824" start="146" end="154" title="Egypt–Libya border" label="the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="156" end="161" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088947" start="165" end="178" title="Libya–Sudan border" label="the southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="180" end="184" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088946" start="188" end="197" title="Chad–Libya border" label="the south"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="199" end="204" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379519" start="208" end="221" title="Libya–Niger border" label="the southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="223" end="230" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088687" start="234" end="242" title="Algeria–Libya border" label="the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="248" end="255" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088943" start="259" end="272" title="Libya–Tunisia border" label="the northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="307" end="313" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="315" end="320" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="325" end="330" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="387" end="399" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="401" end="407" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="413" end="422" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="485" end="491" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="500" end="510" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="520" end="545" title="List of countries and outlying territories by total area" label="16th-largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q209393" start="638" end="642" title="Ghat, Libya" label="Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983417" start="684" end="689" title="Islam in Libya" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="733" end="746" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="782" end="788" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56503" start="806" end="819" title="Libyan Arabic" label="Libyan Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="889" end="893" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="925" end="932" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="1062" end="1069" title="Berber people" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1085" end="1095" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470903" start="1116" end="1130" title="Iberomaurusian" label="Iberomaurusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q766150" start="1135" end="1142" title="Capsian" label="Capsian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1181" end="1190" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="1267" end="1279" title="Cyrenaica" label="Greek cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="1349" end="1362" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="1364" end="1371" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1375" end="1383" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1389" end="1395" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1444" end="1456" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1471" end="1499" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="early centre of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="1511" end="1543" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10416611" start="1590" end="1597" title="Vandal Kingdom" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="1625" end="1634" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1643" end="1648" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="1691" end="1720" title="Arab migration to the Maghreb" label="Arab migration to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1773" end="1778" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1805" end="1819" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1828" end="1846" title="Knights of St John" label="Knights of St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="1856" end="1863" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1870" end="1877" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529261" start="1883" end="1896" title="Ottoman Tripolitania" label="began in 1551"/>
<link wikidata="Q807741" start="1924" end="1936" title="Barbary Wars" label="Barbary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="2002" end="2019" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2043" end="2050" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433694" start="2110" end="2130" title="Italian Tripolitania" label="Italian Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q666893" start="2135" end="2152" title="Italian Cyrenaica" label="Italian Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="2187" end="2200" title="Italian Libya" label="Italian Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2235" end="2247" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="2285" end="2307" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617693" start="2313" end="2331" title="Italian settlers in Libya" label="Italian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="2386" end="2393" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827292" start="2405" end="2414" title="Nonviolent revolution" label="bloodless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107218" start="2415" end="2436" title="1969 Libyan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup in 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="2478" end="2493" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="2505" end="2517" title="Idris of Libya" label="King Idris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="2532" end="2540" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="2586" end="2594" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="2687" end="2692" title="History of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi" label="ruled"/>
<link wikidata="Q431888" start="2720" end="2726" title="Death of Muammar Gaddafi" label="killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="2738" end="2759" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="2011 Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="2789" end="2800" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="2836" end="2865" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="2886" end="2911" title="General National Congress" label="General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702324" start="2954" end="2987" title="Libyan crisis (2011–present)" label="political and humanitarian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="3064" end="3080" title="Second Libyan Civil War" label="second civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="3187" end="3195" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742549" start="3277" end="3293" title="Government of National Unity (Libya)" label="unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="3413" end="3437" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742549" start="3461" end="3489" title="Government of National Unity (Libya)" label="Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q113638573" start="3536" end="3568" title="Government of National Stability" label="Government of National Stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="3899" end="3931" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="10th-largest proven oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3971" end="3985" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3991" end="4011" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="4017" end="4030" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="4036" end="4047" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="4053" end="4088" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="4094" end="4098" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="4195" end="4206" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="4358" end="4365" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="4367" end="4380" title="North African" label="North African"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="4439" end="4448" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q429466" start="4453" end="4462" title="Marmarica" label="Marmarica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456520" start="4549" end="4553" title="Libu" label="Libu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820981" start="4577" end="4583" title="Meryey" label="Meryey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="4609" end="4616" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158043" start="4617" end="4626" title="Merneptah" label="Merneptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775621" start="4684" end="4708" title="Great Karnak Inscription" label="Great Karnak Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775621" start="4826" end="4850" title="Great Karnak Inscription" label="Great Karnak Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191083" start="4888" end="4896" title="Meshwesh" label="Meshwesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194390" start="4902" end="4907" title="Lukka" label="Lukka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="4954" end="4960" title="Ekwesh" label="Ekwesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="4962" end="4968" title="Sea Peoples" label="Teresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q391390" start="4970" end="4979" title="Shekelesh" label="Shekelesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894673" start="4989" end="4996" title="Sherden" label="Sherden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529261" start="5184" end="5204" title="Ottoman Tripolitania" label="Ottoman Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="5380" end="5401" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="United Libyan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="5549" end="5564" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="5855" end="5884" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790539" start="6102" end="6143" title="Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration" label="Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25275" start="6184" end="6194" title="ISO 3166-1" label="ISO 3166-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="6703" end="6712" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="6751" end="6762" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="6780" end="6793" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6842" end="6857" title="Late Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q839034" start="6907" end="6917" title="Garamantes" label="Garamantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117654" start="6928" end="6933" title="Germa" label="Germa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6939" end="6948" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="7067" end="7075" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="7094" end="7102" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="7175" end="7180" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="7215" end="7229" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q807913" start="7256" end="7261" title="Barca (ancient city)" label="Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="7303" end="7309" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="7412" end="7421" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q750192" start="7482" end="7491" title="Cyrenaics" label="Cyrenaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="7507" end="7514" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182483" start="7523" end="7534" title="Cambyses II" label="Cambyses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="7628" end="7647" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="7797" end="7814" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="7835" end="7843" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="7882" end="7894" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="7974" end="7981" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q886894" start="8043" end="8056" title="Ptolemy Apion" label="Ptolemy Apion"/>
<link wikidata="Q692775" start="8179" end="8195" title="Creta et Cyrenaica" label="a Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901244" start="8212" end="8223" title="Africa Nova" label="Africa Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="8335" end="8347" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="8361" end="8376" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="8508" end="8516" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="8555" end="8564" title="Kitos War" label="Kitos War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="8638" end="8644" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965829" start="8730" end="8749" title="Nicene Christianity" label="Nicene Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127989" start="8770" end="8783" title="Pope Victor I" label="Pope Victor I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="8874" end="8882" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="8887" end="8895" title="Donatism" label="Donatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q314781" start="8952" end="8965" title="Amr ibn al-As" label="Amr ibn al-As"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115723" start="8971" end="8984" title="Rashidun army" label="Rashidun army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="8995" end="9004" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q423552" start="9028" end="9045" title="Abdullah ibn Saad" label="Abdullah ibn Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="9097" end="9103" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423772" start="9121" end="9134" title="Uqba ibn Nafi" label="Uqba ibn Nafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="9304" end="9311" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="9312" end="9330" title="Caliph of Damascus" label="Caliph of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="9341" end="9349" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131002" start="9435" end="9450" title="Harun al-Rashid" label="Harun al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q692718" start="9461" end="9482" title="Ibrahim I ibn al-Aghlab" label="Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="9502" end="9510" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="9571" end="9579" title="Aghlabid" label="Aghlabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="9621" end="9629" title="Fatimids" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004719" start="9705" end="9723" title="Bologhine ibn Ziri" label="Bologhine ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="9761" end="9774" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="9998" end="10009" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="10014" end="10024" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827580" start="10268" end="10280" title="Banu Khazrun" label="Banu Khazrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="10384" end="10401" title="Normans of Sicily" label="Normans of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="10479" end="10487" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="10493" end="10500" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895891" start="10530" end="10542" title="Banu Ghaniya" label="Banu Ghaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="10678" end="10692" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117374166" start="10749" end="10760" title="Banu Thabit" label="Banu Thabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="10938" end="10952" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q726798" start="11042" end="11050" title="Tulunids" label="Tulunids"/>
<link wikidata="Q828665" start="11052" end="11062" title="Ikhshidid dynasty" label="Ikhshidids"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="11078" end="11085" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="11119" end="11125" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="11183" end="11188" title="Kanem–Bornu Empire" label="Kanem"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="11336" end="11350" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Habsburg Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="11384" end="11403" title="Knights of St. John" label="Knights of St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="11409" end="11416" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378425" start="11425" end="11436" title="Sinan Pasha (Ottoman admiral)" label="Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="11482" end="11493" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="11508" end="11511" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141945" start="11533" end="11549" title="Pasha of Tripoli" label="Pasha of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="11636" end="11641" title="pasha" label="pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="11680" end="11686" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11696" end="11710" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="11711" end="11719" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="11749" end="11755" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="11838" end="11847" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859497" start="11973" end="11979" title="Barbary slave trade" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="12098" end="12109" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170488" start="12173" end="12177" title="Gozo" label="Gozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="12286" end="12297" title="janissaries" label="janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="12317" end="12320" title="dey" label="dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809554" start="12543" end="12557" title="Mehmed Saqizli" label="Mehmed Saqizli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107103" start="12575" end="12588" title="Osman Saqizli" label="Osman Saqizli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825115" start="12910" end="12925" title="Ahmed Karamanli" label="Ahmed Karamanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929987" start="12931" end="12941" title="Karamanli dynasty" label="Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553413" start="13212" end="13243" title="1793–95 Tripolitanian civil war" label="1793–95 Tripolitanian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134119" start="13294" end="13303" title="Trabluslu Ali Pasha" label="Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622048" start="13400" end="13405" title="Yusuf Karamanli" label="Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="13618" end="13635" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="13644" end="13662" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="13701" end="13716" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="13934" end="13943" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="14534" end="14551" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="14681" end="14701" title="Italian North Africa" label="Italian North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q666893" start="14765" end="14782" title="Italian Cyrenaica" label="Italian Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433694" start="14787" end="14807" title="Italian Tripolitania" label="Italian Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212388" start="14926" end="14938" title="Omar Mukhtar" label="Omar Mukhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542946" start="14963" end="14980" title="Libyan resistance movement" label="resistance leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="15267" end="15279" title="Idris of Libya" label="King Idris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15367" end="15383" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488927" start="15406" end="15427" title="pacification of Libya" label="pacification of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q462874" start="15590" end="15600" title="Ilan Pappé" label="Ilan Pappé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093122" start="15747" end="15783" title="Italian concentration camps in Libya" label="Italian concentration camps in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="15816" end="15825" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="15827" end="15839" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="15844" end="15850" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550755" start="16334" end="16360" title="Military history of Italy during World War II" label="Italy entered World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="16407" end="16429" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="16480" end="16491" title="Afrika Korps" label="German ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080099" start="16537" end="16554" title="Allied occupation of Libya" label="Allied occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953965" start="16577" end="16589" title="British Military Administration (Libya)" label="administered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518801" start="16677" end="16689" title="French Fezzan" label="administered"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="16752" end="16757" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="16899" end="16916" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="1947 peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="16926" end="16932" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="17077" end="17085" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="17126" end="17138" title="Idris of Libya" label="Sayyid Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q370372" start="17144" end="17161" title="Emir of Cyrenaica" label="Emir of Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q171296" start="17236" end="17265" title="Senusiyya" label="Senussi religious brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="17371" end="17381" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="17450" end="17464" title="Bedouin" label="desert Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="17544" end="17558" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="17625" end="17634" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="17750" end="17755" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="17807" end="17818" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="17918" end="17926" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="17954" end="17973" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="18183" end="18206" title="United Kingdom of Libya" label="United Kingdom of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="18240" end="18248" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="18260" end="18265" title="Idris I of Libya" label="Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="19028" end="19046" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin population"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="19364" end="19376" title="oil reserves" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="19416" end="19425" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813600" start="19792" end="19801" title="Nasserism" label="Nasserism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="19806" end="19822" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="19855" end="19866" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="19985" end="20000" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107218" start="20012" end="20047" title="1969 Libyan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état against King Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070798" start="20133" end="20175" title="Brotherly Leader and Guide of the Revolution" label="Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617693" start="20432" end="20449" title="Italian settlers in Libya" label="Italian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499588" start="20454" end="20462" title="1970 expulsion of Italians from Libya" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276856" start="20509" end="20528" title="History of the Jews in Libya" label="Italian Libyan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="20547" end="20563" title="Public holiday" label="national holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242951" start="20579" end="20593" title="Day of Revenge" label="Day of Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932294" start="20682" end="20703" title="Italy–Libya relations" label="Italy–Libya relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q115028900" start="21087" end="21123" title="Revolutionary Women&amp;#x27;s Formation" label="Revolutionary Women&amp;#x27;s Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131323" start="21582" end="21589" title="Misrata" label="Misrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762722" start="21798" end="21829" title="General People&amp;#x27;s Committee" label="General People&amp;#x27;s Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="22031" end="22047" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="22107" end="22127" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107790" start="22145" end="22159" title="The Green Book (Gaddafi)" label="The Green Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="22280" end="22287" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q548636" start="22362" end="22378" title="Goukouni Oueddei" label="Goukouni Oueddei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751369" start="22387" end="22413" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q611071" start="22427" end="22445" title="Chadian–Libyan War" label="Chadian–Libyan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q644589" start="22540" end="22548" title="Toyota war" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="22582" end="22587" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434602" start="22646" end="22665" title="Egyptian–Libyan War" label="Egyptian–Libyan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="22692" end="22701" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q310855" start="22748" end="22765" title="Houari Boumédiène" label="Houari Boumédiène"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="22838" end="22846" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="22854" end="22860" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q202465" start="22868" end="22888" title="Uganda–Tanzania War" label="war against Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="23365" end="23388" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="23443" end="23455" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343415" start="23526" end="23535" title="List of sovereign states by public debt" label="debt-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q656821" start="23541" end="23560" title="Great Manmade River" label="Great Manmade River"/>
<link wikidata="Q922661" start="23923" end="23941" title="1986 United States bombing of Libya" label="American airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="23967" end="23980" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="24092" end="24099" title="Lockerbie bombing" label="bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216045" start="24126" end="24135" title="Lockerbie" label="Lockerbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582447" start="24387" end="24412" title="Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="Revolutionary Guard Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="24428" end="24437" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303616" start="24594" end="24621" title="Libya and weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="24681" end="24694" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="24795" end="24806" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="24848" end="24855" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="24860" end="24865" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318669" start="24989" end="25000" title="Revolution Day" label="17 February"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="25388" end="25425" title="Interim Transitional National Council" label="Interim Transitional National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="25659" end="25688" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q296724" start="25851" end="25865" title="Mahmoud Jibril" label="Mahmoud Jibril"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="26078" end="26091" title="Tripolitania" label="Western Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q221503" start="26215" end="26221" title="Zawiya, Libya" label="Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347042" start="26254" end="26270" title="Libyan Air Force (1951–2011)" label="air force planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150837" start="26300" end="26317" title="Armed Forces of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Jamahiriya troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="26440" end="26472" title="United Nations Secretary General" label="United Nations Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="26473" end="26484" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="26493" end="26528" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q235045" start="26708" end="26723" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973" label="Resolution 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q822530" start="26864" end="26875" title="no-fly zone" label="no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="27121" end="27135" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36219" start="27460" end="27465" title="Brega" label="Brega"/>
<link wikidata="Q948881" start="27784" end="27798" title="National Liberation Army (Libya)" label="rebel fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q848472" start="27832" end="27844" title="Martyrs&amp;#x27; Square, Tripoli" label="Green Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="28026" end="28031" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361214" start="28037" end="28052" title="Battle of Sirte (2011)" label="Battle of Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="28122" end="28144" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="First Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="28186" end="28190" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="28310" end="28318" title="loyalist" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="28461" end="28490" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q32835" start="29088" end="29117" title="National Transitional Council" label="National Transitional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="29169" end="29194" title="General National Congress" label="General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790539" start="29288" end="29307" title="Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration" label="Libyan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021060" start="29336" end="29346" title="Next Libyan referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="29514" end="29518" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="29574" end="29581" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q199416" start="30124" end="30178" title="2012 Benghazi attack" label="attack on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q294536" start="30216" end="30238" title="J. Christopher Stevens" label="J. Christopher Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q57904" start="30374" end="30396" title="Mustafa A. G. Abushagur" label="Mustafa A.G. Abushagur"/>
<link wikidata="Q57847" start="30585" end="30595" title="Ali Zeidan" label="Ali Zeidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15925685" start="30861" end="30878" title="Abdullah al-Thani" label="Abdullah al-Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="30885" end="30901" title="Second Libyan Civil War" label="Second Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="30990" end="30995" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="31096" end="31101" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="31114" end="31119" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="31147" end="31160" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q19290359" start="31199" end="31218" title="February 2015 Egyptian airstrikes in Libya" label="launched airstrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965604" start="31281" end="31300" title="2014 Libyan parliamentary election" label="elections were held"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="31308" end="31332" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="31388" end="31413" title="General National Congress" label="General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="31854" end="31860" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19613356" start="32396" end="32437" title="Bardo National Museum attack" label="terrorist attack against the Bardo Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="32441" end="32448" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726617" start="32734" end="32749" title="Bernardino León" label="Bernardino León"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244308" start="33617" end="33643" title="Zeid bin Ra&amp;#x27;ad" label="Zeid Ra&amp;#x27;ad Al Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="33810" end="33839" title="2015 European migrant crisis" label="people trying to reach Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="34076" end="34090" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Khalifa Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62848344" start="34100" end="34126" title="Western Libya campaign" label="Operation Flood of Dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="34151" end="34171" title="Libyan National Army" label="Libyan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120970" start="34216" end="34245" title="Government of National Accord" label="Government of National Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q21089561" start="34644" end="34659" title="Fayez al-Sarraj" label="Fayez Al-Sarraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="34774" end="34787" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="34788" end="34794" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="34802" end="34805" title="Libyan National Army" label="LNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="35078" end="35081" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="35178" end="35198" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="35253" end="35260" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q85749808" start="35362" end="35375" title="CAIG Wing Loong II" label="Wing Loong II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="35539" end="35543" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="35582" end="35594" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35648" end="35650" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="35671" end="35674" title="United Arab Emirates" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="35679" end="35685" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q82025108" start="35852" end="35873" title="Libyan peace process" label="a permanent ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47672285" start="35968" end="36010" title="2022 Libyan presidential election" label="country&amp;#x27;s first presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63285566" start="36085" end="36099" title="Fathi Bashagha" label="Fathi Bashagha"/>
<link wikidata="Q105319569" start="36231" end="36250" title="Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh" label="Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424460" start="36378" end="36383" title="Ubari" label="Ubari"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216368" start="36398" end="36418" title="El Sharara oil field" label="El Sharara oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="36670" end="36697" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="36714" end="36738" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q122615796" start="36821" end="36832" title="Derna dam collapses" label="dam failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q122311648" start="36847" end="36859" title="Storm Daniel" label="Storm Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="36888" end="36893" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742549" start="37049" end="37077" title="Government of National Unity (Libya)" label="Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="37274" end="37314" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="16th-largest nation in the world by size"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="37353" end="37370" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="37384" end="37391" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="37396" end="37403" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="37422" end="37427" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="37442" end="37446" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="37465" end="37470" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="37488" end="37493" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254997" start="37524" end="37527" title="19th parallel north" label="19°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135123" start="37532" end="37536" title="34th parallel north" label="34°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700239" start="37553" end="37555" title="9th meridian east" label="9°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137519" start="37560" end="37564" title="26th meridian east" label="26°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q738028" start="37734" end="37744" title="Libyan Sea" label="Libyan Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="37853" end="37874" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101068488" start="37925" end="37944" title="Saharan halophytics" label="Saharan halophytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888780" start="37946" end="37984" title="Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe" label="Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616731" start="37986" end="38021" title="Mediterranean woodlands and forests" label="Mediterranean woodlands and forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q41285" start="38023" end="38057" title="North Saharan steppe and woodlands" label="North Saharan steppe and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889412" start="38059" end="38104" title="Tibesti-Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands" label="Tibesti-Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890933" start="38110" end="38146" title="West Saharan montane xeric woodlands" label="West Saharan montane xeric woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180372" start="38206" end="38213" title="sirocco" label="sirocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="38348" end="38358" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="38364" end="38374" title="Dust storm" label="sandstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="38376" end="38381" title="Oasis" label="Oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q192237" start="38460" end="38468" title="Ghadames" label="Ghadames"/>
<link wikidata="Q172114" start="38473" end="38478" title="Kufra" label="Kufra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="38775" end="38783" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q181528" start="39551" end="39564" title="Libyan Desert" label="Libyan Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="39729" end="39738" title="highland (geography)" label="highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441442" start="39790" end="39797" title="Jebel Uweinat" label="Uweinat"/>
<link wikidata="Q312307" start="39947" end="39960" title="&amp;#x27;Aziziya" label="&amp;#x27;Aziziya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="39992" end="39999" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="40164" end="40197" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q172114" start="40496" end="40501" title="Kufra" label="Kufra"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="40582" end="40589" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061151" start="40744" end="40750" title="massif" label="massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="40789" end="40796" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170383" start="40954" end="40967" title="Aïr Mountains" label="Aïr Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="41251" end="41258" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530545" start="41302" end="41333" title="Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System" label="Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="41353" end="41360" title="Ice age" label="Ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q673367" start="41420" end="41437" title="Arkenu structures" label="Arkenu structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="41582" end="41593" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702324" start="41628" end="41641" title="Libyan Crisis (2011–present)" label="Libyan Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="41694" end="41716" title="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q431888" start="41725" end="41732" title="Killing of Muammar Gaddafi" label="killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="41736" end="41751" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="41764" end="41779" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="First Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="41788" end="41817" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="foreign military intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124982" start="41850" end="41868" title="Factional violence in Libya (2011–2014)" label="factional violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373899" start="41876" end="41908" title="Aftermath of the First Libyan Civil War" label="aftermath of the First Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="41943" end="41959" title="Second Libyan Civil War" label="Second Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="42029" end="42053" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="42063" end="42069" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742549" start="42078" end="42106" title="Government of National Unity (Libya)" label="Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="42116" end="42123" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42176" end="42191" title=":Category:Jihadist groups in Libya" label="jihadist groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002194" start="42196" end="42211" title="Ethnic groups in Libya" label="tribal elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="42288" end="42313" title="General National Congress" label="General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="42340" end="42372" title="General National Congress (2014)" label="General National Congress (2014)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="42458" end="42465" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296990" start="42546" end="42569" title="Libyan General National Congress election, 2012" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338697" start="42719" end="42743" title="National Forces Alliance" label="National Forces Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584261" start="42819" end="42849" title="Justice and Construction Party" label="Justice and Construction Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="42869" end="42887" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="43376" end="43400" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="43637" end="43650" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43795" end="43801" title="Sharia#Personal status law only" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="43875" end="43891" title="Court of appeal" label="courts of appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q780176" start="44015" end="44063" title="European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726617" start="44110" end="44125" title="Bernardino León" label="Bernardino León"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742549" start="44181" end="44206" title="Government of National Unity (Libya)" label="national unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120969" start="44287" end="44305" title="Presidency Council (Libya)" label="Presidency Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120970" start="44337" end="44366" title="Government of National Accord" label="Government of National Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="44443" end="44467" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120968" start="44550" end="44563" title="State Council (Libya)" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="44610" end="44642" title="General National Congress (2014)" label="General National Congress (2014)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864601" start="44761" end="44792" title="Libyan Political Dialogue Forum" label="Libyan Political Dialogue Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105319610" start="45068" end="45084" title="Mohamed al-Menfi" label="Mohamed al-Menfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105319569" start="45194" end="45213" title="Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh" label="Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208135" start="45951" end="45972" title="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi" label="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="47305" end="47316" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="47458" end="47464" title="French Fifth Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602944" start="47466" end="47471" title="First Italian Republic" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="47473" end="47479" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="47532" end="47544" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="47695" end="47715" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab-Israeli dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="47911" end="47915" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="47917" end="47932" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="47978" end="47990" title="Nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="48110" end="48124" title="Westernization" label="Westernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="48129" end="48149" title="political liberalism" label="political liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866990" start="48161" end="48168" title="History of Uganda (1971–79)" label="Ugandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="48179" end="48187" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189988" start="48189" end="48204" title="Central African Empire" label="Central African"/>
<link wikidata="Q162708" start="48213" end="48231" title="Jean-Bédel Bokassa" label="Jean-Bédel Bokassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="48233" end="48242" title="Derg" label="Ethiopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192512" start="48253" end="48274" title="Haile Mariam Mengistu" label="Haile Mariam Mengistu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49090" start="48295" end="48309" title="Charles Taylor (Liberian politician)" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="48315" end="48323" title="Serbia and Montenegro/History" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="48334" end="48352" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094151" start="48476" end="48482" title="City of London Police" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258217" start="48495" end="48510" title="Yvonne Fletcher" label="Yvonne Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q536935" start="48516" end="48523" title="1986 Berlin discotheque bombing" label="bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="48529" end="48540" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="48599" end="48616" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="48814" end="48841" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="48852" end="48860" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="48865" end="48879" title="History of Iraq under Ba&amp;#x27;athist rule" label="Iraqi dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="48880" end="48894" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="48974" end="48984" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="49004" end="49017" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778119" start="49129" end="49154" title="trans-Saharan slave trade" label="trans-Saharan slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="49204" end="49233" title="European Neighbourhood Policy" label="European Neighbourhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394662" start="49371" end="49391" title="Immigration to Europe" label="migration from Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="49422" end="49466" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150837" start="49499" end="49521" title="Armed Forces of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="previous national army"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="49542" end="49558" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="49578" end="49584" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="49591" end="49615" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q61000498" start="49721" end="49741" title="Libyan National Army" label="Libyan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="49750" end="49764" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Khalifa Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22120970" start="49898" end="49927" title="Government of National Accord" label="Government of National Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q18706763" start="49952" end="49964" title="Libyan Army" label="its own army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57534" start="50159" end="50178" title="Mohammed Magariaf" label="Mohammed el-Megarif"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715205" start="50645" end="50658" title="Libya Shield Force" label="Libyan Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="50879" end="50891" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="50910" end="50927" title="Cyrenaica" label="Barka (Cyrenaica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="50945" end="50951" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="51006" end="51023" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48242" start="51124" end="51132" title="Shabiyat" label="Shabiyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="51469" end="51487" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="51637" end="51656" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q641743" start="51768" end="51781" title="LGBT rights in Libya" label="Homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="51878" end="51888" title="Petroleum industry" label="oil sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405386" start="52062" end="52073" title="sweet crude" label="sweet crude"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="52234" end="52240" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="52246" end="52273" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="52381" end="52391" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="52652" end="52674" title="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="52714" end="52729" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238438" start="52884" end="52907" title="structural unemployment" label="structural unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="53296" end="53307" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506411" start="53795" end="53814" title="Cairo-Dakar Highway" label="Cairo-Dakar Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081567" start="53819" end="53844" title="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway" label="Tripoli-Cape Town Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="54545" end="54549" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="54574" end="54577" title="WTO" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="54718" end="54732" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061202" start="54901" end="54913" title="International sanctions" label="UN sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="55108" end="55132" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="55143" end="55152" title="Subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="55179" end="55192" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="55449" end="55454" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="55459" end="55469" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q208135" start="55730" end="55751" title="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi" label="Saif al-Islam Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603509" start="55813" end="55830" title="green development" label="green development"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="55928" end="55934" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="55951" end="55956" title="Classical Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q154037" start="56621" end="56634" title="TotalEnergies" label="TotalEnergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="56636" end="56639" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q174747" start="56641" end="56647" title="Repsol" label="Repsol"/>
<link wikidata="Q567050" start="56649" end="56660" title="Wintershall" label="Wintershall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013357" start="56665" end="56675" title="Occidental Petroleum" label="Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q656821" start="56878" end="56898" title="Great Man-Made River" label="Great Man-Made River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="56927" end="56937" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132019" start="56997" end="57009" title="fossil water" label="fossil water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530545" start="57019" end="57050" title="Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System" label="Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="57401" end="57413" title="Malnutrition" label="malnourished"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="58265" end="58277" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="58282" end="58291" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="58495" end="58502" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="58504" end="58512" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131323" start="58517" end="58524" title="Misrata" label="Misrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="58739" end="58743" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="58798" end="58805" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q231167" start="58976" end="58983" title="Zuwarah" label="Zuwarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q165620" start="58992" end="59008" title="Nafusa Mountains" label="Nafusa Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q208389" start="59036" end="59041" title="Sebha" label="Sebha"/>
<link wikidata="Q172114" start="59043" end="59048" title="Kufra" label="Kufra"/>
<link wikidata="Q209393" start="59050" end="59054" title="Ghat, Libya" label="Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192237" start="59056" end="59064" title="Ghadamis" label="Ghadamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q526822" start="59069" end="59075" title="Murzuk" label="Murzuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="59127" end="59133" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q521547" start="59138" end="59144" title="Toubou people" label="Toubou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482645" start="59184" end="59190" title="Tribalism" label="tribal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="59233" end="59237" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="59369" end="59384" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="59470" end="59486" title="Tower block" label="apartment blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="59638" end="59645" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="59945" end="59953" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="61434" end="61448" title="Tertiary education" label="tertiary level"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="61529" end="61544" title="secondary education" label="secondary level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646851" start="61658" end="61677" title="University of Libya" label="University of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648090" start="62342" end="62381" title="Libyan International Medical University" label="Libyan International Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="63029" end="63035" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="63130" end="63135" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="63257" end="63286" title="Arab migration to the Maghreb" label="Arab migration to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="63368" end="63373" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="63414" end="63428" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="63468" end="63472" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="63535" end="63546" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="63551" end="63561" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855517" start="63603" end="63619" title="Turks in Libya" label="Turkish minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199283" start="63643" end="63654" title="Kouloughlis" label="Kouloughlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="63769" end="63775" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q521547" start="63798" end="63803" title="Toubou people" label="Tebou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617693" start="63811" end="63827" title="Italian settlers in Libya" label="Italian settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="64931" end="64934" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="66021" end="66024" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q56503" start="66078" end="66091" title="Libyan Arabic" label="Libyan Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="66120" end="66142" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="66152" end="66168" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="66196" end="66204" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q192237" start="66206" end="66214" title="Ghadamis" label="Ghadamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36151" start="66216" end="66222" title="Nafusi" label="Nafusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487060" start="66224" end="66230" title="Suknah" label="Suknah"/>
<link wikidata="Q56398" start="66235" end="66242" title="Awjilah (language)" label="Awjilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="66309" end="66315" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="66430" end="66437" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="66518" end="66525" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="66652" end="66659" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="66688" end="66700" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q243551" start="66719" end="66724" title="Ibadi" label="Ibadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171296" start="66777" end="66784" title="Senussi" label="Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="66948" end="66960" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="66965" end="66971" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="67012" end="67021" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="67235" end="67251" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italian invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052691" start="67427" end="67465" title="International Religious Freedom Report" label="International Religious Freedom Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049218" start="67857" end="67888" title="International Christian Concern" label="International Christian Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="68016" end="68031" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="fall of Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="68107" end="68112" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="68156" end="68161" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="68227" end="68263" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q162413" start="68311" end="68316" title="Sirte" label="Sirte"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="68321" end="68329" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911838" start="68369" end="68392" title="Second Libyan Civil War (2014–present)" label="Second Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617693" start="68476" end="68483" title="Italian settlers in Libya" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="68628" end="68656" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68708" end="68765" title="Coptic Orthodox Church in Africa#Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco" label="largest and most historic Christian denomination in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="68799" end="68803" title="Copt" label="Copt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21039429" start="69000" end="69014" title="Copts in Egypt" label="Egyptian Copts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="69055" end="69069" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="69169" end="69177" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286876" start="69191" end="69198" title="Maltese people" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="69233" end="69241" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763474" start="69329" end="69354" title="Anglican Diocese of Egypt" label="Anglican Diocese of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="69404" end="69426" title="Christian missionaries" label="Christian missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196789" start="69735" end="69745" title="Open Doors" label="Open Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q117712" start="70085" end="70090" title="Giado" label="Giado"/>
<link wikidata="Q867102" start="70111" end="70118" title="Gharyan" label="Gharyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45521788" start="70432" end="70465" title="Sidi Azaz labor camp" label="a concentration camp at Sidi Azaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="70583" end="70589" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="71091" end="71106" title="Berber language" label="Berber language"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="71443" end="71457" title="Italian Libya" label="Libia Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="71541" end="71548" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="71579" end="71585" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="71771" end="71787" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="72430" end="72442" title="folk culture" label="folk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697036" start="72576" end="72593" title="Television in Libya" label="Libyan television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328601" start="72747" end="72759" title="Tuareg music" label="Tuareg music"/>
<link wikidata="Q192237" start="72785" end="72793" title="Ghadames" label="Ghadames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115813" start="72955" end="72987" title="Committee to Protect Journalists" label="Committee to Protect Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="73358" end="73370" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573993" start="73684" end="73707" title="rail transport in Libya" label="rail transport in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="73733" end="73740" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498401" start="73935" end="73952" title="Red Castle Museum" label="Red Castle Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="74048" end="74054" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="74157" end="74164" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891043" start="74439" end="74463" title="Arrabbiata sauce" label="Sugo all&amp;#x27;arrabbiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="74573" end="74581" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164571" start="74796" end="74802" title="Bazeen" label="Bazeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984652" start="75030" end="75035" title="Asida" label="Asida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916133" start="75179" end="75182" title="Rub (syrup)" label="rub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051726" start="75217" end="75222" title="Usban" label="Usban"/>
<link wikidata="Q948244" start="75325" end="75331" title="Chorba" label="Shurba"/>
<link wikidata="Q966327" start="75640" end="75647" title="harissa" label="harissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20019" start="75889" end="75897" title="macaroni" label="macaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="76169" end="76174" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="76181" end="76190" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="76193" end="76198" title="Date palm" label="dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527136" start="76410" end="76415" title="bsisa" label="bsisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="76618" end="76624" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="76721" end="76729" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q570465" start="76789" end="76816" title="1982 African Cup of Nations" label="1982 African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="76846" end="76865" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q276089" start="76871" end="76884" title="Libya national football team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q172014" start="76925" end="76930" title="Ghana national football team" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="77272" end="77292" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="77298" end="77318" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112335" start="77453" end="77469" title="Outline of Libya" label="Outline of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018354" start="77472" end="77503" title="Index of Libya-related articles" label="Index of Libya-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="77619" end="77640" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17636" wikidata="Q868437" url="?curid=17636" title="Law of noncontradiction">
<text>In logic, the law of non-contradiction (LNC; also known as the law of contradiction, principle of non-contradiction (PNC), or the principle of contradiction) states that propositions cannot both be true and false at the same time, e. g. the two propositions &quot;&quot;the house is white&quot; and &quot;the house is not white&quot;&quot; are mutually exclusive. Formally, this is expressed as the tautology ¬(p ∧ ¬p). For example it is tautologous to say &quot;the house is not both white and not white&quot; since this results from putting &quot;the house is white&quot; in that formula, yielding &quot;not (the house is white and not (the house is white))&quot;, then rewriting this in natural English. The law is not to be confused with the law of excluded middle which states that at least one of two propositions like &quot;the house is white&quot; and &quot;the house is not white&quot; holds.

One reason to have this law is the principle of explosion, which states that anything follows from a contradiction. The law is employed in a &quot;reductio ad absurdum&quot; proof.

To express the fact that the law is tenseless and to avoid equivocation, sometimes the law is amended to say &quot;contradictory propositions cannot both be true &#x27;at the same time and in the same sense&#x27;&quot;. 

It is one of the so called three laws of thought, along with its complement, the law of excluded middle, and the law of identity. However, no system of logic is built on just these laws, and none of these laws provide inference rules, such as &quot;modus ponens&quot; or De Morgan&#x27;s laws.

The law of non-contradiction and the law of excluded middle create a dichotomy in a so-called logical space, the points in which are all the consistent combinations of propositions. Each combination would contain exactly one member of each pair of contradictory propositions, so the space would have two parts which are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive. The law of non-contradiction is merely an expression of the mutually exclusive aspect of that dichotomy, and the law of excluded middle is an expression of its jointly exhaustive aspect.

== Interpretations ==
One difficulty in applying the law of non-contradiction is ambiguity in the propositions. For instance, if it is not explicitly specified as part of the propositions A and B, then &quot;A&quot; may be &quot;B&quot; at one time, and not at another. A and B may in some cases be made to sound mutually exclusive linguistically even though &quot;A&quot; may be partly &quot;B&quot; and partly not &quot;B&quot; at the same time. However, it is impossible to predicate of the same thing, at the same time, and in the same sense, the absence and the presence of the same fixed quality.

=== Indian philosophy ===
The Buddhist Tripitaka attributes to Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, who lived in the 6th century BCE, the implicit formulation of the law of noncontradiction, “‘See how upright, honest and sincere Citta, the householder, is’; and, a little later, he also says: ‘See how Citta, the householder, is not upright, honest or sincere.’ To this, Citta replies: ‘if your former statement is true, your latter statement is false and if your latter statement is true, your former statement is false.’” Early explicit formulations of the law of noncontradiction were ontic, with later 2nd century Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna stating “when something is a single thing, it cannot be both existent and non-existent” similar to Aristotle’s own ontic formulation that “that a thing cannot at the same time be and not be”.

=== Heraclitus ===
According to both Plato and Aristotle, Heraclitus was &quot;said&quot; to have denied the law of non-contradiction. This is quite likely if, as Plato pointed out, the law of non-contradiction does not hold for changing things in the world. If a philosophy of Becoming is not possible without change, then (the potential of) what is to become must already exist in the present object. In &quot;We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and we are not&quot;, both Heraclitus&#x27;s and Plato&#x27;s object simultaneously must, in some sense, be both what it now is and have the potential (dynamic) of what it might become.

So little remains of Heraclitus&#x27; aphorisms that not much about his philosophy can be said with certainty. He seems to have held that strife of opposites is universal both within and without, therefore &quot;both&quot; opposite existents or qualities must simultaneously exist, although in some instances in different respects. &quot;The &quot;road up and down are one and the same&quot;&quot; implies either the road leads both ways, or there can be no road at all. This is the logical complement of the law of non-contradiction. According to Heraclitus, change, and the constant conflict of opposites is the universal logos of nature.

=== Protagoras ===
Personal subjective perceptions or judgments can only be said to be true at the same time in the same respect, in which case, the law of non-contradiction must be applicable to personal judgments.
The most famous saying of Protagoras is: &quot;Man is the measure of all things: of things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not&quot;. However, Protagoras was referring to things that are used by or in some way related to humans. This makes a great difference in the meaning of his aphorism. Properties, social entities, ideas, feelings, judgments, etc. originate in the human mind. However, Protagoras has never suggested that man must be the measure of stars or the motion of the stars.

=== Parmenides ===
Parmenides employed an ontological version of the law of non-contradiction to prove that being is and to deny the void, change, and motion. He also similarly disproved contrary propositions. In his poem On Nature, he said,
The nature of the &#x27;is&#x27; or what-is in Parmenides is a highly contentious subject. Some have taken it to be whatever exists, some to be whatever is or can be the object of scientific inquiry.

=== Socrates ===
In Plato&#x27;s early dialogues, Socrates uses the elenctic method to investigate the nature or definition of ethical concepts such as justice or virtue. Elenctic refutation depends on a dichotomous thesis, one that may be divided into exactly two mutually exclusive parts, only one of which may be true. Then Socrates goes on to demonstrate the contrary of the commonly accepted part using the law of non-contradiction. According to Gregory Vlastos, the method has the following steps:
# Socrates&#x27; interlocutor asserts a thesis, for example, &quot;Courage is endurance of the soul&quot;, which Socrates considers false and targets for refutation.
# Socrates secures his interlocutor&#x27;s agreement to further premises, for example, &quot;Courage is a fine thing&quot; and &quot;Ignorant endurance is not a fine thing&quot;.
# Socrates then argues, and the interlocutor agrees, that these further premises imply the contrary of the original thesis, in this case, it leads to: &quot;courage is not endurance of the soul&quot;.
# Socrates then claims that he has shown that his interlocutor&#x27;s thesis is false and that its negation is true.

=== Plato&#x27;s synthesis ===
Plato&#x27;s version of the law of non-contradiction states that &quot;The same thing clearly cannot act or be acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing at the same time, in contrary ways&quot; (The &quot;Republic&quot; (436b)). In this, Plato carefully phrases three axiomatic restrictions on &quot;action&quot; or reaction: in the same part, in the same relation, at the same time. The effect is to momentarily create a frozen, timeless state, somewhat like figures frozen in action on the frieze of the Parthenon.

This way, he accomplishes two essential goals for his philosophy. First, he logically separates the Platonic world of constant change from the formally knowable world of momentarily fixed physical objects. Second, he provides the conditions for the dialectic method to be used in finding definitions, as for example in the &quot;Sophist&quot;. So Plato&#x27;s law of non-contradiction is the empirically derived necessary starting point for all else he has to say.

In contrast, Aristotle reverses Plato&#x27;s order of derivation. Rather than starting with &quot;experience&quot;, Aristotle begins &quot;a priori&quot; with the law of non-contradiction as the fundamental axiom of an analytic philosophical system. This axiom then necessitates the fixed, realist model. Now, he starts with much stronger logical foundations than Plato&#x27;s non-contrariety of action in reaction to conflicting demands from the three parts of the soul.

=== Aristotle&#x27;s contribution ===
The traditional source of the law of non-contradiction is Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Metaphysics&quot; where he gives three different versions.
*Ontological: &quot;It is impossible that the same thing belong and not belong to the same thing at the same time and in the same respect.&quot; (1005b19-20)
*Psychological: &quot;No one can believe that the same thing can (at the same time) be and not be.&quot; (1005b23–24)
*Logical (aka the medieval &quot;Lex Contradictoriarum&quot;): &quot;The most certain of all basic principles is that contradictory propositions are not true simultaneously.&quot; (1011b13-14)

Aristotle attempts several proofs of this law. He first argues that every expression has a single meaning (otherwise we could not communicate with one another). This rules out the possibility that by &quot;to be a man&quot;, &quot;not to be a man&quot; is meant. But &quot;man&quot; means &quot;two-footed animal&quot; (for example), and so if anything is a man, it is necessary (by virtue of the meaning of &quot;man&quot;) that it must be a two-footed animal, and so it is impossible at the same time for it &quot;not&quot; to be a two-footed animal. Thus &quot;it is not possible to say truly at the same time that the same thing is and is not a man&quot; (&quot;Metaphysics&quot; 1006b 35). Another argument is that anyone who believes something cannot believe its contradiction (1008b):

:Why does he not just get up first thing and walk into a well or, if he finds one, over a cliff? In fact, he seems rather careful about cliffs and wells.

=== Avicenna ===
Avicenna&#x27;s commentary on the &quot;Metaphysics&quot; illustrates the common view that the law of non-contradiction &quot;and their like are among the things that do not require our elaboration.&quot; Avicenna&#x27;s words for &quot;the obdurate&quot; are quite facetious: &quot;he must be subjected to the conflagration of fire, since &#x27;fire&#x27; and &#x27;not fire&#x27; are one. Pain must be inflicted on him through beating, since &#x27;pain&#x27; and &#x27;no pain&#x27; are one. And he must be denied food and drink, since eating and drinking and the abstention from both are one [and the same].&quot;

=== Thomas Aquinas ===
Thomas Aquinas argued that the principle of non-contradiction is essential to the reasoning of human beings (&quot;One cannot reasonably hold two mutually exclusive beliefs at the same time&quot;). He argued that human reasoning without the principle of non-contradiction is utterly impossible because reason itself can&#x27;t function with two contradictory ideas. Aquinas argued that this is the same both for moral arguments as well as theological arguments and even machinery (“the parts must work together, the machine can’t work if two parts are incompatible”).

=== Leibniz and Kant ===
Leibniz and Kant both used the law of non-contradiction to define the difference between analytic and synthetic propositions. For Leibniz, analytic statements follow from the law of non-contradiction, and synthetic ones from the principle of sufficient reason.

===Russell===

The principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; as:

:: formula_1

=== Dialetheism ===

Graham Priest advocates the view that &quot;under some conditions&quot;, some statements can be both true and false simultaneously, or may be true and false at different times. Dialetheism arises from formal logical paradoxes, such as the Liar&#x27;s paradox and Russell&#x27;s paradox, even though it isn&#x27;t the only solution to them.

== Alleged impossibility of its proof or denial ==
The law of non-contradiction is alleged to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable, on the ground that any proof or disproof must use the law itself prior to reaching the conclusion. In other words, in order to verify or falsify the laws of logic one must resort to logic as a weapon, an act that is argued to be self-defeating. Since the early 20th century, certain logicians have proposed logics that deny the validity of the law. 

Logics known as &quot;paraconsistent&quot; are inconsistency-tolerant logics in that there, from P together with ¬P, it does not imply that any proposition follows. Nevertheless, not all paraconsistent logics deny the law of non-contradiction and some such logics even prove it.

Some, such as David Lewis, have objected to paraconsistent logic on the ground that it is simply impossible for a statement and its negation to be jointly true. A related objection is that &quot;negation&quot; in paraconsistent logic is not really &quot;negation&quot;; it is merely a subcontrary-forming operator. Those who (like the dialetheists) claim that the Law of Non-Contradiction can be violated are in fact using a different definition of negation, and therefore talking about something else other than the Law of Non-Contradiction which is based on a particular definition of negation and therefore cannot be violated.

== In popular culture ==

The &quot;Fargo&quot; episode &quot;The Law of Non-Contradiction&quot;, which takes its name from the law, was noted for its several elements relating to the law of non-contradiction, as the episode&#x27;s main character faces several paradoxes. For example, she is still the acting chief of police while having been demoted from the position, and tries to investigate a man that both was and was not named Ennis Stussy, and who both was and was not her stepfather. It also features the story of a robot who, after having spent millions of years unable to help humanity, is told that he greatly helped mankind all along by observing history.

== See also ==

* Contradiction
* First principle
* Law of identity
* Oxymoron
* Peirce&#x27;s law
* Principle of bivalence
* Principle of sufficient reason
* Trivialism
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Béziau, J. Y. (2000). What is paraconsistent logic. Frontiers of paraconsistent logic, 95-111.
* Lewis, David (1982), &quot;Logic for equivocators&quot;, reprinted in &quot;Papers in Philosophical Logic,&quot; Cambridge University Press (1997), p. 97-110.
* Slater, B. H. (1995). Paraconsistent logics?. Journal of Philosophical logic, 24(4), 451-454.

==Further reading==

== External links ==
* S. M. Cohen, &quot;Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction&quot;, &quot;Canadian Journal of Philosophy&quot;, Vol. 16, No. 3.
* James Danaher (2004), &quot;The Laws of Thought&quot;, &quot;The Philosopher&quot;, Vol. LXXXXII No. 1.
* Paula Gottlieb, &quot;Aristotle on Non-contradiction&quot; (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).
* Laurence Horn, &quot;Contradiction&quot; (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).
* Graham Priest and Francesco Berto, &quot;Dialetheism&quot; (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).
* Graham Priest and Koji Tanaka, &quot;Paraconsistent logic&quot; (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3" end="8" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="14" end="38" title="Law of noncontradiction" label="law of non-contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="40" end="43" title="Law of noncontradiction" label="LNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="63" end="83" title="Law of noncontradiction" label="law of contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="85" end="115" title="Law of noncontradiction" label="principle of non-contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="117" end="120" title="Law of noncontradiction" label="PNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="130" end="156" title="Law of noncontradiction" label="principle of contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625281" start="344" end="362" title="Mutual exclusivity" label="mutually exclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667497" start="364" end="372" title="Logical form" label="Formally"/>
<link wikidata="Q209555" start="399" end="408" title="tautology (logic)" label="tautology"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="746" end="768" title="law of excluded middle" label="law of excluded middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60190" start="938" end="960" title="principle of explosion" label="principle of explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14402006" start="1050" end="1070" title="reductio ad absurdum" label="reductio ad absurdum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797615" start="1144" end="1156" title="equivocation" label="equivocation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1334" end="1355" title="Law_of_thought#The_three_traditional_laws" label="three laws of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372261" start="1420" end="1435" title="law of identity" label="law of identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="1525" end="1540" title="Rule of inference" label="inference rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q655742" start="1556" end="1568" title="modus ponens" label="modus ponens"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="1578" end="1599" title="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361123" start="1671" end="1680" title="dichotomy" label="dichotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2787" end="2795" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="2796" end="2805" title="Tripitaka" label="Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="2820" end="2838" title="Mahavira" label="Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="3328" end="3333" title="ontology" label="ontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171195" start="3379" end="3388" title="Nagarjuna" label="Nagarjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="3619" end="3624" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3629" end="3638" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="3640" end="3650" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3751" end="3762" title="Law of Contradiction#Plato&amp;#x27;s synthesis" label="pointed out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="3860" end="3868" title="Becoming (philosophy)" label="Becoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="4725" end="4735" title="Complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="4858" end="4863" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q169243" start="5118" end="5128" title="Protagoras" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="5637" end="5647" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="5660" end="5671" title="ontological" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="5840" end="5849" title="On Nature (Parmenides)" label="On Nature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6129" end="6144" title="Socratic method#Method" label="elenctic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361123" start="6265" end="6276" title="dichotomy" label="dichotomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625281" start="6326" end="6344" title="mutually exclusive" label="mutually exclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425763" start="6582" end="6594" title="Interlocutor (linguistics)" label="interlocutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="7260" end="7265" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="7484" end="7492" title="Republic (dialogue)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="7547" end="7552" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603810" start="7718" end="7723" title="state of affairs (philosophy)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="8046" end="8055" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471715" start="8126" end="8133" title="Sophist (dialogue)" label="Sophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="8832" end="8841" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="8855" end="8866" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="8915" end="8926" title="Ontological" label="Ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="9073" end="9086" title="Psychological" label="Psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="9191" end="9198" title="Logical" label="Logical"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="9322" end="9333" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="10349" end="10357" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10365" end="10375" title="The Book of Healing#Philosophy" label="commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="10389" end="10400" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="10990" end="11004" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="11584" end="11591" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="11596" end="11600" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485413" start="11673" end="11695" title="Analytic–synthetic distinction" label="analytic and synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="11813" end="11843" title="principle of sufficient reason" label="principle of sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="11891" end="11898" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="11902" end="11921" title="propositional calculus" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="11925" end="11932" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="11937" end="11946" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="11956" end="11977" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541962" start="12024" end="12037" title="Graham Priest" label="Graham Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844169" start="12201" end="12212" title="Dialetheism" label="Dialetheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="12240" end="12247" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="12263" end="12282" title="liar paradox" label="Liar&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33401" start="12287" end="12309" title="Russel&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448195" start="12727" end="12741" title="Self-refuting idea" label="self-defeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q426592" start="12871" end="12885" title="paraconsistent logic" label="paraconsistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q384522" start="13143" end="13154" title="David Lewis (philosopher)" label="David Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="13383" end="13391" title="negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749902" start="13414" end="13425" title="Square of opposition" label="subcontrary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931555" start="13796" end="13801" title="Fargo (TV series)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915744" start="13822" end="13850" title="The Law of Non-Contradiction" label="The Law of Non-Contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855502" start="14069" end="14084" title="chief of police" label="chief of police"/>
<link wikidata="Q363948" start="14447" end="14460" title="Contradiction" label="Contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="14463" end="14478" title="First principle" label="First principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372261" start="14481" end="14496" title="Law of identity" label="Law of identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="14499" end="14507" title="Oxymoron" label="Oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387196" start="14510" end="14527" title="Peirce&amp;#x27;s law" label="Peirce&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110857" start="14530" end="14552" title="Principle of bivalence" label="Principle of bivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="14555" end="14585" title="Principle of sufficient reason" label="Principle of sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844667" start="14588" end="14598" title="Trivialism" label="Trivialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="15336" end="15371" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218930" start="15376" end="15389" title="Laurence Horn" label="Laurence Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="15418" end="15453" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541962" start="15458" end="15471" title="Graham Priest" label="Graham Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="15518" end="15553" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="15623" end="15658" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17637" wikidata="Q468422" url="?curid=17637" title="Law of excluded middle">
<text>In logic, the law of excluded middle or the principle of excluded middle states that for every proposition, either this proposition or its negation is true. It is one of the three laws of thought, along with the law of noncontradiction, and the law of identity; however, no system of logic is built on just these laws, and none of these laws provides inference rules, such as modus ponens or De Morgan&#x27;s laws. The law is also known as the law / principle of the excluded third, in Latin principium tertii exclusi. Another Latin designation for this law is tertium non datur or &quot;no third [possibility] is given&quot;. In classical logic, the law is a tautology.

In contemporary logic the principle is distinguished from the semantical principle of bivalence, which states that every proposition is either true or false. The principle of bivalence always implies the law of excluded middle, while the converse is not always true. A commonly cited counterexample uses statements unprovable now, but provable in the future to show that the law of excluded middle may apply when the principle of bivalence fails.

== History ==

=== Aristotle ===
The earliest known formulation is in Aristotle&#x27;s discussion of the principle of non-contradiction, first proposed in &quot;On Interpretation,&quot; where he says that of two contradictory propositions (i.e. where one proposition is the negation of the other) one must be true, and the other false. He also states it as a principle in the &quot;Metaphysics&quot; book 4, saying that it is necessary in every case to affirm or deny, and that it is impossible that there should be anything between the two parts of a contradiction.

Aristotle wrote that ambiguity can arise from the use of ambiguous names, but cannot exist in the facts themselves:

Aristotle&#x27;s assertion that &quot;it will not be possible to be and not to be the same thing&quot; would be written in propositional logic as ~(&quot;P&quot; ∧ ~&quot;P&quot;). In modern so called classical logic, this statement is equivalent to the law of excluded middle (&quot;P&quot; ∨ ~&quot;P&quot;), through distribution of the negation in Aristotle&#x27;s assertion. The former claims that no statement is &quot;both&quot; true and false, while the latter requires that any statement is &quot;either&quot; true or false.

But Aristotle also writes, &quot;since it is impossible that contradictories should be at the same time true of the same thing, obviously contraries also cannot belong at the same time to the same thing&quot; (Book IV, CH 6, p. 531). He then proposes that &quot;there cannot be an intermediate between contradictories, but of one subject we must either affirm or deny any one predicate&quot; (Book IV, CH 7, p. 531). In the context of Aristotle&#x27;s traditional logic, this is a remarkably precise statement of the law of excluded middle, &quot;P&quot; ∨ ~&quot;P&quot;.

Yet in &quot;On Interpretation&quot; Aristotle seems to deny the law of excluded middle in the case of future contingents, in his discussion on the sea battle.

=== Leibniz ===

=== Bertrand Russell and &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; ===
The principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; as:

formula_1.

So just what is &quot;truth&quot; and &quot;falsehood&quot;? At the opening &quot;PM&quot; quickly announces some definitions:

This is not much help. But later, in a much deeper discussion (&quot;Definition and systematic ambiguity of Truth and Falsehood&quot; Chapter II part III, p. 41 ff), &quot;PM&quot; defines truth and falsehood in terms of a relationship between the &quot;a&quot; and the &quot;b&quot; and the &quot;percipient&quot;. For example &quot;This &#x27;a&#x27; is &#x27;b (e.g. &quot;This &#x27;object a&#x27; is &#x27;red) really means object a&#x27; is a sense-datum&quot; and red&#x27; is a sense-datum&quot;, and they &quot;stand in relation&quot; to one another and in relation to &quot;I&quot;. Thus what we really mean is: &quot;I perceive that &#x27;This object a is red and this is an undeniable-by-3rd-party &quot;truth&quot;.

&quot;PM&quot; further defines a distinction between a &quot;sense-datum&quot; and a &quot;sensation&quot;:
Russell reiterated his distinction between &quot;sense-datum&quot; and &quot;sensation&quot; in his book &quot;The Problems of Philosophy&quot; (1912), published at the same time as &quot;PM&quot; (1910–1913):
Russell further described his reasoning behind his definitions of &quot;truth&quot; and &quot;falsehood&quot; in the same book (Chapter XII, &quot;Truth and Falsehood&quot;).

==== Consequences of the law of excluded middle in &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; ====
From the law of excluded middle, formula ✸2.1 in &quot;Principia Mathematica,&quot; Whitehead and Russell derive some of the most powerful tools in the logician&#x27;s argumentation toolkit. (In &quot;Principia Mathematica,&quot; formulas and propositions are identified by a leading asterisk and two numbers, such as &quot;✸2.1&quot;.)

✸2.1 ~&quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;p&quot; &quot;This is the Law of excluded middle&quot; (&quot;PM&quot;, p. 101).

The proof of ✸2.1 is roughly as follows: &quot;primitive idea&quot; 1.08 defines &quot;p&quot; → &quot;q&quot; = ~&quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot;. Substituting &quot;p&quot; for &quot;q&quot; in this rule yields &quot;p&quot; → &quot;p&quot; = ~&quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;p&quot;. Since &quot;p&quot; → &quot;p&quot; is true (this is Theorem 2.08, which is proved separately), then ~&quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;p&quot; must be true.

✸2.11 &quot;p&quot; ∨ ~&quot;p&quot; (Permutation of the assertions is allowed by axiom 1.4)
✸2.12 &quot;p&quot; → ~(~&quot;p&quot;) (Principle of double negation, part 1: if &quot;this rose is red&quot; is true then it&#x27;s not true that this rose is not-red&#x27; is true&quot;.)
✸2.13 &quot;p&quot; ∨ ~{~(~&quot;p&quot;)} (Lemma together with 2.12 used to derive 2.14)
✸2.14 ~(~&quot;p&quot;) → &quot;p&quot; (Principle of double negation, part 2)
✸2.15 (~&quot;p&quot; → &quot;q&quot;) → (~&quot;q&quot; → &quot;p&quot;) (One of the four &quot;Principles of transposition&quot;. Similar to 1.03, 1.16 and 1.17. A very long demonstration was required here.)
✸2.16 (&quot;p&quot; → &quot;q&quot;) → (~&quot;q&quot; → ~&quot;p&quot;) (If it&#x27;s true that &quot;If this rose is red then this pig flies&quot; then it&#x27;s true that &quot;If this pig doesn&#x27;t fly then this rose isn&#x27;t red.&quot;)
✸2.17 ( ~&quot;p&quot; → ~&quot;q&quot; ) → (&quot;q&quot; → &quot;p&quot;) (Another of the &quot;Principles of transposition&quot;.)
✸2.18 (~&quot;p&quot; → &quot;p&quot;) → &quot;p&quot; (Called &quot;The complement of &quot;reductio ad absurdum&quot;. It states that a proposition which follows from the hypothesis of its own falsehood is true&quot; (&quot;PM&quot;, pp. 103–104).)

Most of these theorems—in particular ✸2.1, ✸2.11, and ✸2.14—are rejected by intuitionism. These tools are recast into another form that Kolmogorov cites as &quot;Hilbert&#x27;s four axioms of implication&quot; and &quot;Hilbert&#x27;s two axioms of negation&quot; (Kolmogorov in van Heijenoort, p. 335).

Propositions ✸2.12 and ✸2.14, &quot;double negation&quot;:
The intuitionist writings of L. E. J. Brouwer refer to what he calls &quot;the &quot;principle of the reciprocity of the multiple species&quot;, that is, the principle that for every system the correctness of a property follows from the impossibility of the impossibility of this property&quot; (Brouwer, ibid, p. 335).

This principle is commonly called &quot;the principle of double negation&quot; (&quot;PM&quot;, pp. 101–102). From the law of excluded middle (✸2.1 and ✸2.11), &quot;PM&quot; derives principle ✸2.12 immediately. We substitute ~&quot;p&quot; for &quot;p&quot; in 2.11 to yield ~&quot;p&quot; ∨ ~(~&quot;p&quot;), and by the definition of implication (i.e. 1.01 p → q = ~p ∨ q) then ~p ∨ ~(~p)= p → ~(~p). QED (The derivation of 2.14 is a bit more involved.)

===Reichenbach===
It is correct, at least for bivalent logic—i.e. it can be seen with a Karnaugh map—that this law removes &quot;the middle&quot; of the inclusive-or used in his law (3). And this is the point of Reichenbach&#x27;s demonstration that some believe the &quot;exclusive&quot;-or should take the place of the &quot;inclusive&quot;-or.

About this issue (in admittedly very technical terms) Reichenbach observes:

::The tertium non datur
::29. (&quot;x&quot;)[&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ∨ ~&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)]
::is not exhaustive in its major terms and is therefore an inflated formula. This fact may perhaps explain why some people consider it unreasonable to write (29) with the inclusive-&#x27;or&#x27;, and want to have it written with the sign of the &quot;exclusive&quot;-&#x27;or&#x27;

::30. (&quot;x&quot;)[&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ⊕ ~&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)], where the symbol &quot;⊕&quot; signifies exclusive-or
::in which form it would be fully exhaustive and therefore nomological in the narrower sense. (Reichenbach, p. 376)

In line (30) the &quot;(x)&quot; means &quot;for all&quot; or &quot;for every&quot;, a form used by Russell and Reichenbach; today the symbolism is usually formula_2 &quot;x&quot;. Thus an example of the expression would look like this:

* (&quot;pig&quot;): (&quot;Flies&quot;(&quot;pig&quot;) ⊕ ~&quot;Flies&quot;(&quot;pig&quot;))
* (For all instances of &quot;pig&quot; seen and unseen): (&quot;Pig does fly&quot; or &quot;Pig does not fly&quot; but not both simultaneously)

=== Formalists versus Intuitionists ===
From the late 1800s through the 1930s, a bitter, persistent debate raged between Hilbert and his followers versus Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer. Brouwer&#x27;s philosophy, called intuitionism, started in earnest with Leopold Kronecker in the late 1800s.

Hilbert intensely disliked Kronecker&#x27;s ideas:

The debate had a profound effect on Hilbert. Reid indicates that Hilbert&#x27;s second problem (one of Hilbert&#x27;s problems from the Second International Conference in Paris in 1900) evolved from this debate (italics in the original):

::In his second problem, [Hilbert] had asked for a &quot;mathematical proof&quot; of the consistency of the axioms of the arithmetic of real numbers.
::To show the significance of this problem, he added the following observation:
::&quot;If contradictory attributes be assigned to a concept, I say that &quot;mathematically the concept does not exist&quot;&quot; (Reid p. 71)

Thus, Hilbert was saying: &quot;If &quot;p&quot; and ~&quot;p&quot; are both shown to be true, then &quot;p&quot; does not exist&quot;, and was thereby invoking the law of excluded middle cast into the form of the law of contradiction.

The rancorous debate continued through the early 1900s into the 1920s; in 1927 Brouwer complained about &quot;polemicizing against it [intuitionism] in sneering tones&quot; (Brouwer in van Heijenoort, p. 492). But the debate was fertile: it resulted in &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; (1910–1913), and that work gave a precise definition to the law of excluded middle, and all this provided an intellectual setting and the tools necessary for the mathematicians of the early 20th century:

Brouwer reduced the debate to the use of proofs designed from &quot;negative&quot; or &quot;non-existence&quot; versus &quot;constructive&quot; proof:
::According to Brouwer, a statement that an object exists having a given property means that, and is only proved, when a method is known which in principle at least will enable such an object to be found or constructed …
::Hilbert naturally disagreed.
::&quot;pure existence proofs have been the most important landmarks in the historical development of our science,&quot; he maintained. (Reid p. 155)

::Brouwer refused to accept the logical principle of the excluded middle, His argument was the following:

::&quot;Suppose that A is the statement &quot;There exists a member of the set &quot;S&quot; having the property &quot;P&quot;.&quot; If the set is finite, it is possible—in principle—to examine each member of &quot;S&quot; and determine whether there is a member of &quot;S&quot; with the property &quot;P&quot; or that every member of &quot;S&quot; lacks the property &quot;P&quot;.&quot; For finite sets, therefore, Brouwer accepted the principle of the excluded middle as valid. He refused to accept it for infinite sets because if the set &quot;S&quot; is infinite, we cannot—even in principle—examine each member of the set. If, during the course of our examination, we find a member of the set with the property &quot;P&quot;, the first alternative is substantiated; but if we never find such a member, the second alternative is still not substantiated.
::Since mathematical theorems are often proved by establishing that the negation would involve us in a contradiction, this third possibility which Brouwer suggested would throw into question many of the mathematical statements currently accepted.
::&quot;Taking the Principle of the Excluded Middle from the mathematician,&quot; Hilbert said, &quot;is the same as … prohibiting the boxer the use of his fists.&quot;
::&quot;The possible loss did not seem to bother Weyl … Brouwer&#x27;s program was the coming thing, he insisted to his friends in Zürich.&quot; (Reid, p. 149)

In his lecture in 1941 at Yale and the subsequent paper, Gödel proposed a solution: &quot;that the negation of a universal proposition was to be understood as asserting the existence … of a counterexample&quot; (Dawson, p. 157)

Gödel&#x27;s approach to the law of excluded middle was to assert that objections against &quot;the use of &#x27;impredicative definitions had &quot;carried more weight&quot; than &quot;the law of excluded middle and related theorems of the propositional calculus&quot; (Dawson p. 156). He proposed his &quot;system Σ … and he concluded by mentioning several applications of his interpretation. Among them were a proof of the consistency with intuitionistic logic of the principle ~ (∀A: (A ∨ ~A)) (despite the inconsistency of the assumption ∃ A: ~ (A ∨ ~A))&quot; (Dawson, p. 157)

The debate seemed to weaken: mathematicians, logicians and engineers continue to use the law of excluded middle (and double negation) in their daily work.

=== Intuitionist definitions of the law (principle) of excluded middle ===
The following highlights the deep mathematical and philosophic problem behind what it means to &quot;know&quot;, and also helps elucidate what the &quot;law&quot; implies (i.e. what the law really means). Their difficulties with the law emerge: that they do not want to accept as true implications drawn from that which is unverifiable (untestable, unknowable) or from the impossible or the false. (All quotes are from van Heijenoort, italics added).

&quot;Brouwer&quot; offers his definition of &quot;principle of excluded middle&quot;; we see here also the issue of &quot;testability&quot;:

::On the basis of the testability just mentioned, there hold, for properties conceived within a specific finite main system, the &quot;principle of excluded middle&quot;, that is, &quot;the principle that for every system every property is either correct [richtig] or impossible&quot;, and in particular the principle of the reciprocity of the complementary species, that is, the principle that for every system the correctness of a property follows from the impossibility of the impossibility of this property. (335)

&quot;Kolmogorov&quot;&#x27;s definition cites Hilbert&#x27;s two axioms of negation
::Hilbert&#x27;s first axiom of negation, &quot;anything follows from the false&quot;, made its appearance only with the rise of symbolic logic, as did the first axiom of implication … while … the axiom under consideration [axiom 5] asserts something about the consequences of something impossible: we have to accept &quot;B&quot; if the true judgment &quot;A&quot; is regarded as false …
::Hilbert&#x27;s second axiom of negation expresses the principle of excluded middle. The principle is expressed here in the form in which is it used for derivations: if &quot;B&quot; follows from &quot;A&quot; as well as from ~&quot;A&quot;, then &quot;B&quot; is true. Its usual form, &quot;every judgment is either true or false&quot; is equivalent to that given above&quot;.
::From the first interpretation of negation, that is, the interdiction from regarding the judgment as true, it is impossible to obtain the certitude that the principle of excluded middle is true … Brouwer showed that in the case of such transfinite judgments the principle of excluded middle cannot be considered obvious
::footnote 9: &quot;This is Leibniz&#x27;s very simple formulation (see &quot;Nouveaux Essais&quot;, IV,2). The formulation &quot;&quot;A&quot; is either &quot;B&quot; or not-&quot;B&quot;&quot; has nothing to do with the logic of judgments.
::footnote 10: &quot;Symbolically the second form is expressed thus
:&quot;A&quot; ∨ ~&quot;A&quot;
where ∨ means &quot;or&quot;. The equivalence of the two forms is easily proved (p. 421)

== Examples ==
For example, if &quot;P&quot; is the proposition:

:&quot;Socrates is mortal.&quot;

then the law of excluded middle holds that the logical disjunction:

:&quot;Either Socrates is mortal, or it is not the case that Socrates is mortal.&quot;

is true by virtue of its form alone. That is, the &quot;middle&quot; position, that Socrates is neither mortal nor not-mortal, is excluded by logic, and therefore either the first possibility (&quot;Socrates is mortal&quot;) or its negation (&quot;it is not the case that Socrates is mortal&quot;) must be true.

An example of an argument that depends on the law of excluded middle follows. We seek to prove that

:there exist two irrational numbers formula_3 and formula_4 such that formula_5 is rational.

It is known that formula_6 is irrational (see proof). Consider the number

:formula_7.

Clearly (excluded middle) this number is either rational or irrational. If it is rational, the proof is complete, and
:formula_8 and formula_9.

But if formula_7 is irrational, then let

:formula_11 and formula_9.

Then

:formula_13,

and 2 is certainly rational. This concludes the proof.

In the above argument, the assertion &quot;this number is either rational or irrational&quot; invokes the law of excluded middle. An intuitionist, for example, would not accept this argument without further support for that statement. This might come in the form of a proof that the number in question is in fact irrational (or rational, as the case may be); or a finite algorithm that could determine whether the number is rational.

=== Non-constructive proofs over the infinite ===

The above proof is an example of a &quot;non-constructive&quot; proof disallowed by intuitionists:
&lt;/math&gt; is irrational but there is no known easy proof of that fact.) (Davis 2000:220)}} (Constructive proofs of the specific example above are not hard to produce; for example formula_8 and formula_15 are both easily shown to be irrational, and formula_16; a proof allowed by intuitionists).

By &quot;non-constructive&quot; Davis means that &quot;a proof that there actually are mathematic entities satisfying certain conditions would not have to provide a method to exhibit explicitly the entities in question.&quot; (p. 85). Such proofs presume the existence of a totality that is complete, a notion disallowed by intuitionists when extended to the &quot;infinite&quot;—for them the infinite can never be completed:

David Hilbert and Luitzen E. J. Brouwer both give examples of the law of excluded middle extended to the infinite. Hilbert&#x27;s example: &quot;the assertion that either there are only finitely many prime numbers or there are infinitely many&quot; (quoted in Davis 2000:97); and Brouwer&#x27;s: &quot;Every mathematical species is either finite or infinite.&quot; (Brouwer 1923 in van Heijenoort 1967:336). In general, intuitionists allow the use of the law of excluded middle when it is confined to discourse over finite collections (sets), but not when it is used in discourse over infinite sets (e.g. the natural numbers). Thus intuitionists absolutely disallow the blanket assertion: &quot;For all propositions &quot;P&quot; concerning infinite sets &quot;D&quot;: &quot;P&quot; or ~&quot;P&quot;&quot; (Kleene 1952:48).

Putative counterexamples to the law of excluded middle include the liar paradox or Quine&#x27;s paradox. Certain resolutions of these paradoxes, particularly Graham Priest&#x27;s dialetheism as formalised in LP, have the law of excluded middle as a theorem, but resolve out the Liar as both true and false. In this way, the law of excluded middle is true, but because truth itself, and therefore disjunction, is not exclusive, it says next to nothing if one of the disjuncts is paradoxical, or both true and false.

== Criticisms ==
The Catuṣkoṭi (tetralemma) is an ancient alternative to the law of excluded middle, which examines all four possible assignments of truth values to a proposition and its negation. It has been important in Indian logic and Buddhist logic as well as the ancient Greek philosophical school known as Pyrrhonism.

Many modern logic systems replace the law of excluded middle with the concept of negation as failure. Instead of a proposition&#x27;s being either true or false, a proposition is either true or not able to be proved true. These two dichotomies only differ in logical systems that are not complete. The principle of negation as failure is used as a foundation for autoepistemic logic, and is widely used in logic programming. In these systems, the programmer is free to assert the law of excluded middle as a true fact, but it is not built-in &quot;a priori&quot; into these systems.

Mathematicians such as L. E. J. Brouwer and Arend Heyting have also contested the usefulness of the law of excluded middle in the context of modern mathematics.

===In mathematical logic===

In modern mathematical logic, the excluded middle has been argued to result in possible self-contradiction. It is possible in logic to make well-constructed propositions that can be neither true nor false; a common example of this is the &quot;Liar&#x27;s paradox&quot;, the statement &quot;this statement is false&quot;, which is argued to itself be neither true nor false. Arthur Prior has argued that The Paradox is not an example of a statement that cannot be true or false. The law of excluded middle still holds here as the negation of this statement &quot;This statement is not false&quot;, can be assigned true. In set theory, such a self-referential paradox can be constructed by examining the set &quot;the set of all sets that do not contain themselves&quot;. This set is unambiguously defined, but leads to a Russell&#x27;s paradox: does the set contain, as one of its elements, itself? However, in the modern Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, this type of contradiction is no longer admitted. Furthermore, paradoxes of self reference can be constructed without even invoking negation at all, as in Curry&#x27;s paradox.

== Analogous laws ==
Some systems of logic have different but analogous laws. For some finite &quot;n&quot;-valued logics, there is an analogous law called the &quot;law of excluded &quot;n&quot;+1th&quot;. If negation is cyclic and &quot;∨&quot; is a &quot;max operator&quot;, then the law can be expressed in the object language by (P ∨ ~P ∨ ~~P ∨ ... ∨ ~...~P), where &quot;~...~&quot; represents &quot;n&quot;−1 negation signs and &quot;∨ ... ∨&quot; &quot;n&quot;−1 disjunction signs. It is easy to check that the sentence must receive at least one of the &quot;n&quot; truth values (and not a value that is not one of the &quot;n&quot;).

Other systems reject the law entirely.

=== Law of the weak excluded middle===

A particularly well-studied intermediate logic is given by De Morgan logic, which adds the axiom formula_17 to intuitionistic logic, which is sometimes called the law of the weak excluded middle.

This is equivalent to a few other statements:

* Satisfying all of De Morgan&#x27;s laws including formula_18
* formula_19
* formula_20

== See also ==
* : an account on the formalist-intuitionist divide around the Law of the excluded middle
* Constructive set theory
* 
* : cases where LEM appears to fail in natural language
* Law of excluded middle is untrue in such as and 
* 
* : a graphical syntax for propositional logic
* : the application excluded middle to propositions
* Mathematical constructivism
* Non-affirming negation in the school of Buddhism, another system in which the law of excluded middle is untrue
* : another way of turning intuition classical

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
* Aquinas, Thomas, &quot;Summa Theologica&quot;, Fathers of the English Dominican Province (trans.), Daniel J. Sullivan (ed.), vols. 19–20 in Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.), &quot;Great Books of the Western World&quot;, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, 1952. Cited as GB 19–20.
* Aristotle, &quot;Metaphysics&quot;, W.D. Ross (trans.), vol. 8 in Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.), &quot;Great Books of the Western World&quot;, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, 1952. Cited as GB 8. 1st published, W.D. Ross (trans.), &quot;The Works of Aristotle&quot;, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
* Martin Davis 2000, &quot;Engines of Logic: Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer&quot;, W. W. Norton &amp; Company, NewYork, New York, pbk.
* Dawson, J., &quot;Logical Dilemmas, The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel&quot;, A.K. Peters, Wellesley, Massachusetts, 1997.
* van Heijenoort, J., &quot;From Frege to Gödel, A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931&quot;, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1967. Reprinted with corrections, 1977.
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1923, &quot;On the significance of the principle of excluded middle in mathematics, especially in function theory&quot; [reprinted with commentary, p. 334, van Heijenoort]
* Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov, 1925, &quot;On the principle of excluded middle&quot;, [reprinted with commentary, p. 414, van Heijenoort]
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1927, &quot;On the domains of definitions of functions&quot;,[reprinted with commentary, p. 446, van Heijenoort] Although not directly germane, in his (1923) Brouwer uses certain words defined in this paper.
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1927(2), &quot;Intuitionistic reflections on formalism&quot;,[reprinted with commentary, p. 490, van Heijenoort]
* Stephen C. Kleene 1952 original printing, 1971 6th printing with corrections, 10th printing 1991, &quot;Introduction to Metamathematics&quot;, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, New York, .
* Kneale, W. and Kneale, M., &quot;The Development of Logic&quot;, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1962. Reprinted with corrections, 1975.
* Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, &quot;Principia Mathematica to *56&quot;, Cambridge at the University Press 1962 (Second Edition of 1927, reprinted). Extremely difficult because of arcane symbolism, but a must-have for serious logicians.
* Bertrand Russell, &quot;An Inquiry Into Meaning and Truth&quot;. The William James Lectures for 1940 delivered at Harvard University.
* Bertrand Russell, &quot;The Problems of Philosophy, With a New Introduction by John Perry&quot;, Oxford University Press, New York, 1997 edition (first published 1912). Easy to read.
* Bertrand Russell, &quot;The Art of Philosophizing and Other Essays&quot;, Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co., Totowa, New Jersey, 1974 edition (first published 1968). Includes a wonderful essay on &quot;The Art of drawing Inferences&quot;.
* Hans Reichenbach, &quot;Elements of Symbolic Logic&quot;, Dover, New York, 1947, 1975.
* Tom Mitchell, &quot;Machine Learning&quot;, WCB McGraw–Hill, 1997.
* Constance Reid, &quot;Hilbert&quot;, Copernicus: Springer–Verlag New York, Inc. 1996, first published 1969. Contains a wealth of biographical information, much derived from interviews.
* Bart Kosko, &quot;Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic&quot;, Hyperion, New York, 1993. Fuzzy thinking at its finest but a good introduction to the concepts.
* David Hume, &quot;An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding&quot;, reprinted in Great Books of the Western World Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 35, 1952, p. 449 ff. This work was published by Hume in 1758 as his rewrite of his &quot;juvenile&quot; &quot;Treatise of Human Nature: Being An attempt to introduce the experimental method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects Vol. I, Of The Understanding&quot; first published 1739, reprinted as: David Hume, &quot;A Treatise of Human Nature&quot;, Penguin Classics, 1985. Also see: David Applebaum, &quot;The Vision of Hume&quot;, Vega, London, 2001: a reprint of a portion of &quot;An Inquiry&quot; starts on p. 94 ff

== External links ==
* &quot;Contradiction&quot; entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3" end="8" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="14" end="36" title="Law of excluded middle" label="law of excluded middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="44" end="72" title="Law of excluded middle" label="principle of excluded middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="95" end="106" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="108" end="114" title="Exclusive or" label="either"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="139" end="147" title="negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="151" end="155" title="Truth value" label="true"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="174" end="195" title="Law of thought#The three traditional laws" label="three laws of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="212" end="235" title="law of noncontradiction" label="law of noncontradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372261" start="245" end="260" title="law of identity" label="law of identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="351" end="366" title="Rule of inference" label="inference rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q655742" start="376" end="388" title="modus ponens" label="modus ponens"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="392" end="413" title="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="444" end="447" title="Law of excluded middle" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="450" end="459" title="Law of excluded middle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q468422" start="460" end="481" title="Law of excluded middle" label="of the excluded third"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="486" end="491" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q236975" start="630" end="645" title="classical logic" label="classical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209555" start="660" end="669" title="tautology (logic)" label="tautology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110857" start="745" end="767" title="principle of bivalence" label="principle of bivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="1225" end="1255" title="principle of non-contradiction" label="principle of non-contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q648627" start="1281" end="1298" title="On Interpretation" label="On Interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q363948" start="1332" end="1345" title="contradictory" label="contradictory"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="1502" end="1513" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1688" end="1697" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q237125" start="2791" end="2808" title="traditional logic" label="traditional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755253" start="3016" end="3034" title="Problem of future contingents" label="future contingents"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="3184" end="3191" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="3195" end="3214" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="3218" end="3225" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="3230" end="3239" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="3249" end="3270" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="4791" end="4812" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="6806" end="6818" title="Logical consequence" label="follows from"/>
<link wikidata="Q10879018" start="7270" end="7282" title="Intuitionism" label="intuitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="7295" end="7311" title="L. E. J. Brouwer" label="L. E. J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q461528" start="8133" end="8145" title="Karnaugh map" label="Karnaugh map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="8198" end="8210" title="Logical disjunction" label="inclusive-or"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="8312" end="8336" title="Exclusive or" label="&amp;quot;exclusive&amp;quot;-or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="8366" end="8390" title="Logical disjunction" label="&amp;quot;inclusive&amp;quot;-or"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="8988" end="9000" title="exclusive-or" label="exclusive-or"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048059" start="9060" end="9071" title="nomological" label="nomological"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="9752" end="9764" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Hermann Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="9769" end="9785" title="L. E. J. Brouwer" label="L. E. J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10879018" start="9821" end="9833" title="intuitionism" label="intuitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76410" start="9859" end="9876" title="Leopold Kronecker" label="Leopold Kronecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424667" start="10014" end="10043" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s second problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s second problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q273167" start="10052" end="10075" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s problems" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="11061" end="11082" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="13450" end="13455" title="Gödel" label="Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="14065" end="14085" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="17304" end="17323" title="logical disjunction" label="logical disjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="17845" end="17862" title="irrational number" label="irrational number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17968" end="17973" title="Square root of 2#Proofs of irrationality" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q10879018" start="18434" end="18446" title="intuitionist" label="intuitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044470" start="18828" end="18844" title="non-constructive" label="non-constructive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="19613" end="19626" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="19631" end="19652" title="Luitzen E. J. Brouwer" label="Luitzen E. J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="20507" end="20519" title="liar paradox" label="liar paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272211" start="20523" end="20543" title="Quine&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Quine&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541962" start="20598" end="20611" title="Graham Priest" label="Graham Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844169" start="20619" end="20630" title="dialetheism" label="dialetheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054212" start="20977" end="20986" title="Catuṣkoṭi" label="Catuṣkoṭi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661527" start="21178" end="21190" title="Indian logic" label="Indian logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925603" start="21195" end="21209" title="Buddhist logic" label="Buddhist logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126340" start="21269" end="21279" title="Pyrrhonism" label="Pyrrhonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119400" start="21363" end="21382" title="negation as failure" label="negation as failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846555" start="21570" end="21578" title="Completeness (logic)" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826262" start="21645" end="21664" title="autoepistemic logic" label="autoepistemic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="21688" end="21705" title="logic programming" label="logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="21889" end="21905" title="Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer" label="L. E. J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q641771" start="21910" end="21923" title="Arend Heyting" label="Arend Heyting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="22067" end="22085" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448195" start="22145" end="22163" title="Self-refuting idea" label="self-contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="22301" end="22320" title="Liar paradox" label="Liar&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q250020" start="22432" end="22444" title="Arthur Prior" label="Arthur Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="22461" end="22472" title="Liar paradox" label="The Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="22680" end="22690" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33401" start="22878" end="22900" title="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="22979" end="23006" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory" label="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q899616" start="23163" end="23183" title="Curry&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Curry&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611653" start="23280" end="23307" title="finite-valued logic" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-valued logics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198215" start="23408" end="23414" title="cyclic negation" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="23761" end="23772" title="truth value" label="truth value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361594" start="23939" end="23957" title="intermediate logic" label="intermediate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="23970" end="23985" title="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="De Morgan logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="24022" end="24042" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="24175" end="24196" title="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="De Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164501" start="24352" end="24375" title="Constructive set theory" label="Constructive set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137814" start="24590" end="24617" title="Constructivism (philosophy of mathematics)" label="Mathematical constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="24814" end="24829" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Aquinas, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="24837" end="24853" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24861" end="24902" title="Fathers of the English Dominican Province" label="Fathers of the English Dominican Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217648" start="24913" end="24931" title="Daniel J. Sullivan" label="Daniel J. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q561814" start="24954" end="24977" title="Robert Maynard Hutchins" label="Robert Maynard Hutchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339531" start="24991" end="25023" title="Great Books of the Western World" label="Great Books of the Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="25108" end="25117" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="25125" end="25136" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364954" start="25144" end="25153" title="W.D. Ross" label="W.D. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q561814" start="25174" end="25197" title="Robert Maynard Hutchins" label="Robert Maynard Hutchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339531" start="25211" end="25243" title="Great Books of the Western World" label="Great Books of the Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239172" start="25432" end="25444" title="Martin Davis (mathematician)" label="Martin Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006737" start="25582" end="25592" title="John Dawson Jr." label="Dawson, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q449711" start="25704" end="25722" title="Jean van Heijenoort" label="van Heijenoort, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q991000" start="25920" end="25927" title="Brouwer" label="Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="26122" end="26132" title="Kolmogorov" label="Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q991000" start="26264" end="26271" title="Brouwer" label="Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q991000" start="26504" end="26511" title="Brouwer" label="Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335148" start="26628" end="26645" title="Stephen C. Kleene" label="Stephen C. Kleene"/>
<link wikidata="Q994761" start="26830" end="26840" title="William Kneale" label="Kneale, W."/>
<link wikidata="Q1903060" start="26845" end="26855" title="Martha Kneale" label="Kneale, M."/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="26974" end="26996" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="27001" end="27017" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="27227" end="27243" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="27363" end="27379" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="27548" end="27564" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170147" start="27784" end="27800" title="Hans Reichenbach" label="Hans Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816669" start="27873" end="27885" title="Tom M. Mitchell" label="Tom Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q450415" start="27942" end="27956" title="Constance Reid" label="Constance Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635280" start="28129" end="28139" title="Bart Kosko" label="Bart Kosko"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="28299" end="28309" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230817" start="28824" end="28839" title="David Applebaum" label="David Applebaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="29024" end="29059" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17639" wikidata="Q6693063" url="?curid=17639" title="Lowball">
<text>Lowball can refer to:

*Low-ball, a persuasion, negotiation, and selling technique
*Lowball (poker), a variant of the card game poker, in which hand values are reversed so that the lowest-valued hand wins
*Lowball glass, a short drinking glass typically used for serving liquor

==See also==
* Highball</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6693063" start="0" end="7" title="Lowball" label="Lowball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491396" start="24" end="32" title="Low-ball" label="Low-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356784" start="84" end="99" title="Lowball (poker)" label="Lowball (poker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q625960" start="206" end="219" title="Lowball glass" label="Lowball glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617899" start="294" end="302" title="Highball" label="Highball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17640" wikidata="Q1651587" url="?curid=17640" title="Line of scrimmage">
<text>In gridiron football, a line of scrimmage is an invisible transverse line (across the width of the field) beyond which a team cannot cross until the next play has begun. Its location is based on the spot where the ball is placed after the end of the most recent play and following the assessment of any penalty yards.

== History ==
The line of scrimmage first came into use in 1880. Developed by Walter Camp (who introduced many innovations that are part of the modern game of American football), it replaced a contested scrimmage that had descended from the game&#x27;s rugby roots. This uncontested line of scrimmage would set into motion many more rules that led to the formation of the modern form of gridiron football (although the Canadian rules were developed independently of the American game, despite their similarities).

== Dimensions ==
A line of scrimmage is parallel to the goal lines and touches one edge of the ball where it sits on the ground before the snap. In American football, the set distance of the line of scrimmage between the offense and defense is , the length of the ball. In Canadian football, the set distance of the line of scrimmage is , more than three times as long as the American line.

Under NCAA, and NFHS rules, there are two lines of scrimmage at the outset of each play: one that restricts the offense and one that restricts the defense. The area between the two lines (representing the length of the ball as extended to both sidelines) is called the &quot;neutral zone&quot;.

== Rules regarding the line of scrimmage ==
* Only the offensive player who snaps the ball (usually the center or long snapper) is allowed to have any part of his body in the neutral zone.
* For there to be a legal beginning of a play, at least seven players on the offensive team, including two eligible receivers, must be at, on, or within a few inches of their line of scrimmage.
* Beginning in 2019, high school football will allow as few as five players on a line of scrimmage, but in practice, the limits will remain the same since teams will still be limited to four persons behind the line of scrimmage; the difference would only come into play if a team plays offense with fewer than 11 players.

== Presentation during broadcasts ==
Modern video techniques enable broadcasts of American football to display a visible line on the screen representing the line of scrimmage. The line is tapered according to the camera angle and gets occluded by players and other objects as if the line were painted on the field. The line may represent the line of scrimmage or the minimum distance that the ball must be moved for the offensive team to achieve a first down.

== Misnomers ==
Many fans and commentators refer colloquially to the entire neutral zone as the &quot;line of scrimmage&quot;, although this is technically incorrect. In the NFL rulebook, only the defensive-side restraining line is officially considered a line of scrimmage.

==See also==
* Scrummage
* Glossary of American football
* Comparison of Canadian and American football

==Footnotes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="3" end="20" title="gridiron football" label="gridiron football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651587" start="24" end="41" title="Line of scrimmage" label="line of scrimmage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="303" end="316" title="American football rules#Fouls and their penalties" label="penalty yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365766" start="397" end="408" title="Walter Camp" label="Walter Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="572" end="577" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000101" start="738" end="752" title="Burnside rules" label="Canadian rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="874" end="882" title="Parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q139680" start="973" end="977" title="football snap" label="snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1232" end="1236" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972603" start="1242" end="1246" title="National Federation of State High School Associations" label="NFHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126201" start="1501" end="1513" title="Neutral zone (American football)" label="neutral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25075" start="1626" end="1632" title="center (American football)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q530348" start="1636" end="1648" title="long snapper" label="long snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q694589" start="1788" end="1802" title="offensive team" label="offensive team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360816" start="1818" end="1835" title="eligible receiver" label="eligible receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="1926" end="1946" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2310" end="2327" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q139989" start="2676" end="2686" title="first down" label="first down"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="2738" end="2750" title="colloquialism" label="colloquially"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="2863" end="2866" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q611749" start="2980" end="2989" title="Scrummage" label="Scrummage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917853" start="2992" end="3021" title="Glossary of American football" label="Glossary of American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990355" start="3024" end="3068" title="Comparison of Canadian and American football" label="Comparison of Canadian and American football"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17641" wikidata="Q1806902" url="?curid=17641" title="Lateral pass">
<text>In gridiron football, a lateral pass or lateral (officially backward pass in American football and onside pass in Canadian football), also called a pitch or a flip, occurs when the ball carrier throws or hands the football to a teammate in a direction parallel to or away from the opponents&#x27; goal line. A lateral pass is distinguished from a forward pass, in which the ball is thrown forward, towards the opposition&#x27;s end zone. In a lateral pass the ball is not advanced, but unlike a forward pass a lateral may be attempted from anywhere on the field by any player to any player at any time.

While the forward pass is an invention of the North American games, the lateral and backward pass is also a part of rugby union and rugby league, where such passes are the norm. Compared to its use in rugby, laterals and backward passes are less common in North American football, due to a much greater focus on ball control in American football strategy; they are most commonly used by the quarterback, after taking the snap, to quickly transfer (&quot;pitch&quot;) the ball a short distance to a nearby running back (or, rarely, wide receiver) on a rushing play. Laterals are also often seen as part of a last-minute desperation strategy or as part of a trick play. Examples of plays utilizing the lateral pass are the toss, flea flicker, hook and lateral, and buck-lateral.

==Rules== 
While a forward pass may only be thrown once per down by the team on offense from within or behind the neutral zone, there are no restrictions on the use of lateral passes; any player legally carrying the ball may throw a lateral pass from any position on the field at any time, any player may receive such a pass, and any number of lateral passes may be thrown on a single play. Additionally, a player receiving a lateral pass may throw a forward pass if he is still behind the neutral zone, subject to the forward pass rules. A lateral is the only type of pass that can be legally thrown following a change of possession during a play.

Unlike a forward pass, if a backward pass hits the ground or an official, play continues and, as with a fumble, a backward pass that has hit the ground may be recovered and advanced by either team. Backward passes can also be intercepted. A lateral may be underhand or overhand as long as the ball is not advanced in the pass.

A ball that is passed exactly sideways is considered a backwards pass. If it hits the ground, the person throwing or &quot;pitching&quot; the lateral pass will be subjected to the fumble designation in the statistics in the NFL, even if the ball is dropped or muffed by a teammate, although in college football this can be credited to whichever player the statistician feels is most responsible. If the ball hits the ground after traveling even slightly forward, however, it is then incomplete instead of a fumble.

The snap is legally considered to be a backward pass, although a blown snap is not scored as a fumble.

==Alternate uses==
The &quot;forward lateral&quot; is used to describe an attempted &quot;lateral&quot; (backward pass) that actually goes forward. In most cases, it is illegal.

A variant, the hook and lateral, where a forward pass is immediately passed backward to a second receiver to fool the defense, is used on occasion. Another variant is called the flea flicker, where a player laterals the ball back to the quarterback before crossing the line of scrimmage.

==Famous plays in history==
The lateral pass rule, or rather the lack of restrictions contained therein, has given rise to some of the most memorable and incredible walk-off touchdowns in football history. Both collegiate and NFL football have certain examples of football lore which involve laterals. This is not a complete list. This is only the most known plays with lateral passes.

===One lateral pass===

A well-known and controversial NFL lateral pass occurred during the Music City Miracle play at the end of the 2000 playoff game between the Tennessee Titans and the Buffalo Bills. The play was a true lateral (the ball did not move forward or backward in the pass), but the receiver was a step ahead of the passer and reached back to catch the ball, so it gave the appearance of an illegal forward pass.

In October 2003, the Minnesota Vikings faced the Denver Broncos with the scores tied at 7–7 as the first half came to a close. With 12 seconds left in the half and the Vikings on their own 41-yard line facing a 3rd-and-24, Daunte Culpepper threw a long pass to Randy Moss, who caught the ball at the Denver 10-yard line. As Moss was being tackled and driven backwards by two Broncos defenders, he tossed the ball over his head for a blind lateral to running back Moe Williams at the 15, and Williams ran it into the end zone for a touchdown to give the Vikings a 14–7 lead at halftime. This play was later named the 68th greatest play in the first 100 years of the NFL.

Another well known play was executed in a college football game by Presbyterian against Wake Forest in 2010. In this trick play, three lateral pass rules were used in combination. First the quarterback passed the ball sideways while intentionally bouncing the ball on the ground (a so-called &quot;fake fumble pass&quot;). The pass-receiver faked the end of the play, suggesting that it was an incomplete pass, but then passed the ball forward to a wide-receiver, who successfully ran for a touchdown. Wake Forest coach Jim Grobe described the play &quot;as well executed as anything I’ve ever seen&quot;. 

===Multiple lateral passes===

In a college football game in 1982, the famous walk-off touchdown simply called The Play happened with five backward passes. In the Big Game between Stanford and California, with four seconds left and trailing by one point, Cal ran the kickoff all the way for the walk-off touchdown using five backward passes, eventually running through the Stanford Band, who had already taken the field (believing the game was over after Stanford players appeared to have tackled a Cal ball-carrier). The game remains controversial because of Stanford&#x27;s contention that the Cal player&#x27;s knee was down before he passed the ball during the third lateral and that the fifth lateral was an illegal forward pass.

In an NFL game in 2003, there was a well known play called the River City Relay with three lateral passes. The game was between the New Orleans Saints and the Jacksonville Jaguars. The game was held on December 21, 2003. With time running out, the Saints threw backward passes and brought the ball down the length of the field for a touchdown. However, kicker John Carney missed the extra point, which would have tied the game, so the Saints lost by one point, 20–19.
In a Division III college football in 2007 there was a walk-off touchdown play with 15 lateral passes. Trinity University was trailing by two points with two seconds left in a game against conference rival Millsaps College. Starting from their own 39-yard line, Trinity called a play for a short pass across the middle. The receiver pitched the ball backward, with a sequence of additional backward passes as players were in danger of being tackled. The &quot;Mississippi Miracle&quot; ultimately included 15 backward passes as it covered 61 yards for the walk-off touchdown. The game was on October 27, 2007.

In a college football game in 2015, there was a walk-off touchdown with eight lateral passes. The Miami Hurricanes college football team threw eight lateral passes over the course of 45 seconds to score a touchdown and upset the 22nd-ranked Duke Blue Devils 30–27. The play stirred controversy amid a number of missed calls by the Atlantic Coast Conference officiating crew. The game was on October 31, 2015.

In an NFL game in 2018, there was a play with two lateral passes for the only walk-off touchdown in NFL history. The Miami Dolphins NFL team pulled off the only walk-off touchdown to involve multiple lateral passes in NFL history, completing two laterals for a 69-yard touchdown to beat the New England Patriots 34–33. Miami had almost lost a game against the Pittsburgh Steelers five years prior via laterals, but managed to win when Antonio Brown stepped out of bounds at the thirteen-yard line. The game was on December 9, 2018.

==See also==
* Hail Mary pass

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="3" end="20" title="gridiron football" label="gridiron football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806902" start="24" end="36" title="Lateral pass" label="lateral pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806902" start="40" end="47" title="Lateral pass" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806902" start="60" end="73" title="Lateral pass" label="backward pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="77" end="94" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806902" start="99" end="110" title="Lateral pass" label="onside pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="114" end="131" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806902" start="148" end="153" title="Lateral pass" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806902" start="159" end="163" title="Lateral pass" label="flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433685" start="347" end="359" title="forward pass" label="forward pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234374" start="428" end="436" title="end zone" label="end zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="720" end="731" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="736" end="748" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745474" start="932" end="958" title="American football strategy" label="American football strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="995" end="1006" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q139680" start="1025" end="1029" title="snap (gridiron football)" label="snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="1109" end="1121" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q918224" start="1135" end="1148" title="wide receiver" label="wide receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q744865" start="1155" end="1162" title="rush (gridiron football)" label="rushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452746" start="1260" end="1270" title="trick play" label="trick play"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453820" start="1325" end="1329" title="toss play" label="toss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458317" start="1331" end="1343" title="Flea flicker (American football)" label="flea flicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897939" start="1345" end="1361" title="hook and lateral" label="hook and lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982798" start="1367" end="1379" title="Buck-lateral series" label="buck-lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q139989" start="1442" end="1446" title="down (American football)" label="down"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126201" start="1496" end="1508" title="Neutral zone (American football)" label="neutral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721589" start="2136" end="2142" title="fumble" label="fumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594352" start="2258" end="2269" title="interception" label="intercepted"/>
<link wikidata="Q139680" start="2880" end="2884" title="snap (football)" label="snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897939" start="3174" end="3190" title="hook and lateral" label="hook and lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458317" start="3337" end="3349" title="flea flicker" label="flea flicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320476" start="3613" end="3632" title="walk-off touchdowns" label="walk-off touchdowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941481" start="3927" end="3945" title="Music City Miracle" label="Music City Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="3999" end="4015" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="4024" end="4037" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q706014" start="4486" end="4502" title="Daunte Culpepper" label="Daunte Culpepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q462925" start="4524" end="4534" title="Randy Moss" label="Randy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950381" start="4726" end="4738" title="Moe Williams" label="Moe Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320476" start="5620" end="5638" title="walk-off touchdown" label="walk-off touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522255" start="5653" end="5661" title="The Play (American football)" label="The Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905753" start="5705" end="5713" title="Big Game (American football)" label="Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598725" start="5722" end="5730" title="Stanford Cardinal football" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650742" start="5735" end="5745" title="California Golden Bears football" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740847" start="5809" end="5816" title="Kickoff (American football)" label="kickoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598718" start="5915" end="5928" title="Stanford Band" label="Stanford Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433685" start="6263" end="6275" title="forward pass" label="forward pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337258" start="6341" end="6357" title="River City Relay" label="River City Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="6410" end="6428" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="6437" end="6457" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="6611" end="6620" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="6631" end="6637" title="placekicker" label="kicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195457" start="6638" end="6649" title="John Carney (American football)" label="John Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603777" start="6661" end="6672" title="extra point" label="extra point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="6751" end="6763" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311379" start="6849" end="6867" title="Trinity University (Texas)" label="Trinity University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860022" start="6952" end="6968" title="Millsaps College" label="Millsaps College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609433" start="7206" end="7225" title="2007 Trinity vs. Millsaps football game" label="Mississippi Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="7455" end="7471" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="Miami Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312733" start="7598" end="7614" title="Duke Blue Devils football" label="Duke Blue Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="7884" end="7898" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028520" start="7923" end="7946" title="Miracle In Miami (2018)" label="only walk-off touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="8058" end="8078" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639191" start="8315" end="8329" title="Hail Mary pass" label="Hail Mary pass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17643" wikidata="Q171892" url="?curid=17643" title="Lavandula">
<text>Lavandula (common name lavender) is a genus of 47 known species of perennial flowering plants in the mints family, Lamiaceae. It is native to the Old World, primarily found across the drier, warmer regions of mainland Eurasia, with an affinity for maritime breezes.

Lavender is found on the Iberian Peninsula and around the entirety of the Mediterranean coastline (including the Adriatic coast, the Balkans, the Levant, and coastal North Africa), in parts of Eastern and Southern Africa and the Middle East, as well as in South Asia and on the Indian subcontinent. 

Many members of the genus are cultivated extensively in temperate climates as ornamental plants for garden and landscape use, for use as culinary herbs, and also commercially for the extraction of essential oils. Lavender is used in traditional medicine and as an ingredient in cosmetics.

==Description==
The genus includes annual or short-lived herbaceous perennial plants, and shrub-like perennials, subshrubs or small shrubs.

Leaf shape is diverse across the genus. They are simple in some commonly cultivated species; in other species, they are pinnately toothed, or pinnate, sometimes multiple pinnate and dissected. In most species, the leaves are covered in fine hairs or indumentum, which normally contain essential oils.

Flowers are contained in whorls, held on spikes rising above the foliage, the spikes being branched in some species. Some species produce colored bracts at the tips of the inflorescences. The flowers may be blue, violet, or lilac in the wild species, occasionally blackish purple or yellowish. The sepal calyx is tubular. The corolla is also tubular, usually with five lobes (the upper lip often cleft, and the lower lip has two clefts).

===Phytochemicals===
Some 100 individual phytochemicals have been identified in lavender oil, including major contents of linalyl acetate (30–55%), linalool (20–35%), tannins (5–10%), and caryophyllene (8%), with lesser amounts of sesquiterpenoids, perillyl alcohols, esters, oxides, ketones, cineole, camphor, beta-ocimene, limonene, caproic acid, and caryophyllene oxide. The relative amounts of these compounds vary considerably among lavender species.

== Taxonomy ==
&quot;Lavandula stoechas&quot;, &quot;L. pedunculata&quot;, and &quot;L. dentata&quot; were known in Roman times. From the Middle Ages onwards, the European species were considered two separate groups or genera, &quot;Stoechas&quot; (&quot;L. stoechas&quot;, &quot;L. pedunculata&quot;, &quot;L. dentata&quot;) and &quot;Lavandula&quot; (&quot;L. spica&quot; and &quot;L. latifolia&quot;), until Carl Linnaeus combined them. He recognised only five species in &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; (1753), &quot;L. multifida&quot; and &quot;L. dentata&quot; (Spain) and &quot;L. stoechas&quot; and &quot;L. spica&quot; from Southern Europe. &quot;L. pedunculata&quot; was included within &quot;L. stoechas&quot;.

By 1790, &quot;L. pinnata&quot; and &quot;L. carnosa&quot; were recognised. The latter was subsequently transferred to &quot;Anisochilus&quot;. By 1826, Frédéric Charles Jean Gingins de la Sarraz listed 12 species in three sections, and by 1848 eighteen species were known.

One of the first modern major classifications was that of Dorothy Chaytor in 1937 at Kew. The six sections she proposed for 28 species still left many intermediates that could not easily be assigned. Her sections included &quot;Stoechas&quot;, &quot;Spica&quot;, &quot;Subnudae&quot;, &quot;Pterostoechas&quot;, &quot;Chaetostachys&quot;, and &quot;Dentatae&quot;. However, all the major cultivated and commercial forms resided in the &quot;Stoechas&quot; and &quot;Spica&quot; sections. There were four species within &quot;Stoechas&quot; (&quot;Lavandula stoechas&quot;, &quot;L. dentata&quot;, &quot;L. viridis&quot;, and &quot;L. pedunculata&quot;) while &quot;Spica&quot; had three (&quot;L. officinalis&quot; (now &quot;L. angustifolia&quot;), &quot;L. latifolia&quot; and &quot;L. lanata&quot;). She believed that the garden varieties were hybrids between true lavender &quot;L. angustifolia&quot; and spike lavender (&quot;L. latifolia&quot;).

&quot;Lavandula&quot; has three subgenera: 
*Subgenus &quot;Lavandula&quot; is mainly of woody shrubs with entire leaves. It contains the principal species grown as ornamental plants and for oils. They are found across the Mediterranean region to northeast Africa and western Arabia.
*Subgenus &quot;Fabricia&quot; consists of shrubs and herbs, and it has a wide distribution from the Atlantic to India. It contains some ornamental plants.
*Subgenus &quot;Sabaudia&quot; constitutes two species in the southwest Arabian peninsula and Eritrea, which are rather distinct from the other species, and are sometimes placed in their own genus &quot;Sabaudia&quot;.

In addition, there are numerous hybrids and cultivars in commercial and horticultural usage.

The first major clade corresponds to subgenus &quot;Lavandula&quot;, and the second &quot;Fabricia&quot;. The &quot;Sabaudia&quot; group is less clearly defined. Within the &quot;Lavandula&quot; clade, the subclades correspond to the existing sections but place &quot;Dentatae&quot; separately from &quot;Stoechas&quot;, not within it. Within the &quot;Fabricia&quot; clade, the subclades correspond to &quot;Pterostoechas&quot;, &quot;Subnudae&quot;, and &quot;Chaetostachys&quot;.

Thus the current classification includes 39 species distributed across 8 sections (the original 6 of Chaytor and the two new sections of Upson and Andrews), in three subgenera (see table below). However, since lavender cross-pollinates easily, countless variations present difficulties in classification.

=== Taxonomic table ===

This is based on the classification of Upson and Andrews, 2004.

==Etymology==
The English word lavender came into use in the 13th century, and is generally thought to derive from Old French &quot;lavandre&quot;, ultimately from Latin &quot;lavare&quot; from &quot;lavo&quot; (to wash), referring to the use of blue infusions of the plants for bathing. The botanic name &quot;Lavandula&quot; as used by Linnaeus is considered to be derived from this and other European vernacular names for the plants.

The names widely used for some of the species, &quot;English lavender&quot;, &quot;French lavender&quot; and &quot;Spanish lavender&quot; are all imprecisely applied. &quot;English lavender&quot; is commonly used for &quot;L. angustifolia&quot;, though some references say the proper term is &quot;Old English lavender&quot;. The name &quot;French lavender&quot; may refer to either &quot;L. stoechas&quot; or to &quot;L. dentata&quot;. &quot;Spanish lavender&quot; may refer to &quot;L. pedunculata&quot;, &quot;L. stoechas&quot;, or &quot;L. lanata.&quot;

==Cultivation==

The most common form in cultivation is the common or English lavender &quot;Lavandula angustifolia&quot; (formerly named &quot;L. officinalis&quot;). A wide range of cultivars can be found. Other commonly grown ornamental species are &quot;L. stoechas&quot;, &quot;L. dentata&quot;, and &quot;L. multifida&quot; (Egyptian lavender).

Because the cultivated forms are planted in gardens worldwide, they are occasionally found growing wild as garden escapes, well beyond their natural range. Such spontaneous growth is usually harmless, but in some cases, &quot;Lavandula&quot; species have become invasive. For example, in Australia, &quot;L. stoechas&quot; has become a cause for concern; it occurs widely throughout the continent and has been declared a noxious weed in Victoria since 1920. It is regarded as a weed in parts of Spain.

Lavenders flourish best in dry, well-drained, sandy or gravelly soils in full sun. English lavender has a long germination process (14–28 days) and matures within 100–110 days. All types need little or no fertilizer and good air circulation. In areas of high humidity, root rot due to fungus infection can be a problem. Organic mulches can trap moisture around the plants&#x27; bases, encouraging root rot. Gravelly materials such as crushed rocks give better results. It grows best in soils with a pH between 6 and 8. Most lavender is hand-harvested, and harvest times vary depending on intended use.

== Health risks ==
The U.S. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) states that lavender is considered likely safe in food amounts, and that topical uses may cause allergic reactions. The NCCIH does not recommend the use of lavender while pregnant or breastfeeding because of lack of knowledge of its effects. It recommends caution if young boys use lavender oil because of possible hormonal effects leading to gynecomastia.

A 2007 study examined the relationship between various fragrances and photosensitivity, stating that lavender is known &quot;to elicit cutaneous photo-toxic reactions&quot;, but does not induce photohaemolysis.

Some people experience contact dermatitis, allergic eczema, or facial dermatitis from the use of lavender oil on skin.

==Uses==
=== Lavender oil ===

Commercially, the plant is grown mainly for the production of lavender essential oil. English lavender (&quot;Lavandula angustifolia&quot;) yields an oil with sweet overtones and can be used in balms, salves, perfumes, cosmetics, and topical applications. 

&quot;Lavandula &quot;×&quot; intermedia&quot;, also known as &quot;lavandin&quot; or &quot;Dutch lavender&quot;, hybrids of &quot;L. angustifolia&quot; and &quot;L. latifolia&quot;. are widely cultivated for commercial use since their flowers tend to be bigger than those of English lavender and the plants tend to be easier to harvest. They yield a similar essential oil, but with higher levels of terpenes, including camphor, which add a sharper overtone to the fragrance, regarded by some as of lower quality than that of English lavender.

The US Food and Drug Administration considers lavender as generally recognized as safe for human consumption. The essential oil was used in hospitals during World War I.

=== Culinary ===
Culinary lavender is usually English lavender, the most commonly used species in cooking (&quot;L. angustifolia&quot; &#x27;Munstead&#x27;). As an aromatic, it has a sweet fragrance with lemon or citrus notes. It is used as a spice or condiment in pastas, salads and dressings, and desserts. Their buds and greens are used in teas, and their buds, processed by bees, are the essential ingredient of a monofloral honey.

==== Culinary history ====
Spanish nard (), referring to &quot;L. stoechas&quot;, is listed as an ingredient in making a spiced wine, namely hippocras, in &quot;The Forme of Cury&quot;.

Lavender was introduced into England in the 1600s. It is said that Queen Elizabeth I of England prized a lavender conserve (jam) at her table, so lavender was produced as a jam at that time, as well as used in teas both medicinally and for its taste.

Lavender was not used in traditional southern French cooking at the turn of the 20th century. It does not appear at all in the best-known compendium of Provençal cooking, J.-B. Reboul&#x27;s &quot;Cuisinière Provençale&quot;. French lambs have been allowed to graze on lavender as it is alleged to make their meat more tender and fragrant. In the 1970s, a blend of herbs called &quot;herbes de Provence&quot; was invented by spice wholesalers. Culinary lavender is added to the mixture in the North American version.

In the 21st century, lavender is used in many world regions to flavor tea, vinegar, jellies, baked goods, and beverages.

==== Buds ====
For most cooking applications, the dried buds (also called flowers) are used.

The potency of the lavender buds increases with drying which necessitates more sparing use to avoid a heavy, soapy aftertaste. Chefs note to reduce by two-thirds the dry amount in recipes that call for fresh lavender buds.

Lavender buds can amplify both sweet and savory flavors in dishes and are sometimes paired with sheep&#x27;s milk and goat&#x27;s milk cheeses. Lavender flowers are occasionally blended with black, green, or herbal teas. Lavender flavors baked goods and desserts, pairing especially well with chocolate. In the United States, both lavender syrup and dried lavender buds are used to make lavender scones and marshmallows.

Lavender buds are put into sugar for two weeks to allow the essential oils and fragrance to transfer; then the sugar itself is used in baking. Lavender can be used in breads where recipes call for rosemary. Lavender can be used decoratively in dishes or spirits, or as a decorative and aromatic in a glass of champagne. Lavender is used in savory dishes, giving stews and reduced sauces aromatic flair. It is also used to scent flans, custards, and sorbets.

==== In honey ====
The flowers yield abundant nectar, from which bees make a high-quality honey. Monofloral honey is produced primarily around the Mediterranean Sea, and is marketed worldwide as a premium product. Flowers can be candied and are sometimes used as cake decorations. It is also used to make &quot;lavender sugar&quot;.

=== Herbalism ===
The German scientific committee on traditional medicine, Commission E, reported uses of lavender flower in practices of herbalism, including its use for restlessness or insomnia, Roemheld syndrome, intestinal discomfort, and cardiovascular diseases, among others.
=== Other uses ===

Flower spikes are used for dried flower arrangements. The fragrant, pale purple flowers and flower buds are used in potpourris. Lavender is also used as herbal filler inside sachets used to freshen linens. Dried and sealed in pouches, lavender flowers are placed among stored items of clothing to give a fresh fragrance and to deter moths. Dried lavender flowers may be used for wedding confetti. Lavender is also used in scented waters, soaps, and sachets.

==In culture==

The ancient Greeks called the lavender herb νάρδος: nárdos, Latinized as &quot;nardus&quot;, after the Syrian city of Naarda (possibly the modern town of Duhok, Iraq). It was also commonly called &quot;nard&quot;. The species originally grown was &quot;L. stoechas&quot;.

During Roman times, flowers were sold for 100 &quot;denarii&quot; per pound, which was about the same as a month&#x27;s wages for a farm laborer, or fifty haircuts from the local barber. Its late Latin name was &quot;lavandārius&quot;, from &quot;lavanda&quot; (things to be washed), from &quot;lavāre&quot; from the verb &quot;lavo&quot; (to wash).

Since the late 19th century, lavenders and their color have been associated with the queer community.

==Gallery==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Upson T, Andrews S. &quot;The Genus Lavandula&quot;. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 2004
* United States Department of Agriculture GRIN: Lavandula (archived 12 May 2013)

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="23" end="31" title="Lavandula" label="lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="38" end="43" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="67" end="76" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="77" end="92" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q160114" start="101" end="106" title="Spearmint" label="mints"/>
<link wikidata="Q53476" start="115" end="124" title="Lamiaceae" label="Lamiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="132" end="138" title="native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="146" end="155" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="218" end="225" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="292" end="309" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="341" end="364" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="380" end="394" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="400" end="407" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="413" end="419" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="433" end="445" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="460" end="467" title="East Africa" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="472" end="487" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="496" end="507" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="523" end="533" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="545" end="564" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="624" end="641" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="646" end="662" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="705" end="718" title="culinary herb" label="culinary herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="765" end="778" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="801" end="821" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="846" end="855" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="915" end="925" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="926" end="935" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="948" end="953" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867502" start="971" end="979" title="subshrub" label="subshrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="999" end="1009" title="Leaf shape" label="Leaf shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="1141" end="1148" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493164" start="1249" end="1259" title="indumentum" label="indumentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q937039" start="1326" end="1332" title="whorl (botany)" label="whorls"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="1447" end="1452" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="1473" end="1486" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="1599" end="1604" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="1627" end="1634" title="corolla (flower)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="1781" end="1794" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q188314" start="1862" end="1877" title="linalyl acetate" label="linalyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410932" start="1888" end="1896" title="linalool" label="linalool"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="1907" end="1913" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421614" start="1928" end="1941" title="caryophyllene" label="caryophyllene"/>
<link wikidata="Q80218" start="1971" end="1986" title="sesquiterpenoid" label="sesquiterpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15391928" start="1989" end="2005" title="perillyl alcohol" label="perillyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="2008" end="2013" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="2016" end="2021" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="2024" end="2030" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161572" start="2033" end="2040" title="cineole" label="cineole"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="2042" end="2049" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q412945" start="2056" end="2063" title="ocimene" label="ocimene"/>
<link wikidata="Q278809" start="2065" end="2073" title="limonene" label="limonene"/>
<link wikidata="Q422597" start="2075" end="2087" title="caproic acid" label="caproic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q421614" start="2093" end="2106" title="caryophyllene" label="caryophyllene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="2218" end="2236" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="Lavandula stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251970" start="2250" end="2264" title="Lavandula pedunculata" label="L. pedunculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450735" start="2282" end="2292" title="Lavandula dentata" label="L. dentata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2608" end="2621" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="2678" end="2695" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q941807" start="2716" end="2728" title="Lavandula multifida" label="L. multifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450735" start="2745" end="2755" title="Lavandula dentata" label="L. dentata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="2780" end="2791" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="L. stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251970" start="2851" end="2865" title="Lavandula pedunculata" label="L. pedunculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="2898" end="2909" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="L. stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006288" start="2933" end="2943" title="Lavandula pinnata" label="L. pinnata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776512" start="3043" end="3054" title="Anisochilus" label="Anisochilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878692" start="3071" end="3113" title="Frédéric Charles Jean Gingins de la Sarraz" label="Frédéric Charles Jean Gingins de la Sarraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="3421" end="3429" title="Stoechas" label="Stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="3443" end="3448" title="Spica" label="Spica"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="3511" end="3524" title="Chaetostachys" label="Chaetostachys"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="3634" end="3642" title="Stoechas" label="Stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13008" start="3659" end="3664" title="Spica" label="Spica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="3740" end="3758" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="Lavandula stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450735" start="3772" end="3782" title="Lavandula dentata" label="L. dentata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206924" start="3796" end="3806" title="Lavandula viridis" label="L. viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251970" start="3824" end="3838" title="Lavandula pedunculata" label="L. pedunculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q42081" start="3919" end="3934" title="Lavandula angustifolia" label="L. angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q905916" start="3949" end="3961" title="Lavandula latifolia" label="L. latifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251971" start="3978" end="3987" title="Lavandula lanata" label="L. lanata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4040" end="4047" title="Hybrid (biology)#Hybrid plants" label="hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q42081" start="4076" end="4091" title="Lavandula angustifolia" label="L. angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q905916" start="4124" end="4136" title="Lavandula latifolia" label="L. latifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="4916" end="4921" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5168" end="5176" title="Dentatae" label="Dentatae"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="5205" end="5213" title="Stoechas" label="Stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5309" end="5322" title="Pterostoechas" label="Pterostoechas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5336" end="5344" title="Subnudae" label="Subnudae"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="5362" end="5375" title="Chaetostachys" label="Chaetostachys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136494" start="5531" end="5538" title="Susyn M. Andrews" label="Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="5603" end="5619" title="crosspollination" label="cross-pollinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049" start="5841" end="5853" title="13th century" label="13th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="5895" end="5905" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5944" end="5949" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="6031" end="6039" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="6118" end="6126" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42081" start="6441" end="6456" title="Lavandula angustifolia" label="L. angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="6607" end="6618" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="L. stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450735" start="6637" end="6647" title="Lavandula dentata" label="L. dentata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251970" start="6703" end="6717" title="Lavandula pedunculata" label="L. pedunculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="6731" end="6742" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="L. stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251971" start="6759" end="6768" title="Lavandula lanata" label="L. lanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q42081" start="6870" end="6892" title="Lavandula angustifolia" label="Lavandula angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="6960" end="6968" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="7028" end="7051" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="&amp;quot;L. stoechas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450735" start="7059" end="7069" title="Lavandula dentata" label="L. dentata"/>
<link wikidata="Q941807" start="7087" end="7099" title="Lavandula multifida" label="L. multifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="7390" end="7398" title="Invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="7433" end="7444" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="L. stoechas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278030" start="8262" end="8318" title="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health" label="National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="8400" end="8412" title="topical medication" label="topical uses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="8423" end="8440" title="allergic reaction" label="allergic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q339221" start="8670" end="8682" title="gynecomastia" label="gynecomastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014823" start="8755" end="8771" title="photosensitivity" label="photosensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="8879" end="8894" title="hemolysis" label="photohaemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q783903" start="8920" end="8938" title="contact dermatitis" label="contact dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="8949" end="8955" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="8967" end="8977" title="dermatitis" label="dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42081" start="9158" end="9180" title="Lavandula angustifolia" label="Lavandula angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42081" start="9437" end="9452" title="Lavandula angustifolia" label="L. angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q905916" start="9469" end="9481" title="Lavandula latifolia" label="L. latifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="9706" end="9713" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="9726" end="9733" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="9858" end="9886" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041116" start="9909" end="9937" title="generally recognized as safe" label="generally recognized as safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10008" end="10019" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776580" start="10440" end="10456" title="monofloral honey" label="monofloral honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="10516" end="10539" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="&amp;quot;L. stoechas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q673389" start="10600" end="10609" title="hippocras" label="hippocras"/>
<link wikidata="Q166358" start="10620" end="10637" title="The Forme of Cury" label="The Forme of Cury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="10719" end="10741" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q913548" start="11282" end="11300" title="herbes de Provence" label="herbes de Provence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11500" end="11507" title="Fruit preserves#Jelly" label="jellies"/>
<link wikidata="Q203415" start="12047" end="12052" title="black tea" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="12054" end="12059" title="green tea" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="12064" end="12074" title="herbal tea" label="herbal tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q869660" start="12252" end="12257" title="scone" label="scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q272198" start="12263" end="12274" title="marshmallow" label="marshmallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="12475" end="12483" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="12783" end="12789" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="12827" end="12832" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776580" start="12834" end="12850" title="Monofloral honey" label="Monofloral honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="12884" end="12901" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189351" start="13000" end="13015" title="cake decoration" label="cake decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="13124" end="13144" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13146" end="13158" title="Commission E" label="Commission E"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="13209" end="13218" title="herbalism" label="herbalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="13258" end="13266" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638006" start="13268" end="13285" title="Roemheld syndrome" label="Roemheld syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="13314" end="13336" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q920748" start="13489" end="13498" title="potpourri" label="potpourri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="13706" end="13710" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q815530" start="13760" end="13768" title="confetti" label="confetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605029" start="13795" end="13808" title="scented water" label="scented water"/>
<link wikidata="Q34396" start="13811" end="13815" title="soap" label="soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597618" start="13822" end="13828" title="sachet" label="sachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="13852" end="13866" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q152831" start="14002" end="14007" title="Duhok" label="Duhok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342976" start="14095" end="14118" title="Lavandula stoechas" label="&amp;quot;L. stoechas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="14128" end="14133" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="14173" end="14180" title="denarii" label="denarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161819" start="14191" end="14196" title="Libra (weight)" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="14312" end="14322" title="late Latin" label="late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468392" start="14521" end="14526" title="Lavender (color)" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="14557" end="14572" title="queer community" label="queer community"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="17644" wikidata="Q148396" url="?curid=17644" title="Lemon balm">
<text>Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) is a perennial herbaceous plant in the mint family. It grows to a maximum height of and the leaves have a mild lemon scent. During summer, small white flowers full of nectar appear. The species is native to Eurasia and naturalised elsewhere.

The leaves are used as an herb, in teas and as a flavouring. It is grown as an ornamental plant and for its oil (to use in perfumery). It has been cultivated (and used to attract honey bees) since at least the 16th century.

==Description==
Lemon balm (&quot;Melissa officinalis&quot;) is a perennial herbaceous plant in the mint family, Lamiaceae.

Lemon balm plants grow bushy and upright to a maximum height of . The heart-shaped leaves are long, and have a rough, veined surface. They are soft and hairy with scalloped edges, and have a mild lemon scent. During summer, small white or pale pink flowers appear. The plants live for ten years; the crop plant is replaced after five years to allow the ground to rejuvenate.

===Chemistry===
Lemon balm contains eugenol, tannins, and terpenes.

==Etymology==
The white flowers attract bees, hence the genus &quot;Melissa&quot; (Greek for &quot;honey bee&quot;). It is not to be confused with bee balm (genus &quot;Monarda&quot;).

The second name, &quot;officinalis&quot; (Latin, &#x27;of the shop&#x27;), originates from the use of the herb by apothecaries, who sold herbal remedies directly to their customers.

==Distribution and habitat==
&quot;Melissa officinalis&quot; is native to south-central Europe, the Mediterranean Basin, Central Asia and Iran, but is now naturalized in the Americas and elsewhere around the world. It grows easily from seed, preferring rich, moist soil.

== Cultivation ==
Lemon balm seeds require light and a minimum temperature of to germinate. The plant grows in clumps and spreads vegetatively (a new plant growing from a fragment of its parent), as well as by seed. In mild temperate zones, the plant stems die off at the start of the winter, but shoot up again in spring. Lemon balm grows vigorously.

, Hungary, Egypt, and Italy are the major producing countries of lemon balm. The leaves are harvested by hand in June and August in the northern hemisphere, on a day when the weather is dry, to prevent the crop from turning black if damp.

The cultivars of &quot;M. officinalis&quot; include:
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Citronella&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Lemonella&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Quedlinburger&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Lime&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Mandarina&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Variegata&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Aurea&#x27;
* &quot;M. officinalis&quot; &#x27;Quedlinburger Niederliegende&#x27;, a variety reportedly bred for higher essential oil content.

===Essential oil production===

Ireland is a major producer of lemon balm essential oil, which has a pale yellow colour and a lemon scent. The essential oil is commonly co-distilled with lemon oil, citronella oil or other essential oils. Yields are low; 0.014% for fresh leaves and 0.112% for dried leaves.

==Uses==
Lemon balm is the main ingredient of Carmelite Water, which is sold in German pharmacies.

The plant is grown and sold as an ornamental plant, and for attracting bees. The essential oil is used as a perfume ingredient and in toothpaste. The young leaves can be eaten raw.

Lemon balm is used as a flavouring in ice cream and herbal teas, often in combination with other herbs such as spearmint. The leaves are not dried when used for tea. It is a common addition to peppermint tea, mostly because of its complementing flavor. Lemon balm is also used with fruit dishes or candies. It can be used in fish dishes and is the main ingredient in lemon balm pesto. Its flavour comes from geraniol (3–40%), neral (3–35%), geranial (4–85%) (both isomers of citral), (0–14%), and citronellal (1–44%). It is also one of the ingredients in Spreewald gherkins.

== In history ==
The use of lemon balm can be dated to over 2,000 years ago through the Greeks and the Romans. It is mentioned by the Greek polymath Theophrastus in his &quot;Historia Plantarum&quot;, written in 300 BC, as &quot;bee-leaf&quot; (μελισσόφυλλον). Lemon balm was formally introduced into Europe in the 7th century, from which its use and domestication spread. Its use in the Middle Ages is noted by herbalists, writers, philosophers, and scientists.

Lemon balm was a favourite plant of the Tudors, who scattered the leaves across their floors. It was in the herbal garden of the English botanist John Gerard in the 1590s, who considered it especially good for feeding and attracting honey bees. Especially cultivated for honey production, according to the authors Janet Dampney and Elizabeth Pomeroy, &quot;bees were thought never to leave a garden in which it was grown&quot;. It was introduced to North America by the first colonists from Europe; it was cultivated in the Gardens of Monticello, designed by the American statesman Thomas Jefferson.

The English botanist Nicholas Culpeper considered lemon balm to be ruled by the planet Jupiter in Cancer, and suggested it to be used for &quot;weak stomachs&quot;, to cause the heart to become &quot;merry&quot;, to help digestion, to open &quot;obstructions of the brain&quot;, and to expel &quot;melancholy vapors&quot; from the heart and arteries.

In traditional Austrian medicine, &quot;M. officinalis&quot; leaves have been prescribed as a herbal tea, or as an external application in the form of an essential oil.

== Notes ==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148396" start="0" end="10" title="Lemon balm" label="Lemon balm"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="48" end="64" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q53476" start="72" end="83" title="Lamiaceae" label="mint family"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="144" end="149" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="184" end="190" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="230" end="236" title="Native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q131746" start="399" end="406" title="perfume" label="perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="567" end="576" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q53476" start="614" end="623" title="Lamiaceae" label="Lamiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="822" end="827" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="875" end="881" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q423357" start="1038" end="1045" title="eugenol" label="eugenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="1047" end="1053" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="1060" end="1067" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="1111" end="1114" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q920402" start="1139" end="1146" title="Melissa (plant)" label="Melissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1154" end="1159" title="Greek Language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q157665" start="1218" end="1226" title="bee balm" label="bee balm"/>
<link wikidata="Q157665" start="1240" end="1247" title="Monarda" label="Monarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1299" end="1304" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="1371" end="1383" title="Apothecary" label="apothecaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="1504" end="1510" title="Native species" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="1514" end="1534" title="South-Central Europe" label="south-central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="1540" end="1559" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1561" end="1573" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1741" end="1745" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="1793" end="1802" title="Germination" label="germinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="1842" end="1854" title="Vegetative reproduction" label="vegetatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1936" end="1950" title="temperate zone" label="temperate zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="2309" end="2317" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="3030" end="3039" title="lemon oil" label="lemon oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q904800" start="3041" end="3055" title="citronella oil" label="citronella oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="3081" end="3087" title="Crop yield" label="Yields"/>
<link wikidata="Q911687" start="3197" end="3212" title="Carmelite Water" label="Carmelite Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q245984" start="3231" end="3248" title="Healthcare in Germany" label="German pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="3285" end="3301" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="3471" end="3480" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="3530" end="3534" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q160114" start="3544" end="3553" title="spearmint" label="spearmint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071940" start="3626" end="3640" title="peppermint tea" label="peppermint tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="3731" end="3738" title="candy" label="candies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097933" start="3758" end="3769" title="List of fish dishes" label="fish dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9896" start="3811" end="3816" title="pesto" label="pesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="3822" end="3829" title="Flavour (taste)" label="flavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q410836" start="3841" end="3849" title="geraniol" label="geraniol"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="3897" end="3903" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176530" start="3908" end="3914" title="citral" label="citral"/>
<link wikidata="Q61651085" start="3930" end="3941" title="citronellal" label="citronellal"/>
<link wikidata="Q452107" start="3988" end="4006" title="Spreewald gherkins" label="Spreewald gherkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4097" end="4103" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4112" end="4118" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="4158" end="4170" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156420" start="4184" end="4202" title="Historia Plantarum (Theophrastus book)" label="Historia Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4397" end="4408" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="4421" end="4431" title="Herbal medicine" label="herbalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="4442" end="4453" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="4513" end="4519" title="Tudors" label="Tudors"/>
<link wikidata="Q624114" start="4581" end="4594" title="herbal garden" label="herbal garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="4610" end="4618" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333338" start="4619" end="4630" title="John Gerard" label="John Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="4706" end="4715" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="4744" end="4749" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522486" start="4997" end="5018" title="Gardens of Monticello" label="Gardens of Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="5055" end="5071" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334667" start="5095" end="5112" title="Nicholas Culpeper" label="Nicholas Culpeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460138" start="5161" end="5168" title="Jupiter (astrology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q161701" start="5172" end="5178" title="Cancer (astrology)" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="5372" end="5382" title="melancholia" label="melancholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="5429" end="5458" title="Traditional medicine" label="traditional Austrian medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="5520" end="5530" title="herbal tea" label="herbal tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="5580" end="5593" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
</links>
</doc>
