<doc id="18964" wikidata="Q1019" url="?curid=18964" title="Madagascar">
<text>Madagascar, officially the Republic of Madagascar, is an island country that includes the island of Madagascar and numerous smaller peripheral islands. Lying off the southeastern coast of Africa, it is the world&#x27;s fourth largest island (after Greenland, New Guinea, and Borneo), the second-largest island country (after Indonesia), and the 46th largest country overall. Its capital and largest city is Antananarivo.

Following the prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana, Madagascar split from Africa during the Early Jurassic period, around 180 million years ago, and separated from the Indian subcontinent approximately 90 million years ago. This isolation allowed native plants and animals to evolve in relative seclusion; as a result, Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot and one of the world&#x27;s 17 megadiverse countries, with over 90% of its wildlife being endemic. The island has a subtropical to tropical maritime climate. Madagascar was first permanently settled during or before the mid-first millennium AD by Austronesian peoples, presumably arriving on outrigger canoes from present-day Indonesia. These were joined around the ninth century AD by Bantu groups crossing the Mozambique Channel from East Africa. Other groups continued to settle on Madagascar over time, each one making lasting contributions to Malagasy cultural life. Consequently, there are 18 or more classified peoples of Madagascar, the most numerous being the Merina of the central highlands. 

Until the late 18th century, the island of Madagascar was ruled by a fragmented assortment of shifting sociopolitical alliances. Beginning in the early 19th century, most of it was united and ruled as the Kingdom of Madagascar by a series of Merina nobles. The monarchy was ended in 1897 by the annexation by France, from which Madagascar gained independence in 1960. The country has since undergone four major constitutional periods, termed republics, and has been governed as a constitutional democracy since 1992. Following a political crisis and military coup in 2009, Madagascar underwent a protracted transition towards its fourth and current republic, with constitutional governance being restored in January 2014.

Madagascar is a member of the United Nations (UN), the African Union (AU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and the . Malagasy and French are both official languages of the state. Christianity is the country&#x27;s predominant religion, with a significant minority still practising traditional faiths. Madagascar is classified as a least developed country by the UN. Ecotourism and agriculture, paired with greater investments in education, health and private enterprise, are key elements of its development strategy. Despite substantial economic growth since the early 2000s, income disparities have widened, and quality of life remains low for the majority of the population. 

As of 2021, 68.4 percent of the population was considered to be multidimensionally poor. According to the World Food Programme, as of January 2025, 1.31 million citizens faced high levels of food insecurity and more than 90% of its 28 million people lived on less than $3.10 per day.

==Etymology==
In the Malagasy language, the island of Madagascar is called &quot;Madagasikara&quot; () and its people are referred to as &quot;Malagasy&quot;. The origin of the name is uncertain, and is likely foreign, having been propagated in the Middle Ages by Europeans. If this is the case, it is unknown when the name was adopted by the inhabitants of the island. No single Malagasy-language name predating &quot;Madagasikara&quot; appears to have been used by the local population to refer to the island, although some communities had their name for part or all of the lands they inhabited.

One hypothesis relates &quot;Madagascar&quot; to the word &quot;Malay&quot;, referring to the Austronesian origin of the Malagasy people in modern-day Indonesia. In a map by Muhammad al-Idrisi dating from the year 1154, the island is named &quot;Gesira Malai&quot;, or &quot;Malay island&quot; in Arabic. The inversion of this name to &quot;Malai Gesira&quot;, as it was known by the Greeks, is thought to be the precursor of the modern name of the island. The name &quot;Malay island&quot; was later rendered in Latin as &quot;Malichu&quot;, an abbreviated form of &quot;Malai Insula&quot;, in the medieval Hereford Mappa Mundi as the name of Madagascar.

Another hypothesis is that &quot;Madagascar&quot; is a corrupted transliteration of Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia and an important medieval Indian Ocean port. This would have resulted from 13th-century Venetian explorer Marco Polo confusing the two locations in his memoirs, in which he mentions the land of &quot;Madageiscar&quot; to the south of Socotra. This name would then have been popularized on Renaissance maps by Europeans. One of the first documents written that might explain why Marco Polo called it &quot;Madagascar&quot; is in a 1609 book on Madagascar by Jerome Megiser. Jerome Megiser describes an event in which the kings of Mogadishu and Adal traveled to Madagascar with a fleet of around twenty-five thousand men in order to invade the wealthy islands of Taprobane and Sumatra. However, a tempest threw them off course and they landed on the coasts of Madagascar, conquering the island and signing a treaty with its inhabitants. They remained for eight months and erected at different points of the island eight pillars on which they engraved &quot;Magadoxo&quot;, a name which later, by corruption became Madagascar. Jan Huyghen van Linschoten, a Dutch traveler who copied Portuguese works and maps, confirmed this event by saying &quot;Madagascar has its name from &#x27;makdishu&#x27; (Mogadishu)&quot; whose &quot;shayk&quot; invaded it.

The name &quot;Malagasikara&quot;, or &quot;Malagascar&quot;, is also historically attested. A British state paper in 1699 records the arrival of eighty to ninety passengers from &quot;Malagaskar&quot; to what eventually became New York City. An 1882 edition of the British newspaper &quot;The Graphic&quot; referred to &quot;Malagascar&quot; as the name of the island, stating that it is etymologically a word of Malay origin, and may be related to the name of Malacca. In 1891, Saleh bin Osman, a Zanzibari traveler, refers to the island as &quot;Malagaskar&quot; when recounting his journeys, including as part of the Emin Pasha Relief Expedition. In 1905, Charles Basset wrote in his doctoral thesis that &quot;Malagasikara&quot; was the way the island is referred to by its natives, who emphasized that they were &quot;Malagasy&quot;, and not &quot;Madagasy&quot;.

==History==
===Early period===

Traditionally, archaeologists have estimated that the earliest settlers arrived in successive waves in outrigger canoes from South Borneo, possibly throughout the period between 350 BC and 550 AD, while others are cautious about dates earlier than AD 250. In either case, these dates make Madagascar one of the most recent major landmasses on Earth to be settled by humans, predating the settlement of Iceland and New Zealand. It is proposed that Ma&#x27;anyan people were brought as laborers and slaves by Javan and Sumatran-Malays in their trading fleets to Madagascar. Dates of settlement of the island earlier than the mid-first millennium AD are not strongly supported. However, there is scattered evidence for much earlier human visits and presence. (See History of Madagascar). Archaeological finds such as cut marks on bones found in the northwest and stone tools in the northeast indicate that Madagascar was visited by foragers around 2000 BCE. 

Upon arrival, early settlers practiced slash-and-burn agriculture to clear the coastal rainforests for cultivation. The first settlers encountered Madagascar&#x27;s abundance of megafauna, including 17 species of giant lemurs, the large flightless elephant birds (including possibly the largest bird to ever exist, &quot;Aepyornis maximus&quot;), the giant fossa, and several species of Malagasy hippopotamus, which have since become extinct because of hunting and habitat destruction. By 600 AD, groups of these early settlers had begun clearing the forests of the central highlands.

Arab traders first reached the island between the 7th and 9th centuries. A wave of Bantu-speaking migrants from southeastern Africa arrived around the year 1000. Around this time, zebu from South India were first brought, intermingling with sanga found in East Africa. Irrigated paddy fields were developed in the central highland Betsileo Kingdom and were extended with terraced paddies throughout the neighboring Kingdom of Imerina a century later. The rising intensity of land cultivation and the ever-increasing demand for zebu pasturage had largely transformed the central highlands from a forest ecosystem to grassland by the 17th century.

The oral histories of the Merina people, who arrived in the central highlands between 600 and 1,000 years ago, describe encountering an established population they called the Vazimba. Probably the descendants of an earlier and less technologically advanced Austronesian settlement wave, the Vazimba were assimilated or expelled from the highlands by the Merina kings Andriamanelo, Ralambo, and Andrianjaka in the 16th and early 17th centuries. Today, the spirits of the Vazimba are revered as &quot;tompontany&quot; (ancestral masters of the land) by many traditional Malagasy communities.

===Arab and European contacts===
The written history of Madagascar began with the Arabs, who established trading posts along the northwest coast by at least the 10th century and introduced Islam, the Arabic script (used to transcribe the Malagasy language in a form of writing known as &quot;sorabe&quot;), Arab astrology, and other cultural elements.

European contact began in 1500, when the Portuguese sea captain Diogo Dias sighted the island, while participating in the 2nd Armada of the Portuguese India Armadas.

Matatana was the first Portuguese settlement on the south coast, 10 km west of Fort Dauphin. In 1508, settlers there built a tower, a small village, and a stone column. This settlement was established in 1513 at the behest of the viceroy of Portuguese India, Jeronimo de Azevedo.
Contacts continued from the 1550s. Several colonization and conversion missions were ordered by King João III and by the Viceroy of India, including one in 1553 by Baltazar Lobo de Sousa. In that mission, according to detailed descriptions by chroniclers Diogo do Couto and João de Barros, emissaries reached the inland via rivers and bays, exchanging goods and even converting one of the local kings.

The French established trading posts along the east coast in the late 17th century. From about 1774 to 1824, Madagascar gained prominence among pirates and European traders, particularly those involved in the trans-Atlantic slave trade. The small island of Nosy Boroha off the northeastern coast of Madagascar has been proposed by some historians as the site of the legendary pirate utopia of Libertalia. Many European sailors were shipwrecked on the coasts of the island, among them Robert Drury, whose journal is one of the few written depictions of life in southern Madagascar during the 18th century. European accounts until the early 20th century identified Malagasy people as being of Jewish origin.

The wealth generated by maritime trade spurred the rise of organized kingdoms on the island, some of which had grown quite powerful by the 17th century. Among these were the Betsimisaraka alliance of the eastern coast and the Sakalava chiefdoms of Menabe and Boina on the west coast. The Kingdom of Imerina, located in the central highlands with its capital at the royal palace of Antananarivo, emerged at around the same time under the leadership of King Andriamanelo.

===Kingdom of Madagascar===
Upon its emergence in the early 17th century, the highland kingdom of Imerina was initially a minor power relative to the larger coastal kingdoms and grew even weaker in the early 18th century when King Andriamasinavalona divided it among his four sons. Following almost a century of warring and famine, Imerina was reunited in 1793 by King Andrianampoinimerina (1787–1810). From his initial capital Ambohimanga, and later from the Rova of Antananarivo, this Merina king rapidly expanded his rule over neighbouring principalities. His ambition to bring the entire island under his control was largely achieved by his son and successor, King Radama I (1810–28), who was recognized by the British government as King of Madagascar. Radama concluded a treaty in 1817 with the British governor of Mauritius to abolish the lucrative slave trade in return for British military and financial assistance. Artisan missionary envoys from the London Missionary Society began arriving in 1818 and included such key figures as James Cameron, David Jones and David Griffiths, who established schools, transcribed the Malagasy language using the Roman alphabet, translated the Bible, and introduced a variety of new technologies to the island.

Radama&#x27;s successor, Queen Ranavalona I (1828–61), responded to increasing political and cultural encroachment on the part of Britain and France by issuing a royal edict prohibiting the practice of Christianity in Madagascar and pressuring most foreigners to leave the territory. William Ellis of the London Missionary Society described his visits made during her reign in his book &quot;Three Visits to Madagascar during the years 1853, 1854, and 1856&quot;. The Queen made heavy use of the traditional practice of &quot;fanompoana&quot; (forced labor as tax payment) to complete public works projects and develop a standing army of between 20,000 and 30,000 Merina soldiers, whom she deployed to pacify outlying regions of the island and further expand the Kingdom of Merina to encompass most of Madagascar. Residents of Madagascar could accuse one another of various crimes, including theft, Christianity and especially witchcraft, for which the ordeal of &quot;tangena&quot; was routinely obligatory. Between 1828 and 1861, the &quot;tangena&quot; ordeal caused about 3,000 deaths annually. In 1838, it was estimated that as many as 100,000 people in Imerina died as a result of the tangena ordeal, constituting roughly 20 percent of the population. The combination of regular warfare, disease, difficult forced labor, and harsh measures of justice resulted in a high mortality rate among soldiers and civilians alike during her 33-year reign; the population of Madagascar is estimated to have declined from around 5 million to 2.5 million between 1833 and 1839.

Among those who continued to reside in Imerina were Jean Laborde, an entrepreneur who developed munitions and other industries on behalf of the monarchy, and Joseph-François Lambert, a French adventurer and slave trader, with whom then-Prince Radama II signed a controversial trade agreement termed the Lambert Charter. Succeeding his mother, Radama II attempted to relax the queen&#x27;s stringent policies but was overthrown two years later by Prime Minister Rainivoninahitriniony and an alliance of &quot;Andriana&quot; (noble) and &quot;Hova&quot; (commoner) courtiers, who sought to end the absolute power of the monarch.

Following the coup, the courtiers offered Radama&#x27;s queen, Rasoherina, the opportunity to rule, if she would accept a power-sharing arrangement with the Prime Minister: a new social contract that would be sealed by a political marriage between them. Queen Rasoherina accepted, first marrying Rainivoninahitriniony, then later deposing him and marrying his brother, Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony, who would go on to marry Queen Ranavalona II and Queen Ranavalona III in succession. 

Over the course of Rainilaiarivony&#x27;s 31-year tenure as prime minister, numerous policies were adopted to modernize and consolidate the power of the central government. Schools were constructed throughout the island and attendance was made mandatory. Army organization was improved and British consultants were employed to train and professionalize soldiers. Polygamy was outlawed and Christianity declared the official religion of the court in 1869, was adopted alongside traditional beliefs among a growing portion of the populace. Legal codes were reformed on the basis of British common law and three European-style courts were established in the capital city. In his joint role as Commander-in-Chief, Rainilaiarivony also successfully ensured the defense of Madagascar against several French colonial incursions.

===French colonization===


Primarily on the basis that the Lambert Charter had not been respected, France invaded Madagascar in 1883 in what became known as the first Franco-Hova War. At the end of the war, Madagascar ceded the northern port town of Antsiranana (Diego Suarez) to France and paid 560,000 francs to Lambert&#x27;s heirs. In 1890, the British accepted the full formal imposition of a French protectorate on the island, but French authority was not acknowledged by the government of Madagascar. To force capitulation, the French bombarded and occupied the harbor of Toamasina on the east coast, and Mahajanga on the west coast, in December 1894 and January 1895 respectively.

A French military flying column then marched toward Antananarivo, losing many men to malaria and other diseases. Reinforcements came from Algeria and Sub-Saharan Africa. Upon reaching the city in September 1895, the column bombarded the royal palace with heavy artillery, causing heavy casualties and leading Queen Ranavalona III to surrender. Popular resistance to the French capture of Antananarivo—known as the Menalamba rebellion—broke out in December 1895, and was not suppressed until the end of 1897. France annexed Madagascar in 1896 and declared the island a colony the following year, dissolving the Merina monarchy and sending the royal family into exile on Réunion Island and to Algeria. 

The conquest was followed by ten years of civil war, due to the Menalamba insurrection. The &quot;pacification&quot; carried out by the French administration lasted more than fifteen years, in response to the rural guerrillas scattered throughout the country. In total, the repression of this resistance to colonial conquest caused several tens of thousands of Malagasy victims.

Under colonial rule, plantations were established for the production of a variety of export crops. Slavery was abolished in 1896 and approximately 500,000 slaves were freed; many remained in their former masters&#x27; homes as servants or as sharecroppers; in many parts of the island strong discriminatory views against slave descendants are still held today. Wide paved boulevards and gathering places were constructed in the capital city of Antananarivo and the Rova palace compound was turned into a museum. Additional schools were built, particularly in rural and coastal areas where the schools of the Merina had not reached. Education became mandatory between the ages of 6 and 13 and focused primarily on the French language and practical skills.
Huge mining and forestry concessions were granted to large companies. Native chiefs loyal to the French administration were also granted part of the land. Forced labor was introduced in favor of the French companies and peasants were encouraged, through taxation, to work for wages (especially in the colonial concessions) to the detriment of small individual farms. However, the colonial period was accompanied by movements fighting for independence: the Menalamba, the Vy Vato Sakelika, the Democratic Movement for Malagasy Renovation (MDRM). In 1927, major demonstrations were organized in Antananarivo, notably on the initiative of the communist activist François Vittori, who was imprisoned as a result. The 1930s saw the Malagasy anti-colonial movement gain further momentum. Malagasy trade unionism began to appear underground and the Communist Party of the Madagascar region was formed. But in 1939, all the organizations were dissolved by the administration of the colony, which opted for the Vichy regime. The MDRM was accused by the colonial regime of being at the origin of the 1947 insurrection and was pursued by violent repression.

The Merina royal tradition of taxes paid in the form of labor was continued under the French and used to construct a railway and roads linking key coastal cities to Antananarivo. Malagasy troops fought for France in World War I. In the 1930s, Nazi political thinkers developed the Madagascar Plan that had identified the island as a potential site for the deportation of Europe&#x27;s Jews. During the Second World War, the island was the site of the Battle of Madagascar between the Vichy French and an Allied expeditionary force.

The occupation of France during the Second World War tarnished the prestige of the colonial administration in Madagascar and galvanized the growing independence movement, leading to the Malagasy Uprising of 1947. This movement led the French to establish reformed institutions in 1956 under the &quot;Loi Cadre&quot; (Overseas Reform Act), and Madagascar moved peacefully towards independence. The Malagasy Republic was proclaimed on 14 October 1958, as an autonomous state within the French Community. A period of provisional government ended with the adoption of a constitution in 1959 and full independence on 26 June 1960.

===Independent state===
Since regaining independence, Madagascar has transitioned through four republics with corresponding revisions to its constitution. The First Republic (1960–72), under the leadership of French-appointed President Philibert Tsiranana, was characterized by a continuation of strong economic and political ties to France. Many high-level technical positions were filled by French expatriates, and French teachers, textbooks and curricula continued to be used in schools around the country. Popular resentment over Tsiranana&#x27;s tolerance for this &quot;neo-colonial&quot; arrangement inspired a series of farmer and student protests that overturned his administration in 1972.

Gabriel Ramanantsoa, a major general in the army, was appointed interim president and prime minister that same year, but low public approval forced him to step down in 1975. Colonel Richard Ratsimandrava, appointed to succeed him, was assassinated six days into his tenure. General Gilles Andriamahazo ruled after Ratsimandrava for four months before being replaced by another military appointee: Vice Admiral Didier Ratsiraka, who ushered in the Marxist–Leninist Second Republic that ran under his tenure from 1975 to 1993.

This period saw a political alignment with the Eastern Bloc countries and a shift toward economic insularity. These policies, coupled with economic pressures stemming from the 1973 oil crisis, resulted in the rapid collapse of Madagascar&#x27;s economy and a sharp decline in living standards, and the country had become completely bankrupt by 1979. The Ratsiraka administration accepted the conditions of transparency, anti-corruption measures and free market policies imposed by the International Monetary Fund, World Bank and various bilateral donors in exchange for their bailout of the nation&#x27;s broken economy.

Ratsiraka&#x27;s dwindling popularity in the late 1980s reached a critical point in 1991 when presidential guards opened fire on unarmed protesters during a rally. Within two months, a transitional government had been established under the leadership of Albert Zafy (1993–96), who went on to win the 1992 presidential elections and inaugurate the Third Republic (1992–2010). The new Madagascar constitution established a multi-party democracy and a separation of powers that placed significant control in the hands of the National Assembly. The new constitution also emphasized human rights, social and political freedoms, and free trade. Zafy&#x27;s term, however, was marred by economic decline, allegations of corruption, and his introduction of legislation to give himself greater powers. He was consequently impeached in 1996, and an interim president, Norbert Ratsirahonana, was appointed for the three months prior to the next presidential election. Ratsiraka was then voted back into power on a platform of decentralization and economic reforms for a second term which lasted from 1996 to 2001.

The contested 2001 presidential elections in which then-mayor of Antananarivo, Marc Ravalomanana, eventually emerged victorious, caused a seven-month standoff in 2002 between supporters of Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka. The negative economic impact of the political crisis was gradually overcome by Ravalomanana&#x27;s progressive economic and political policies, which encouraged investments in education and ecotourism, facilitated foreign direct investment, and cultivated trading partnerships both regionally and internationally. National GDP grew at an average rate of 7 percent per year under his administration. In the latter half of his second term, Ravalomanana was criticised by domestic and international observers who accused him of increasing authoritarianism and corruption.

Opposition leader and then-mayor of Antananarivo, Andry Rajoelina, led a movement in early 2009 in which Ravalomanana was pushed from power in an unconstitutional process widely condemned as a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;. In March 2009, Rajoelina was declared by the Supreme Court as the President of the High Transitional Authority, an interim governing body responsible for moving the country toward presidential elections. In 2010, a new constitution was adopted by referendum, establishing a Fourth Republic, which sustained the democratic, multi-party structure established in the previous constitution. Hery Rajaonarimampianina was declared the winner of the 2013 presidential election, which the international community deemed fair and transparent.

In 2018 the first round of the presidential election was held on 7 November and the second round was held on 10 December. Three former presidents and the most recent president were the main candidates of the elections. Rajoelina won the second round of the elections. Ravalomana lost the second round and he did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud. Rajaonarimampianina received very modest support in the first round. In January 2019 the High Constitutional Court declared Rajoelina as the winner of the elections and the new president.
In June 2019 parliamentary elections the Rajoelina&#x27;s won absolute majority of the seats of the National Assembly. It received 84 seats and the supporters of former president Ravalomana got only 16 seats of 151 seats of the National Assembly. 51 seats of deputies were independent or represented small parties. Rajoelina could rule as a strongman.

Mid-2021 marked the beginning of the 2021–2022 Madagascar famine which, due to a severe drought, caused hundreds of thousands of people to face food insecurity and over one million people were on the verge of a famine.

In November 2023, Rajoelina was re-elected to another term with 58.95% of the vote in the first round of the election amidst an opposition boycott and a controversy about his acquisition of French citizenship and subsequent eligibility. Turnout was 46.36%, the lowest in a presidential election in the country&#x27;s history.

==Geography==
At , Madagascar is the world&#x27;s 46th largest country, the second-largest island country and the fourth-largest island. The country lies mostly between latitudes 12°S and 26°S, and longitudes 43°E and 51°E. Neighboring islands include the French territory of Réunion and the country of Mauritius to the east, as well as the state of Comoros and the French territory of Mayotte to the north west. The nearest mainland state is Mozambique, located to the west.

The prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana resulted in the separation of East Gondwana (comprising Madagascar, Antarctica, Australia and the Indian subcontinent) and West Gondwana (Africa–South America) during the Jurassic period, around 185 million years ago. The Indo-Madagascar landmass separated from Antarctica and Australia around 125 million years ago and Madagascar separated from the Indian landmass about 84–92 million years ago during the Late Cretaceous. This long history of separation from other continents has allowed plants and animals on the island to evolve in relative isolation. Along the length of the eastern coast runs a narrow and steep escarpment containing much of the island&#x27;s remaining tropical lowland forest. To the west of this ridge lies a plateau in the center of the island ranging in altitude from above sea level. These central highlands, traditionally the homeland of the Merina people and the location of their historic capital at Antananarivo, are the most densely populated part of the island and are characterized by terraced, rice-growing valleys lying between grassy hills and patches of the subhumid forests that formerly covered the highland region. To the west of the highlands, the increasingly arid terrain gradually slopes down to the Mozambique Channel and mangrove swamps along the coast.

Madagascar&#x27;s highest peaks rise from three prominent highland massifs: Maromokotro in the Tsaratanana Massif is the island&#x27;s highest point, followed by Boby Peak in the Andringitra Massif, and Tsiafajavona in the Ankaratra Massif. To the east, the &quot;Canal des Pangalanes&quot; is a chain of human-made and natural lakes connected by canals built by the French just inland from the east coast and running parallel to it for some .

The western and southern sides, which lie in the rain shadow of the central highlands, are home to dry deciduous forests, spiny forests, and deserts and xeric shrublands. Due to their lower population densities, Madagascar&#x27;s dry deciduous forests have been better preserved than the eastern rain forests or the original woodlands of the central plateau. The western coast features many protected harbors, but silting is a major problem caused by sediment from the high levels of inland erosion carried by rivers crossing the broad western plains.

===Climate===
The combination of southeastern trade winds and northwestern monsoons produces a hot rainy season (November–April) with frequently destructive cyclones, and a relatively cooler dry season (May–October). Rain clouds originating over the Indian Ocean discharge much of their moisture over the island&#x27;s eastern coast; the heavy precipitation supports the area&#x27;s rainforest ecosystem. The central highlands are both drier and cooler while the west is drier still, and a semi-arid climate prevails in the southwest and southern interior of the island.
Tropical cyclones cause damage to infrastructure and local economies as well as loss of life. In 2004, Cyclone Gafilo became the strongest cyclone ever recorded to hit Madagascar. The storm killed 172 people, left 214,260 homeless and caused more than US$250 million in damage. In February 2022, Cyclone Batsirai killed 121 people, weeks after Cyclone Ana killed 55 and displaced 130,000 people on the island.

A 2022 analysis found that the expected costs for Madagascar, to adapt to and avert the environmental consequences of climate change, are going to be high.

===Biodiversity and conservation===
As a result of the island&#x27;s long isolation from neighbouring continents, Madagascar is home to various endemic plants and animals found nowhere else on Earth. Approximately 90% of all plant and animal species found in Madagascar are endemic. This distinctive ecology has led some ecologists to refer to Madagascar as the &quot;eighth continent&quot;, and the island has been classified by Conservation International as a biodiversity hotspot. Madagascar is classed as one of 17 megadiverse countries. The country is home to seven terrestrial ecoregions: Madagascar lowland forests, Madagascar subhumid forests, Madagascar dry deciduous forests, Madagascar ericoid thickets, Madagascar spiny forests, Madagascar succulent woodlands, and Madagascar mangroves.

More than 80 percent of Madagascar&#x27;s 14,883 plant species are found nowhere else in the world, including five plant families. The family &quot;Didiereaceae&quot;, composed of four genera and 11 species, is limited to the spiny forests of southwestern Madagascar. Four-fifths of the world&#x27;s &quot;Pachypodium&quot; species are endemic to the island. Three-fourths of Madagascar&#x27;s 860 orchid species are found here alone, as are six of the world&#x27;s nine baobab species. The island is home to around 170 palm species, three times as many as on all of mainland Africa; 165 of them are endemic. Many native plant species are used as herbal remedies for a variety of afflictions. The drugs vinblastine and vincristine are &quot;vinca&quot; alkaloids, used to treat Hodgkin lymphoma, leukemia, and other cancers, were derived from the Madagascar periwinkle. The traveler&#x27;s palm, known locally as &quot;ravinala&quot; and endemic to the eastern rain forests, is highly iconic of Madagascar and is featured in the national emblem as well as the Air Madagascar logo.

Like its flora, Madagascar&#x27;s fauna is diverse and exhibits a high rate of endemism. Lemurs have been characterized as &quot;Madagascar&#x27;s flagship mammal species&quot; by Conservation International. In the absence of monkeys and other competitors, these primates have adapted to a wide range of habitats and diversified into numerous species. , there were officially 103 species and subspecies of lemur, 39 of which were described by zoologists between 2000 and 2008. They are almost all classified as rare, vulnerable, or endangered. At least 17 species of lemur have become extinct since humans arrived on Madagascar, all of which were larger than the surviving lemur species.

A number of other mammals, including the catlike fossa, are endemic to Madagascar. Over 300 species of birds have been recorded on the island, of which over 60 percent (including four families and 42 genera) are endemic. The few families and genera of reptiles that have reached Madagascar have diversified into more than 260 species, with over 90 percent of these being endemic (including one endemic family). The island is home to two-thirds of the world&#x27;s chameleon species, including the smallest known.

Endemic fish of Madagascar include two families, 15 genera and over 100 species, primarily inhabiting the island&#x27;s freshwater lakes and rivers. Although invertebrates remain poorly studied in Madagascar, researchers have found high rates of endemism among the known species. All 651 species of terrestrial snail are endemic, as are a majority of the island&#x27;s butterflies, scarab beetles, lacewings, spiders, and dragonflies.

Madagascar&#x27;s varied fauna and flora are endangered by human activity. Since the arrival of humans around 2,350 years ago, Madagascar has lost more than 90 percent of its original forest. This forest loss is largely fueled by &quot;tavy&quot; (&quot;fat&quot;), a traditional slash-and-burn agricultural practice imported to Madagascar by the earliest settlers. Malagasy farmers embrace and perpetuate the practice not only for its practical benefits as an agricultural technique, but for its cultural associations with prosperity, health and venerated ancestral custom (&quot;fomba malagasy&quot;). As human population density rose on the island, deforestation accelerated beginning around 1,400 years ago. By the 16th century, the central highlands had been largely cleared of their original forests. More recent contributors to the loss of forest cover include the growth in cattle herd size since their introduction around 1,000 years ago, a continued reliance on charcoal as a fuel for cooking, and the increased prominence of coffee as a cash crop over the past century. 
According to a conservative estimate, about 40 percent of the island&#x27;s original forest cover was lost from the 1950s to 2000, with a thinning of remaining forest areas by 80 percent. In addition to traditional agricultural practice, wildlife conservation is challenged by the illicit harvesting of protected forests, as well as the state-sanctioned harvesting of precious woods within national parks. Although banned by then-President Marc Ravalomanana from 2000 to 2009, the collection of small quantities of precious timber from national parks was re-authorized in January 2009 and dramatically intensified under the administration of Andry Rajoelina as a key source of state revenues to offset cuts in donor support following Ravalomanana&#x27;s ousting.

Invasive species have likewise been introduced by human populations. Following the 2014 discovery in Madagascar of the Asian common toad, a relative of a toad species that has severely harmed wildlife in Australia since the 1930s, researchers warned the toad could &quot;wreak havoc on the country&#x27;s unique fauna.&quot; Habitat destruction and hunting have threatened many of Madagascar&#x27;s endemic species or driven them to extinction. The island&#x27;s elephant birds, a family of endemic giant ratites, became extinct in the 17th century or earlier, most probably because of human hunting of adult birds and poaching of their large eggs for food. Numerous giant lemur species vanished with the arrival of human settlers to the island, while others became extinct over the course of the centuries as a growing human population put greater pressures on lemur habitats and, among some populations, increased the rate of lemur hunting for food. A July 2012 assessment found that the exploitation of natural resources since 2009 has had dire consequences for the island&#x27;s wildlife: 90 percent of lemur species were found to be threatened with extinction, the highest proportion of any mammalian group. Of these, 23 species were classified as critically endangered. A 2023 study published in &quot;Nature Communications&quot; found that 120 of the 219 mammal species only found on Madagascar are threatened with extinction.

In 2003, Ravalomanana announced the Durban Vision, an initiative to more than triple the island&#x27;s protected natural areas to over or 10 percent of Madagascar&#x27;s land surface. , areas protected by the state included five Strict Nature Reserves (&quot;Réserves Naturelles Intégrales&quot;), 21 Wildlife Reserves (&quot;Réserves Spéciales&quot;) and 21 National Parks (&quot;Parcs Nationaux&quot;). In 2007 six of the national parks were declared a joint World Heritage Site under the name Rainforests of the Atsinanana. These parks are Marojejy, Masoala, Ranomafana, Zahamena, Andohahela and Andringitra. Local timber merchants are harvesting scarce species of rosewood trees from protected rainforests within Marojejy National Park and exporting the wood to China for the production of luxury furniture and musical instruments.

==Government==
===Structure===
Madagascar is a semi-presidential representative democratic multi-party republic, wherein the popularly elected president is the head of state and selects a prime minister, who recommends candidates to the president to form his cabinet of ministers. According to the constitution, executive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in the ministerial cabinet, the Senate and the National Assembly, although in reality these two latter bodies have very little power or legislative role. The constitution establishes independent executive, legislative and judicial branches and mandates a popularly elected president limited to three five-year terms.

The public directly elects the president and the 151 members of the National Assembly to five-year terms. All 18 members of the Senate serve six-year terms, with 12 senators elected by local officials and 6 appointed by the president.

At the local level, the island&#x27;s 22 provinces are administered by a governor and provincial council. Provinces are further subdivided into regions and communes. The judiciary is modeled on the French system, with a High Constitutional Court, High Court of Justice, Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, criminal tribunals, and tribunals of first instance. The courts, which adhere to civil law, lack the capacity to quickly and transparently try the cases in the judicial system, often forcing defendants to pass lengthy pretrial detentions in unsanitary and overcrowded prisons.

Antananarivo is the administrative capital and largest city of Madagascar. It is located in the highlands region, near the geographic center of the island. King Andrianjaka founded Antananarivo as the capital of his Imerina Kingdom around 1610 or 1625 upon the site of a captured Vazimba capital on the hilltop of Analamanga. As Merina dominance expanded over neighboring Malagasy peoples in the early 19th century to establish the Kingdom of Madagascar, Antananarivo became the center of administration for virtually the entire island. In 1896 the French colonizers of Madagascar adopted the Merina capital as their center of colonial administration. The city remained the capital of Madagascar after regaining independence in 1960. In 2017, the capital&#x27;s population was estimated at 1,391,433 inhabitants. The next largest cities are Antsirabe (500,000), Toamasina (450,000) and Mahajanga (400,000).

===Politics===


Since Madagascar gained independence from France in 1960, the island&#x27;s political transitions have been marked by numerous popular protests, several disputed elections, an impeachment, two military coups and one assassination. The island&#x27;s recurrent political crises are often prolonged, with detrimental effects on the local economy, international relations and Malagasy living standards. The eight-month standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana following the 2001 presidential elections cost Madagascar millions of dollars in lost tourism and trade revenue as well as damage to infrastructure, such as bombed bridges and buildings damaged by arson. A series of protests led by Andry Rajoelina against Ravalomanana in early 2009 became violent, with more than 170 people killed. Modern politics in Madagascar are colored by the history of Merina subjugation of coastal communities under their rule in the 19th century. The consequent tension between the highland and coastal populations has periodically flared up into isolated events of violence.

Madagascar has historically been perceived as being on the margin of mainstream African affairs despite being a founding member of the Organisation of African Unity, which was established in 1963 and dissolved in 2002 to be replaced by the African Union. Madagascar was not permitted to attend the first African Union summit because of a dispute over the results of the 2001 presidential election, but rejoined the African Union in July 2003 after a 14-month hiatus. Madagascar was again suspended by the African Union in March 2009 following the unconstitutional transfer of executive power to Rajoelina. Madagascar is a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States military. Eleven countries have established embassies in Madagascar, including France, the United Kingdom, the United States, China and India, while Madagascar has embassies in sixteen other countries.

Human rights in Madagascar are protected under the constitution and the state is a signatory to numerous international agreements including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Religious, ethnic and sexual minorities are protected under the law. Freedom of association and assembly are also guaranteed under the law, although in practice the denial of permits for public assembly has occasionally been used to impede political demonstrations. Torture by security forces is rare and state repression is low relative to other countries with comparably few legal safeguards, although arbitrary arrests and the corruption of military and police officers remain problems. Ravalomanana&#x27;s 2004 creation of BIANCO, an anti-corruption bureau, resulted in reduced corruption among Antananarivo&#x27;s lower-level bureaucrats in particular, although high-level officials have not been prosecuted by the bureau. Accusations of media censorship have risen due to the alleged restrictions on the coverage of government opposition. Some journalists have been arrested for allegedly spreading fake news.

===Military and law enforcement===

The rise of centralized kingdoms among the Sakalava, Merina and other ethnic groups produced the island&#x27;s first standing armies by the 16th century, initially equipped with spears but later with muskets, cannons and other firearms. By the early 19th century, the Merina sovereigns of the Kingdom of Madagascar had brought much of the island under their control by mobilizing an army of trained and armed soldiers numbering as high as 30,000. French attacks on coastal towns in the later part of the century prompted then-Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony to solicit British assistance to provide training to the Merina monarchy&#x27;s army. Despite the training and leadership provided by British military advisers, the Malagasy army was unable to withstand French weaponry and was forced to surrender following an attack on the royal palace at Antananarivo. Madagascar was declared a colony of France in 1897.

The political independence and sovereignty of the Malagasy armed forces, which comprises an army, navy and air force, was restored with independence from France in 1960. Since this time the Malagasy military has never engaged in armed conflict with another state or within its own borders, but has occasionally intervened to restore order during periods of political unrest. Under the socialist Second Republic, Admiral Didier Ratsiraka instated mandatory national armed or civil service for all young citizens regardless of sex, a policy that remained in effect from 1976 to 1991. The armed forces are under the direction of the Minister of Defense and have remained largely neutral during times of political crisis, as during the protracted standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana in the disputed 2001 presidential elections, when the military refused to intervene in favor of either candidate. This tradition was broken in 2009, when a segment of the army defected to the side of Andry Rajoelina, then-mayor of Antananarivo, in support of his attempt to force President Ravalomanana from power.

The Minister of Interior is responsible for the national police force, paramilitary force (&quot;gendarmerie&quot;) and the secret police. The police and gendarmerie are stationed and administered at the local level. However, in 2009 fewer than a third of all communes had access to the services of these security forces, with most lacking local-level headquarters for either corps. Traditional community tribunals, called &quot;dina&quot;, are presided over by elders and other respected figures and remain a key means by which justice is served in rural areas where state presence is weak. Historically, security has been relatively high across the island. Violent crime rates are low, and criminal activities are predominantly crimes of opportunity such as pickpocketing and petty theft, although child prostitution, human trafficking and the production and sale of marijuana and other illegal drugs are increasing. Budget cuts since 2009 have severely impacted the national police force, producing a steep increase in criminal activity in recent years.

===Administrative divisions===
Madagascar is subdivided into 22 regions (&quot;faritra&quot;). The regions are further subdivided into 119 districts, 1,579 communes, and 17,485 &quot;fokontany&quot;.

=== United Nations involvement ===
Madagascar became a member state of the United Nations on 20 September 1960, shortly after gaining its independence on 26 June 1960. As of January 2017, 34 police officers from Madagascar are deployed in Haiti as part of the United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti. Starting in 2015, under the direction of and with assistance from the UN, the World Food Programme started the Madagascar Country Programme with the two main goals of long-term development and reconstruction efforts, and addressing the food insecurity issues in the southern regions of Madagascar. These goals plan to be accomplished by providing meals for specific schools in rural and urban priority areas and by developing national school feeding policies to increase consistency of nourishment throughout the country. Small and local farmers have also been assisted in increasing both the quantity and quality of their production, as well as improving their crop yield in unfavorable weather conditions. In 2017, Madagascar signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

== Economy ==

Madagascar&#x27;s GDP in 2015 was estimated at US$9.98 billion, with a per capita GDP of $411.82. Approximately 69 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line threshold of one dollar per day. According to the United Nations Development Programme, as of 2021, 68.4 percent of the population is multidimensionally poor. During 2011–15, the average growth rate was 2.6% but was expected to have reached 4.1% in 2016, due to public works programs and a growth of the service sector. The agriculture sector constituted 29 percent of Malagasy GDP in 2011, while manufacturing formed 15 percent of GDP. Madagascar&#x27;s other sources of growth are tourism, agriculture and the extractive industries. The fishing sector represents 800 millions USD or 6% of GNP with 200 000 direct jobs.

Tourism focuses on the niche eco-tourism market, capitalizing on Madagascar&#x27;s unique biodiversity, unspoiled natural habitats, national parks and lemur species. An estimated 365,000 tourists visited Madagascar in 2008, but the sector declined during the political crisis with 180,000 tourists visiting in 2010. However, the sector has been growing steadily for a few years. In 2016, 293,000 tourists landed in the African island with an increase of 20% compared to 2015. For 2017 the country has the goal of reaching 366,000 visitors, while for 2018 government estimates are expected to reach 500,000 annual tourists.

The island is still a very poor country in 2018; structural brakes remain in the development of the economy: corruption and the shackles of the public administration, lack of legal certainty, and backwardness of land legislation. The economy, however, has been growing since 2011, with GDP growth exceeding 4% per year; almost all economic indicators are growing, the GDP per capita was around $1600 (PPP) for 2017, one of the lowest in the world, although growing since 2012; unemployment was also cut, which in 2016 was equal to 2.1% with a work force of 13.4 million as of 2017. The main economic resources of Madagascar are tourism, textiles, agriculture, and mining.

Poverty affects 92% of the population in 2017. The country ranks fourth in the world in terms of chronic malnutrition. Nearly one in two children under the age of five is stunted. In addition, Madagascar is among the five countries where access to water is the most difficult for the population. Twelve million people do not have access to clean water, according to the NGO WaterAid.

===Natural resources and trade===

Madagascar&#x27;s natural resources include a variety of agricultural and mineral products. Agriculture (including the growing of raffia), mining, fishing and forestry are mainstays of the economy. In 2017 the top exports were vanilla (US$894M), nickel metal (US$414M), cloves (US$288M), knitted sweaters (US$184M) and cobalt (US$143M).

Madagascar is the world&#x27;s principal supplier of vanilla, cloves and ylang-ylang. The island supplies 80% of the world&#x27;s natural vanilla. Other key agricultural resources include coffee, lychees and shrimp. Key mineral resources include various types of precious and semi-precious stones, and it currently provides half of the world&#x27;s supply of sapphires, which were discovered near Ilakaka in the late 1990s.

Madagascar has one of the world&#x27;s largest reserves of ilmenite (titanium ore), as well as important reserves of chromite, coal, iron, cobalt, copper and nickel. Several major projects are underway in the mining, oil and gas sectors that are anticipated to give a significant boost to the Malagasy economy. These include such projects as ilmenite and zircon mining at the Mandena mine by Rio Tinto, extraction of nickel by the Ambatovy mine near Moramanga and its processing near Toamasina by Sherritt International, and the development of the giant onshore heavy oil deposits at Tsimiroro and Bemolanga by Madagascar Oil.

Exports formed 28 percent of GDP in 2009. Most of the country&#x27;s export revenue is derived from the textiles industry, fish and shellfish, vanilla, cloves and other foodstuffs. France is the nation&#x27;s main trading partner, although the United States, Japan and Germany also have strong economic ties. High-value cash crops for export such as lychees are more recent growth areas, with 18,000 tons sold abroad in 2023, of which 16,000 tons were exported to Europe. 

The Madagascar-U.S. Business Council was formed in May 2003, as a collaboration between USAID and Malagasy artisan producers to support the export of local handicrafts to foreign markets. Imports of such items as foodstuffs, fuel, capital goods, vehicles, consumer goods and electronics consume an estimated 52 percent of GDP. The main sources of Madagascar&#x27;s imports include China, France, Iran, Mauritius and Hong Kong.

===Infrastructure and media===

In 2010, Madagascar had approximately of paved roads, of railways and of navigable waterways. The majority of roads in Madagascar are unpaved, with many becoming impassable in the rainy season. Largely paved national routes connect the six largest regional towns to Antananarivo, with minor paved and unpaved routes providing access to other population centers in each district. Construction of the Antananarivo–Toamasina toll highway, the country&#x27;s first toll highway, began in December 2022. The approximately infrastructure project, which will connect Madagascar&#x27;s capital to its largest seaport, is expected to take four years to complete. Another project meant to create of roads and create better connections costs €235.5 million. This includes a €116 million grant from the European Union, a €110 million loan from the European Investment Bank, and €4.8 million in finance from the Republic of Madagascar. Since 2016, €100.4 million has been paid to the Republic of Madagascar through this project.

There are several rail lines in Madagascar. Antananarivo is connected to Toamasina, Ambatondrazaka and Antsirabe by rail, and another rail line connects Fianarantsoa to Manakara. The most important seaport in Madagascar is located on the east coast at Toamasina. Ports at Mahajanga and Antsiranana are significantly less used because of their remoteness. Madagascar&#x27;s government hopes to expand the ports of Antsiranana in the north and Taolagnaro in the south, connecting them to improved road networks, since many imports are every day necessities and Madagascar also relies on export money. The island&#x27;s newest port at Ehoala, constructed in 2008 and privately managed by Rio Tinto, will come under state control upon completion of the company&#x27;s mining project near Tôlanaro around 2038. Air Madagascar services the island&#x27;s many small regional airports, which offer the only practical means of access to many of the more remote regions during rainy season road washouts.

Running water and electricity are supplied at the national level by a government service provider, Jirama, which is unable to service the entire population. , only 6.8 percent of Madagascar&#x27;s &quot;fokontany&quot; had access to water provided by Jirama, while 9.5 percent had access to its electricity services. Fifty-six percent of Madagascar&#x27;s power is provided by hydroelectric power plants, with the remaining 44% provided by diesel engine generators. Mobile telephone and internet access are widespread in urban areas but remain limited in rural parts of the island. Approximately 30% of the districts are able to access the nations&#x27; several private telecommunications networks via mobile telephones or land lines. The World Bank estimates that 17 million people in Madagascar&#x27;s rural areas live more than two kilometres away from an all-season road. In Madagascar, 11% of the rural population has access to power.

Radio broadcasts remain the principal means by which the Malagasy population access international, national, and local news. Only state radio broadcasts are transmitted across the entire island. Hundreds of public and private stations with local or regional range provide alternatives to state broadcasting. In addition to the state television channel, a variety of privately owned television stations broadcast local and international programming throughout Madagascar. Several media outlets are owned by political partisans or politicians themselves, including the media groups MBS (owned by Ravalomanana) and Viva (owned by Rajoelina), contributing to political polarization in reporting.

The media have historically come under varying degrees of pressure to censor their criticism of the government. Reporters are occasionally threatened or harassed, and media outlets are periodically forced to close. Accusations of media censorship have increased since 2009 because of the alleged intensification of restrictions on political criticism. Access to the internet has grown dramatically in the 21st century; in December 2011, an estimated 352,000 residents of Madagascar accessed the internet from home or in one of the nation&#x27;s many internet cafés . By January 2022, 22.3 percent of the population (6.43 million people) had internet access, mostly through mobile phones.

==Demographics==


Agriculture has long influenced settlement on the island. Almost 60% of the nation&#x27;s population live in rural areas.

In 2024, the population of Madagascar was estimated at 32 million, up from 2.2 million in 1900. The annual population growth rate in Madagascar was approximately 2.4% in 2024.

Approximately 39.3 percent of the population is younger than 15 years of age, while 57.3 percent are between the ages of 15 and 64. Those aged 65 and older form 3.4 percent of the total population. Only two general censuses, in 1975 and 1993, have been carried out after independence. The most densely populated regions of the island are the eastern highlands and the eastern coast, contrasting most dramatically with the sparsely populated western plains.

===Ethnic groups===

The Malagasy ethnic group forms over 90 percent of Madagascar&#x27;s population and is typically divided into 18 ethnic subgroups. Recent DNA research revealed that the genetic makeup of the average Malagasy person constitutes an approximately equal blend of Southeast Asian, Oceanian and East African genes, although the genetics of some communities show a predominance of Southeast Asian or East African origins or some Arab, Indian, or European ancestry.

Southeast Asian features – specifically from the southern part of Borneo – are most predominant among the Merina of the central highlands, who form the largest Malagasy ethnic subgroup at approximately 26 percent of the population, while certain communities among the western coastal peoples (collectively called &quot;côtiers&quot;) have relatively stronger East African features. The largest coastal ethnic subgroups are the Betsimisaraka (14.9 percent) and the Tsimihety and Sakalava (6 percent each). Peoples along the east and southeastern coasts often have a roughly equal blend of Austronesian and Bantu ancestry; coastal peoples also usually show the largest genetic influence from the centuries of Arab, Somali, Gujarati, and Tamil traders and merchants of the area, compared to the inland highlander peoples.

Chinese, Indian and Comoran minorities are present in Madagascar, as well as a small European (primarily French) populace. Emigration in the late 20th century has reduced these minority populations, occasionally in abrupt waves, such as the exodus of Comorans in 1976, following anti-Comoran riots in Mahajanga. By comparison, there has been no significant emigration of Malagasy peoples. The number of Europeans has declined since independence, reduced from 68,430 in 1958 to 17,000 three decades later. There were an estimated 25,000 Comorans, 18,000 Indians, and 9,000 Chinese living in Madagascar in the mid-1980s.

=== Largest cities ===
===Languages===
The Malagasy language is of Malayo-Polynesian origin and is generally spoken throughout the island. The numerous dialects of Malagasy, which are generally mutually intelligible, can be clustered under one of two subgroups: eastern Malagasy, spoken along the eastern forests and highlands including the Merina dialect of Antananarivo, and western Malagasy, spoken across the western coastal plains. The Malagasy language derives from the Southeast Barito languages, with the Ma&#x27;anyan language being its closest relative, incorporating numerous Malay and Javanese loanwords.

French became the official language during the colonial period, when Madagascar came under the authority of France. In the first national Constitution of 1958, Malagasy and French were named the official languages of the Malagasy Republic. Madagascar is a francophone country, and French is mostly spoken as a second language among the educated population and used for international communication.

Among the upper class in large cities, French is spoken as a native language.

No official languages were mentioned in the Constitution of 1992, although Malagasy was identified as the national language. Nonetheless, many sources still claimed that Malagasy and French were official languages, eventually leading a citizen to initiate a legal case against the state in April 2000, on the grounds that the publication of official documents only in the French language was unconstitutional. The High Constitutional Court observed in its decision that, in the absence of a language law, French still had the character of an official language.

The Constitution of 2007 recognised three official languages, Malagasy, French, and English. A fourth Constitution, adopted in 2010 following a referendum, recognised only Malagasy and French.

=== Religion ===

Christianity is the most widely professed religion in Madagascar. According to the most recent national census completed in 1993, a majority of the population (52 percent) adhered to indigenous beliefs, with Christianity being the largest single religion at 41 percent, followed by Islam at 7 percent. However, according to the Pew Research Center in 2020, 85% of the population identified as Christian, while just 4.5% exclusively practiced folk religions; Protestants comprise a plurality of Christians, followed by Roman Catholics. In contrast, a 2020 study conducted by the Association of Religion Data Archives found 58.1% of the population was Christian, 2.1% Muslim, 39.2% practiced traditional faiths, and 0.6% was nonreligious or adhered to other faiths.

The inconsistency in religious data reflects the common practice of alternating between religious identities or syncretizing different faith traditions. Christians integrate and combine their religious beliefs with the deeply rooted practice of honoring ancestors. For instance, they may bless their dead at church before proceeding with traditional burial rites or invite a Christian minister to consecrate a &quot;famadihana&quot; reburial. Christianity is predominant in the highlands. The Malagasy Council of Churches comprises the four oldest and most prominent Christian denominations of Madagascar (Roman Catholic, Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar, Lutheran, and Anglican) and has been influential in Malagasy politics.

The veneration of ancestors has led to the widespread tradition of tomb building, as well as the highlands practice of the &quot;famadihana&quot;, whereby a deceased family member&#x27;s remains are exhumed and re-wrapped in fresh silk shrouds, before being replaced in the tomb. The &quot;famadihana&quot; is an occasion to celebrate the beloved ancestor&#x27;s memory, reunite with family and community, and enjoy a festive atmosphere. Residents of surrounding villages are often invited to attend the party, where food and rum are typically served, and a &quot;hiragasy&quot; troupe or other musical entertainment is commonly present. Consideration for ancestors is also demonstrated through adherence to &quot;fady&quot;, taboos that are respected during and after the lifetime of the person who establishes them. It is widely believed that by showing respect for ancestors in these ways, they may intervene on behalf of the living. Conversely, misfortunes are often attributed to ancestors whose memory or wishes have been neglected. The sacrifice of zebu is a traditional method used to appease or honor the ancestors. In addition, the Malagasy traditionally believe in a creator god, called Zanahary or Andriamanitra.

Islam was first brought to Madagascar in the Middle Ages by Arab and Somali Muslim traders, who established several Islamic schools along the eastern coast. While the use of Arabic script and loan words, and the adoption of Islamic astrology, would spread across the island, Islam took hold in only a handful of southeastern coastal communities. In 2020, Muslims constituted 2% of the population of Madagascar. They are largely concentrated in the northwestern provinces of Mahajanga and Antsiranana. Muslims are divided between ethnic Malagasy and Indians, Pakistanis and Comorans.

Hinduism was introduced to Madagascar through Gujarati people immigrating from the Saurashtra region of India in the late 19th century. Most Hindus in Madagascar speak Gujarati or Hindi at home, reflecting the faiths concentration among those of Indian ancestry.

Rabbinic Judaism emerged on the island in the 21st century, as the common belief in a myth of Jewish origin for the Malagasy peoples inspired Messianic Jews in Antananarivo to begin researching Judaism and studying the Torah. In 2016, 121 members of the Malagasy Jewish community were formally converted to Orthodox Judaism.

===Health===

Medical centers, dispensaries, and hospitals are found throughout the island, although they are concentrated in urban areas and particularly in Antananarivo. Access to medical care remains beyond the reach of many Malagasy, especially in the rural areas, and many recourse to traditional healers. In addition to the high expense of medical care relative to the average Malagasy income, the prevalence of trained medical professionals remains extremely low. In 2010, Madagascar had an average of three hospital beds per 10,000 people and a total of 3,150 doctors, 5,661 nurses, 385 community health workers, 175 pharmacists, and 57 dentists for a population of 22 million. Fifteen percent of government spending in 2008 was directed toward the health sector. Approximately 70 percent of spending on health was contributed by the government, while 30 percent originated with international donors and other private sources. The government provides at least one basic health center per commune. Private health centers are concentrated within urban areas and particularly those of the central highlands.

Despite these barriers to access, health services have shown a trend toward improvement over the past twenty years. Child immunizations against such diseases as hepatitis B, diphtheria, and measles increased an average of 60 percent in this period, indicating low but increasing availability of basic medical services and treatments. The Malagasy fertility rate in 2009 was 4.6 children per woman, declining from 6.3 in 1990. Teen pregnancy rates of 14.8 percent in 2011, much higher than the African average, are a contributing factor to rapid population growth. In 2010, the maternal mortality rate was 440 per 100,000 births, compared to 373.1 in 2008 and 484.4 in 1990, indicating a decline in perinatal care following the 2009 coup. The infant mortality rate in 2011 was 41 per 1,000 births, with an under-five mortality rate at 61 per 1,000 births. Schistosomiasis, malaria, and sexually transmitted diseases are common in Madagascar, although infection rates of AIDS remain low relative to many countries in mainland Africa, at 0.2 percent of the adult population. The malaria mortality rate is also among the lowest in Africa at 8.5 deaths per 100,000 people, in part because of the highest frequency use of insecticide treated nets in Africa. Adult life expectancy in 2009 was 63 years for men and 67 years for women.

Madagascar had outbreaks of the bubonic plague and pneumonic plague in 2017 (2575 cases, 221 deaths) and 2014 (263 confirmed cases, 71 deaths). In 2019, Madagascar had a measles outbreak, resulting in 118,000 cases and 1,688 deaths. In 2020, Madagascar was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Undernourishment and hunger rates were at 42% in 2018. According to the United Nations, more than one million people in southern Madagascar are struggling to get enough to eat, due to what could become the first famine caused by climate change.

===Education===
Prior to the 19th century, all education in Madagascar was informal and typically served to teach practical skills as well as social and cultural values, including respect for ancestors and elders. The first formal European-style school was established in 1818 at Toamasina by members of the London Missionary Society (LMS). The LMS was invited by King Radama I to expand its schools throughout Imerina to teach basic literacy and numeracy to aristocratic children. The schools were closed by Ranavalona I in 1835, but reopened and expanded in the decades after her death.

By the end of the 19th century, Madagascar had the most developed and modern school system in pre-colonial Sub-Saharan Africa. Access to schooling was expanded in coastal areas during the colonial period, with French language and basic work skills becoming the focus of the curriculum. During the post-colonial First Republic, a continued reliance on French nationals as teachers, and French as the language of instruction, displeased those desiring a complete separation from the former colonial power. Consequently, under the socialist Second Republic, French instructors and other nationals were expelled, Malagasy was declared the language of instruction, and a large cadre of young Malagasy were rapidly trained to teach at remote rural schools under the mandatory two-year national service policy.

This policy, known as &quot;malgachization&quot;, coincided with a severe economic downturn and a dramatic decline in the quality of education. Those schooled during this period generally failed to master the French language or many other subjects and struggled to find employment, forcing many to take low-paying jobs in the informal or black market that mired them in deepening poverty. Excepting the brief presidency of Albert Zafy, from 1992 to 1996, Ratsiraka remained in power from 1975 to 2001 and failed to achieve significant improvements in education throughout his tenure.

Education was prioritized under the Ravalomanana administration (2002–09), and is currently free and compulsory from ages 6 to 13. The primary schooling cycle is five years, followed by four years at the lower secondary level and three years at the upper secondary level. During Ravalomanana&#x27;s first term, thousands of new primary schools and additional classrooms were constructed, older buildings were renovated, and tens of thousands of new primary teachers were recruited and trained. Primary school fees were eliminated, and kits containing basic school supplies were distributed to primary students.

Government school construction initiatives have ensured at least one primary school per &quot;fokontany&quot; and one lower secondary school within each commune. At least one upper secondary school is located in each of the larger urban centers. The three branches of the national public university are located at Antananarivo, Mahajanga, and Fianarantsoa. These are complemented by public teacher-training colleges and several private universities and technical colleges.

As a result of increased educational access, enrollment rates more than doubled between 1996 and 2006. However, education quality is weak, producing high rates of grade repetition and dropout. Education policy in Ravalomanana&#x27;s second term focused on quality issues, including an increase in minimum education standards for the recruitment of primary teachers from a middle school leaving certificate (BEPC) to a high school leaving certificate (BAC), and a reformed teacher training program to support the transition from traditional didactic instruction to student-centered teaching methods to boost student learning and participation in the classroom. Public expenditure on education was 2.8 percent of GDP in 2014. The literacy rate is estimated at 64.7%.

==Culture==

Each of the many ethnic subgroups in Madagascar adhere to their own set of beliefs, practices and ways of life that have historically contributed to their unique identities. However, there are a number of core cultural features that are common throughout the island, creating a strongly unified Malagasy cultural identity. In addition to a common language and shared traditional religious beliefs around a creator god and veneration of the ancestors, the traditional Malagasy worldview is shaped by values that emphasize &quot;fihavanana&quot; (solidarity), &quot;vintana&quot; (destiny), &quot;tody&quot; (karma), and &quot;hasina&quot;, a sacred life force that traditional communities believe imbues and thereby legitimates authority figures within the community or family. Other cultural elements commonly found throughout the island include the practice of male circumcision; strong kinship ties; a widespread belief in the power of magic, diviners, astrology and witch doctors; and a traditional division of social classes into nobles, commoners, and slaves.

Although social castes are no longer legally recognized, ancestral caste affiliation often continues to affect social status, economic opportunity, and roles within the community. Malagasy people traditionally consult &quot;Mpanandro&quot; (&quot;Makers of the Days&quot;) to identify the most auspicious days for important events such as weddings or &quot;famadihana&quot;, according to a traditional astrological system introduced by Arabs. Similarly, the nobles of many Malagasy communities in the pre-colonial period would commonly employ advisers known as the &quot;ombiasy&quot; (from &quot;olona-be-hasina&quot;, &quot;man of much virtue&quot;) of the southeastern Antemoro ethnic group, who trace their ancestry back to early Somali settlers.

The diverse origins of Malagasy culture are evident in its tangible expressions. The most emblematic instrument of Madagascar, the &quot;valiha&quot;, is a bamboo tube zither carried to Madagascar by early settlers from southern Borneo, and is very similar in form to those found in Indonesia and the Philippines today. Traditional houses in Madagascar are likewise similar to those of southern Borneo in terms of symbolism and construction, featuring a rectangular layout with a peaked roof and central support pillar. Reflecting a widespread veneration of the ancestors, tombs are culturally significant in many regions and tend to be built of more durable material, typically stone, and display more elaborate decoration than the houses of the living. The production and weaving of silk can be traced back to the island&#x27;s earliest settlers, and Madagascar&#x27;s national dress, the woven &quot;lamba&quot;, has evolved into a varied and refined art.

The Southeast Asian cultural influence is also evident in Malagasy cuisine, in which rice is consumed at every meal, typically accompanied by one of a variety of flavorful vegetable or meat dishes. African influence is reflected in the sacred importance of zebu cattle and their embodiment of their owner&#x27;s wealth, traditions originating on the African mainland. Cattle rustling, originally a rite of passage for young men in the plains areas of Madagascar where the largest herds of cattle are kept, has become a dangerous and sometimes deadly criminal enterprise as herdsmen in the southwest attempt to defend their cattle with traditional spears against increasingly armed professional rustlers.

===Media===
===Arts===

A wide variety of oral and written literature has developed in Madagascar. One of the island&#x27;s foremost artistic traditions is its oratory, as expressed in the forms of &quot;hainteny&quot; (poetry), &quot;kabary&quot; (public discourse) and &quot;ohabolana&quot; (proverbs). An epic poem exemplifying these traditions, the &quot;Ibonia&quot;, has been handed down over the centuries in several different forms across the island, and offers insight into the diverse mythologies and beliefs of traditional Malagasy communities. This tradition was continued in the 20th century by such artists as Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo, who is considered Africa&#x27;s first modern poet, and Elie Rajaonarison, an exemplar of the new wave of Malagasy poetry. Madagascar has also developed a rich musical heritage, embodied in dozens of regional musical genres such as the coastal &quot;salegy&quot; or highland &quot;hiragasy&quot; that enliven village gatherings, local dance floors and national airwaves. Madagascar also has a growing culture of classical music fostered through youth academies, organizations and orchestras that promote youth involvement in classical music.

The plastic arts are also widespread throughout the island. In addition to the tradition of silk weaving and lamba production, the weaving of raffia and other local plant materials has been used to create a wide array of practical items such as floor mats, baskets, purses and hats. Wood carving is a highly developed art form, with distinct regional styles evident in the decoration of balcony railings and other architectural elements. Sculptors create a variety of furniture and household goods, &quot;aloalo&quot; funerary posts, and wooden sculptures, many of which are produced for the tourist market. The decorative and functional woodworking traditions of the Zafimaniry people of the central highlands was inscribed on UNESCO&#x27;s list of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2008.

Among the Antaimoro people, the production of paper embedded with flowers and other decorative natural materials is a long-established tradition that the community has begun to market to eco-tourists. Embroidery and drawn thread work are done by hand to produce clothing, as well as tablecloths and other home textiles for sale in local crafts markets. Malagasy artists such as Madame Zo have incorporated textile traditions of Madagascar directly into their work. A small but growing number of fine art galleries in Antananarivo, and several other urban areas, offer paintings by local artists, and annual art events, such as the Hosotra open-air exhibition in the capital, contribute to the continuing development of fine arts in Madagascar.

===Sport===

A number of traditional pastimes have emerged in Madagascar. &quot;Moraingy&quot;, a type of hand-to-hand combat, is a popular spectator sport in coastal regions. It is traditionally practiced by men, but women have recently begun to participate. The wrestling of zebu cattle, which is named savika or &quot;tolon-omby&quot;, is also practiced in many regions. In addition to sports, a wide variety of games are played. Among the most emblematic is &quot;fanorona&quot;, a board game widespread throughout the Highland regions. According to folk legend, the succession of King Andrianjaka after his father Ralambo was partially the result of the obsession that Andrianjaka&#x27;s older brother may have had with playing &quot;fanorona&quot; to the detriment of his other responsibilities.

Western recreational activities were introduced to Madagascar over the past two centuries. Rugby union is considered the national sport of Madagascar. Soccer is also popular. Madagascar has produced a world champion in pétanque, a French game similar to lawn bowling, which is widely played in urban areas and throughout the Highlands. School athletics programs typically include soccer, track and field, judo, boxing, women&#x27;s basketball and women&#x27;s tennis. Madagascar sent its first competitors to the Olympic Games in 1964, and has also competed in the African Games. Scouting is represented in Madagascar by its own local federation of three scouting clubs. Membership in 2011 was estimated at 14,905.

Because of its advanced sports facilities, Antananarivo gained the hosting rights for several of Africa&#x27;s top international basketball events, including the 2011 FIBA Africa Championship, the 2009 FIBA Africa Championship for Women, the 2014 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship, the 2013 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship, and the 2015 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship for Women. Madagascar&#x27;s national 3x3 basketball team won the gold medal at the 2019 African Games.

===Cuisine===

Malagasy cuisine reflects the diverse influences of Southeast Asian, African, Oceania, Indian, Chinese, and European culinary traditions. The complexity of Malagasy meals can range from the simple, traditional preparations introduced by the earliest settlers, to the refined festival dishes prepared for the island&#x27;s 19th-century monarchs. Throughout almost the entire island, the contemporary cuisine of Madagascar typically consists of a base of rice (&quot;vary&quot;) served with an accompaniment (&quot;laoka&quot;). The many varieties of &quot;laoka&quot; may be vegetarian or include animal proteins, and typically feature a sauce flavored with such ingredients as ginger, onion, garlic, tomato, vanilla, coconut milk, salt, curry powder, green peppercorns or, less commonly, other spices or herbs. In parts of the arid south and west, pastoral families may replace rice with maize, cassava, or curds made from fermented zebu milk. A wide variety of sweet and savory fritters as well as other street foods are available across the island, as are diverse tropical and temperate-climate fruits. Locally produced beverages include fruit juices, coffee, herbal teas and teas, and alcoholic drinks such as rum, wine, and beer. Three Horses Beer is the most popular beer on the island and is considered emblematic of Madagascar.

==See also==

* Index of Madagascar-related articles
* Outline of Madagascar

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Country Profile from BBC News
* Madagascar . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Madagascar from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Key Development Forecasts for Madagascar from International Futures
*Map of Madagascar, 1666 , (in French). Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, The National Library of Israel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="0" end="10" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="27" end="49" title="Madagascar" label="Republic of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="57" end="71" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q845225" start="90" end="110" title="island of Madagascar" label="island of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="188" end="194" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104176" start="219" end="240" title="List of islands by area" label="fourth largest island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859151" start="288" end="317" title="List of island countries" label="second-largest island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="407" end="419" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="463" end="477" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="478" end="486" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="534" end="542" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="604" end="623" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="771" end="791" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="823" end="844" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161343" start="867" end="875" title="wildlife of Madagascar" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="1039" end="1059" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="1084" end="1100" title="Outrigger boat" label="outrigger canoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1118" end="1127" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="1178" end="1183" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="1204" end="1222" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="1410" end="1431" title="Malagasy peoples" label="peoples of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q844538" start="1461" end="1467" title="Merina people" label="Merina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="1701" end="1722" title="Merina Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919873" start="1728" end="1734" title="List of Imerina monarchs" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q9145130" start="1745" end="1751" title="andriana" label="nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501842" start="1791" end="1811" title="French Madagascar" label="annexation by France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628984" start="2025" end="2067" title="2009 Malagasy political crisis" label="political crisis and military coup in 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129741" start="2092" end="2121" title="High Transitional Authority" label="protracted transition towards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2249" end="2263" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="2274" end="2287" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="2298" end="2336" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="2355" end="2363" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2368" end="2374" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="2384" end="2401" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2417" end="2429" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574739" start="2519" end="2537" title="Malagasy mythology" label="traditional faiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="2569" end="2592" title="least developed countries" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="2604" end="2614" title="Ecotourism" label="Ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="2981" end="3004" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensionally poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="3223" end="3240" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy language"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="3345" end="3353" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3451" end="3462" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="3865" end="3870" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="3895" end="3907" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="3922" end="3937" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy people"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3952" end="3961" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="3975" end="3993" title="Muhammad al-Idrisi" label="Muhammad al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4098" end="4104" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="4185" end="4191" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q521141" start="4409" end="4429" title="Hereford Mappa Mundi" label="Hereford Mappa Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="4542" end="4551" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="4568" end="4575" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="4682" end="4692" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="4810" end="4817" title="Socotra" label="Socotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4865" end="4876" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q861784" start="5105" end="5114" title="Sultanate of Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="5119" end="5123" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal"/>
<link wikidata="Q941383" start="5600" end="5626" title="Jan Huyghen van Linschoten" label="Jan Huyghen van Linschoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5630" end="5635" title="netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6053" end="6066" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521113" start="6115" end="6126" title="The Graphic" label="The Graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="6239" end="6244" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61089" start="6287" end="6294" title="Malacca City" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="6324" end="6332" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062431" start="6446" end="6474" title="Emin Pasha Relief Expedition" label="Emin Pasha Relief Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="6831" end="6846" title="outrigger canoe" label="outrigger canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906" start="6853" end="6865" title="South Kalimantan" label="South Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="7130" end="7137" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="7142" end="7153" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567621" start="7175" end="7195" title="Ma&amp;#x27;anyan people" label="Ma&amp;#x27;anyan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="7235" end="7239" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="7245" end="7252" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="7254" end="7260" title="Malay (ethnic group)" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7489" end="7510" title="History_of_Madagascar#First_inhabitants_and_settlements_(500_BCE–700_CE)" label="History of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="7513" end="7527" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="7724" end="7738" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="7863" end="7872" title="Pleistocene megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086758" start="7898" end="7910" title="Subfossil lemur" label="giant lemurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214508" start="7933" end="7946" title="elephant bird" label="elephant bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638301" start="8006" end="8023" title="Aepyornis maximus" label="Aepyornis maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716674" start="8036" end="8047" title="Cryptoprocta spelea" label="giant fossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25796510" start="8072" end="8093" title="Malagasy hippopotamus" label="Malagasy hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="8354" end="8359" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="8451" end="8455" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="8461" end="8472" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417765" start="8512" end="8517" title="Sanga cattle" label="sanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q832229" start="8602" end="8610" title="Betsileo" label="Betsileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="8697" end="8704" title="Imerina" label="Imerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123073" start="9093" end="9100" title="Vazimba" label="Vazimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846855" start="9285" end="9297" title="Andriamanelo" label="Andriamanelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418104" start="9299" end="9306" title="Ralambo" label="Ralambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q510246" start="9312" end="9323" title="Andrianjaka" label="Andrianjaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="9546" end="9561" title="Recorded history" label="written history"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9698" end="9703" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="9709" end="9722" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q576484" start="9801" end="9807" title="sorabe" label="sorabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="9903" end="9913" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q453238" start="9926" end="9936" title="Diogo Dias" label="Diogo Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633859" start="9984" end="9994" title="2nd Portuguese India Armada (Cabral, 1500)" label="2nd Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286250" start="10002" end="10026" title="Portuguese India Armadas" label="Portuguese India Armadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590846" start="10029" end="10037" title="Sainte Luce Reserve" label="Matatana"/>
<link wikidata="Q526568" start="10108" end="10120" title="Fort Dauphin (Madagascar)" label="Fort Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="10270" end="10286" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306761" start="10288" end="10307" title="Jerónimo de Azevedo" label="Jeronimo de Azevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="10410" end="10418" title="John III of Portugal" label="João III"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="10921" end="10947" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="trans-Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321311" start="10969" end="10980" title="Île Sainte-Marie" label="Nosy Boroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q654347" start="11105" end="11115" title="Libertalia" label="Libertalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306607" start="11196" end="11208" title="Robert Drury (sailor)" label="Robert Drury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11364" end="11416" title="Jews in Madagascar#The &amp;quot;Jewish thesis&amp;quot;" label="identified Malagasy people as being of Jewish origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309630" start="11593" end="11606" title="Betsimisaraka people" label="Betsimisaraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355221" start="11645" end="11653" title="Sakalava" label="Sakalava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344087" start="11667" end="11673" title="Menabe" label="Menabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q557842" start="11678" end="11683" title="Boina Kingdom" label="Boina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290337" start="11784" end="11796" title="Rova of Antananarivo" label="royal palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846853" start="12121" end="12139" title="Andriamasinavalona" label="Andriamasinavalona"/>
<link wikidata="Q218622" start="12259" end="12279" title="Andrianampoinimerina" label="Andrianampoinimerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q458167" start="12318" end="12329" title="Ambohimanga" label="Ambohimanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290337" start="12350" end="12370" title="Rova of Antananarivo" label="Rova of Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q525141" start="12559" end="12567" title="Radama I" label="Radama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="12710" end="12719" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="12849" end="12874" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160968" start="12931" end="12944" title="James Cameron (missionary)" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018170" start="12946" end="12957" title="David Jones (missionary)" label="David Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234415" start="12962" end="12977" title="David Griffiths (missionary)" label="David Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="13020" end="13037" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="13048" end="13062" title="Latin alphabet" label="Roman alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q169794" start="13178" end="13190" title="Ranavalona I" label="Ranavalona I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146531" start="13349" end="13375" title="Christianity in Madagascar" label="Christianity in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q719525" start="13431" end="13444" title="William Ellis (British missionary)" label="William Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="13452" end="13477" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="13673" end="13683" title="Corvée" label="fanompoana"/>
<link wikidata="Q844538" start="13811" end="13817" title="Merina" label="Merina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682859" start="14116" end="14123" title="tangena" label="tangena"/>
<link wikidata="Q259345" start="14771" end="14783" title="Jean Laborde" label="Jean Laborde"/>
<link wikidata="Q721617" start="14877" end="14900" title="Joseph-François Lambert" label="Joseph-François Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q218628" start="14962" end="14971" title="Radama II" label="Radama II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15135" end="15145" title="Radama II#Assassination plot" label="overthrown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396490" start="15180" end="15201" title="Rainivoninahitriniony" label="Rainivoninahitriniony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9145130" start="15227" end="15235" title="Andriana" label="Andriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q721588" start="15260" end="15264" title="Hova (Madagascar)" label="Hova"/>
<link wikidata="Q225533" start="15410" end="15420" title="Rasoherina" label="Rasoherina"/>
<link wikidata="Q528996" start="15731" end="15746" title="Rainilaiarivony" label="Rainilaiarivony"/>
<link wikidata="Q240168" start="15779" end="15792" title="Ranavalona II" label="Ranavalona II"/>
<link wikidata="Q233326" start="15803" end="15817" title="Ranavalona III" label="Ranavalona III"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="16198" end="16206" title="Polygamy" label="Polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="16423" end="16433" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638505" start="16826" end="16841" title="Franco-Hova War" label="Franco-Hova War"/>
<link wikidata="Q218928" start="16909" end="16920" title="Antsiranana" label="Antsiranana"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="17064" end="17076" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="17238" end="17247" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q218753" start="17271" end="17280" title="Mahajanga" label="Mahajanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778469" start="17367" end="17380" title="flying column" label="flying column"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="17487" end="17494" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="17499" end="17517" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="17737" end="17749" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305728" start="17763" end="17782" title="Menalamba rebellion" label="Menalamba rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="18018" end="18032" title="Réunion" label="Réunion Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="18530" end="18537" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="20364" end="20395" title="Corvée" label="taxes paid in the form of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20550" end="20561" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="20577" end="20581" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312490" start="20615" end="20630" title="Madagascar Plan" label="Madagascar Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20736" end="20752" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052651" start="20785" end="20805" title="Battle of Madagascar" label="Battle of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="20818" end="20830" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="20838" end="20844" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506639" start="21053" end="21070" title="Malagasy Uprising" label="Malagasy Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088290" start="21168" end="21177" title="Loi Cadre" label="Loi Cadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740997" start="21265" end="21282" title="Malagasy Republic" label="Malagasy Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="21324" end="21334" title="autonomous entity" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120363" start="21352" end="21368" title="French Community" label="French Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740997" start="21654" end="21668" title="Malagasy Republic" label="First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q315944" start="21731" end="21750" title="Philibert Tsiranana" label="Philibert Tsiranana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107768" start="22113" end="22150" title="rotaka" label="series of farmer and student protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q365387" start="22196" end="22215" title="Gabriel Ramanantsoa" label="Gabriel Ramanantsoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q559681" start="22378" end="22399" title="Richard Ratsimandrava" label="Richard Ratsimandrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q878859" start="22478" end="22497" title="Gilles Andriamahazo" label="Gilles Andriamahazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315953" start="22606" end="22622" title="Didier Ratsiraka" label="Didier Ratsiraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456447" start="22660" end="22675" title="Democratic Republic of Madagascar" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="22769" end="22781" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="22898" end="22913" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="23236" end="23246" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q559672" start="23598" end="23609" title="Albert Zafy" label="Albert Zafy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784940" start="23691" end="23705" title="Third Republic of Madagascar" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687814" start="23727" end="23750" title="constitution of Madagascar" label="Madagascar constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q727140" start="24202" end="24223" title="Norbert Ratsirahonana" label="Norbert Ratsirahonana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741033" start="24462" end="24489" title="Malagasy presidential election, 2001" label="2001 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57363" start="25285" end="25300" title="Andry Rajoelina" label="Andry Rajoelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628984" start="25308" end="25330" title="2009 Malagasy political crisis" label="movement in early 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129741" start="25541" end="25568" title="High Transitional Authority" label="High Transitional Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515541" start="25694" end="25715" title="Malagasy constitutional referendum, 2010" label="adopted by referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15382355" start="25845" end="25869" title="Hery Rajaonarimampianina" label="Hery Rajaonarimampianina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586622" start="25901" end="25927" title="Malagasy general election, 2013" label="2013 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376541" start="26024" end="26045" title="2018 Malagasy presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388922" start="26562" end="26585" title="2019 Malagasy parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q648198" start="26890" end="26899" title="Strongman (politics)" label="strongman"/>
<link wikidata="Q107417684" start="26939" end="26966" title="2021–2022 Madagascar famine" label="2021–2022 Madagascar famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="27046" end="27061" title="Food security" label="food insecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="27113" end="27119" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83973489" start="27231" end="27239" title="2023 Malagasy presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="27504" end="27519" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="largest country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859151" start="27540" end="27554" title="List of island countries" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q104176" start="27563" end="27584" title="list of islands by area" label="fourth-largest island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391451" start="27628" end="27632" title="12th parallel south" label="12°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390493" start="27637" end="27641" title="26th parallel south" label="26°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186161" start="27658" end="27662" title="43rd meridian east" label="43°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700195" start="27667" end="27671" title="51st meridian east" label="51°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="27725" end="27732" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="27752" end="27761" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="27799" end="27806" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="27835" end="27842" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="27892" end="27902" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="28152" end="28160" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="28393" end="28403" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="28599" end="28609" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079260" start="28666" end="28680" title="Madagascar lowland forests" label="lowland forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="28715" end="28722" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128625" start="28799" end="28816" title="Central Highlands (Madagascar)" label="central highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q844538" start="28852" end="28865" title="Merina people" label="Merina people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="28912" end="28924" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q859748" start="29078" end="29094" title="Madagascar subhumid forests" label="subhumid forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="29227" end="29245" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080682" start="29250" end="29265" title="Madagascar mangroves" label="mangrove swamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061151" start="29351" end="29357" title="massif" label="massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147144" start="29360" end="29371" title="Maromokotro" label="Maromokotro"/>
<link wikidata="Q845225" start="29379" end="29397" title="Tsaratanana Massif" label="Tsaratanana Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q511672" start="29463" end="29481" title="Andringitra Massif" label="Andringitra Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q556594" start="29507" end="29516" title="Ankaratra" label="Ankaratra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032650" start="29548" end="29568" title="Canal des Pangalanes" label="Canal des Pangalanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="29778" end="29789" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q285831" start="29828" end="29849" title="Madagascar dry deciduous forests" label="dry deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q585492" start="29851" end="29864" title="Madagascar spiny forests" label="spiny forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246061" start="29870" end="29898" title="deserts and xeric shrublands" label="deserts and xeric shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="30328" end="30339" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="30357" end="30364" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="30439" end="30446" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="30665" end="30675" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="30772" end="30789" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="30853" end="30869" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137393" start="30956" end="30970" title="Cyclone Gafilo" label="Cyclone Gafilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q110797740" start="31149" end="31165" title="Cyclone Batsirai" label="Cyclone Batsirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q110682415" start="31197" end="31208" title="Tropical_Storm_Ana_(2022)" label="Cyclone Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q113960936" start="31382" end="31396" title="Climate change in Madagascar" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="31565" end="31572" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="31695" end="31702" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127365" start="31851" end="31877" title="Conservation International" label="Conservation International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="31940" end="31961" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079260" start="32016" end="32042" title="Madagascar lowland forests" label="Madagascar lowland forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q859748" start="32044" end="32071" title="Madagascar subhumid forests" label="Madagascar subhumid forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q285831" start="32073" end="32105" title="Madagascar dry deciduous forests" label="Madagascar dry deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726159" start="32107" end="32134" title="Madagascar ericoid thickets" label="Madagascar ericoid thickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q585492" start="32136" end="32160" title="Madagascar spiny forests" label="Madagascar spiny forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079205" start="32162" end="32192" title="Madagascar succulent woodlands" label="Madagascar succulent woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080682" start="32198" end="32218" title="Madagascar mangroves" label="Madagascar mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073871" start="32270" end="32283" title="flora of Madagascar" label="plant species"/>
<link wikidata="Q131286" start="32369" end="32381" title="Didiereaceae" label="Didiereaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q585492" start="32447" end="32460" title="Madagascar spiny thickets" label="spiny forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q131519" start="32527" end="32538" title="Pachypodium" label="Pachypodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="32619" end="32625" title="Orchidaceae" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q157991" start="32692" end="32698" title="Adansonia" label="baobab"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="32741" end="32745" title="Arecaceae" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q282629" start="32924" end="32935" title="vinblastine" label="vinblastine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408977" start="32940" end="32951" title="vincristine" label="vincristine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559405" start="32956" end="32983" title="vinca alkaloid" label="&amp;quot;vinca&amp;quot; alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="32999" end="33015" title="Hodgkin lymphoma" label="Hodgkin lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="33017" end="33025" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050790" start="33068" end="33089" title="Catharanthus" label="Madagascar periwinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q932196" start="33095" end="33115" title="Ravenala" label="traveler&amp;#x27;s palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q253858" start="33281" end="33295" title="Air Madagascar" label="Air Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="33566" end="33573" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249557" start="33679" end="33714" title="List of lemur species" label="103 species and subspecies of lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q183330" start="34041" end="34046" title="Fossa (animal)" label="fossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="34244" end="34251" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q37686" start="34456" end="34465" title="chameleon" label="chameleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105305913" start="34489" end="34503" title="Brookesia nana" label="smallest known"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="34888" end="34902" title="Scarabaeidae" label="scarab beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q156438" start="34904" end="34913" title="Neuroptera" label="lacewings"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="35222" end="35236" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="35990" end="35999" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q155554" start="36464" end="36481" title="Marc Ravalomanana" label="Marc Ravalomanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q57363" start="36666" end="36681" title="Andry Rajoelina" label="Andry Rajoelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q28031739" start="36907" end="36924" title="Duttaphrynus melanostictus" label="Asian common toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q214508" start="37251" end="37264" title="elephant bird" label="elephant bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q19170" start="37293" end="37299" title="ratite" label="ratite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086758" start="37455" end="37466" title="Subfossil lemur" label="giant lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q573880" start="38096" end="38117" title="Nature Communications" label="Nature Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754255" start="38326" end="38349" title="Protected areas of Madagascar" label="protected natural areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092535" start="38684" end="38703" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Madagascar" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q564321" start="38719" end="38748" title="Rainforests of the Atsinanana" label="Rainforests of the Atsinanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485097" start="38766" end="38774" title="Marojejy National Park" label="Marojejy"/>
<link wikidata="Q964116" start="38776" end="38783" title="Masoala National Park" label="Masoala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498242" start="38785" end="38795" title="Ranomafana National Park" label="Ranomafana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071200" start="38797" end="38805" title="Zahamena National Park" label="Zahamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968746" start="38807" end="38817" title="Andohahela National Park" label="Andohahela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116933" start="38822" end="38833" title="Andringitra National Park" label="Andringitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="39107" end="39124" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="39125" end="39150" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230584" start="39151" end="39162" title="Diversity (politics)" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23782691" start="39248" end="39262" title="Prime Minister of Madagascar" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687814" start="39358" end="39370" title="Constitution of Madagascar" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510853" start="39485" end="39491" title="Senate of Madagascar" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141206" start="39500" end="39517" title="National Assembly of Madagascar" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="40391" end="40400" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40902" end="40912" title="Twelve sacred hills of Imerina#Hill of Analamanga" label="Analamanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q583184" start="41429" end="41438" title="Antsirabe" label="Antsirabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="41450" end="41459" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q218753" start="41474" end="41483" title="Mahajanga" label="Mahajanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628984" start="42202" end="42222" title="2009 Malagasy protests" label="A series of protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="42736" end="42765" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="42841" end="42854" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628984" start="43148" end="43192" title="2009 Malagasy political crisis" label="unconstitutional transfer of executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="43237" end="43265" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="43324" end="43346" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602153" start="43502" end="43538" title="List of diplomatic missions of Madagascar" label="embassies in sixteen other countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="43685" end="43722" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q466087" start="43731" end="43768" title="Convention on the Rights of the Child" label="Convention on the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="44519" end="44529" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549308" start="44675" end="44684" title="fake news" label="fake news"/>
<link wikidata="Q740123" start="48285" end="48330" title="United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti" label="United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="49074" end="49118" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="49365" end="49401" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="49449" end="49472" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensionally poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421403" start="51189" end="51196" title="Tourism in Madagascar" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="51198" end="51206" title="Textile industry" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694051" start="51208" end="51219" title="Agriculture in Madagascar" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099125" start="51225" end="51231" title="Mining industry of Madagascar" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q133289" start="51784" end="51790" title="raffia" label="raffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="51813" end="51821" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="52045" end="52052" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q220963" start="52065" end="52076" title="ylang-ylang" label="ylang-ylang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182" start="52188" end="52194" title="lychee" label="lychee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108180" start="52389" end="52396" title="Ilakaka" label="Ilakaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q190729" start="52476" end="52484" title="ilmenite" label="ilmenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="52634" end="52637" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="52642" end="52645" title="Natural gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q120107982" start="52793" end="52800" title="Mandena" label="Mandena"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="52809" end="52818" title="Rio Tinto Group" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002794" start="52848" end="52861" title="Ambatovy mine" label="Ambatovy mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423165" start="52867" end="52876" title="Moramanga" label="Moramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495372" start="52914" end="52936" title="Sherritt International" label="Sherritt International"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280487" start="52979" end="52988" title="heavy crude oil" label="heavy oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541579" start="53001" end="53010" title="Tsimiroro" label="Tsimiroro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039276" start="53015" end="53024" title="Bemolanga" label="Bemolanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163248" start="53028" end="53042" title="Madagascar Oil" label="Madagascar Oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53523" end="53555" title="Madagascar-U.S. Business Council" label="Madagascar-U.S. Business Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="53607" end="53612" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251385" start="53900" end="53905" title="China–Madagascar relations" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q116611986" start="54089" end="54108" title="roads in Madagascar" label="roads in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588122" start="54187" end="54202" title="National routes of Madagascar" label="national routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116844053" start="54378" end="54413" title="Antananarivo–Toamasina toll highway" label="Antananarivo–Toamasina toll highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="54440" end="54452" title="toll highway" label="toll highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="54770" end="54784" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192247" start="54815" end="54839" title="European Investment Bank" label="European Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100099" start="55014" end="55038" title="rail lines in Madagascar" label="rail lines in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="55681" end="55690" title="Rio Tinto (corporation)" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q253858" start="55802" end="55816" title="Air Madagascar" label="Air Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092876" start="56091" end="56097" title="Jirama" label="Jirama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="56731" end="56741" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="59117" end="59125" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="59372" end="59386" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="59389" end="59396" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192943" start="59541" end="59547" title="Indians in Madagascar" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="59638" end="59644" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q844538" start="59678" end="59684" title="Merina people" label="Merina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309630" start="59999" end="60012" title="Betsimisaraka people" label="Betsimisaraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526495" start="60036" end="60045" title="Tsimihety" label="Tsimihety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355221" start="60050" end="60058" title="Sakalava" label="Sakalava"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275518" start="60392" end="60399" title="Chinese people in Madagascar" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192943" start="60401" end="60407" title="Indians in Madagascar" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="60412" end="60419" title="Comoros" label="Comoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="60497" end="60503" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502323" start="60795" end="60804" title="French people in Madagascar" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="61055" end="61072" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy language"/>
<link wikidata="Q143158" start="61079" end="61096" title="Malayo-Polynesian" label="Malayo-Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="61453" end="61470" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489344" start="61498" end="61514" title="Barito languages" label="Barito languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328761" start="61525" end="61547" title="Ma&amp;#x27;anyan language" label="Ma&amp;#x27;anyan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="61599" end="61604" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="61609" end="61617" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="61630" end="61636" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="61886" end="61897" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515541" start="62812" end="62824" title="Malagasy constitutional referendum, 2010" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="62882" end="62894" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="63164" end="63169" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="63210" end="63229" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146531" start="63275" end="63284" title="Christianity in Madagascar" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="63340" end="63351" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q965443" start="63400" end="63415" title="Roman Catholicism in Madagascar" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="63460" end="63497" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="63532" end="63541" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="63548" end="63554" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="63605" end="63617" title="Irreligious" label="nonreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="63759" end="63771" title="Syncretism" label="syncretizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="64022" end="64040" title="minister (Christianity)" label="Christian minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116920" start="64269" end="64305" title="Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar" label="Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497901" start="64307" end="64315" title="Malagasy Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089839" start="64321" end="64329" title="Church of the Province of the Indian Ocean" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="64383" end="64406" title="Veneration of the dead" label="veneration of ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395073" start="64508" end="64518" title="famadihana" label="famadihana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553356" start="64943" end="64951" title="hiragasy" label="hiragasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509906" start="65093" end="65097" title="Fady (taboo)" label="fady"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="65435" end="65439" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58328913" start="65577" end="65585" title="Zanahary" label="Zanahary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="65665" end="65669" title="Arab people" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="65674" end="65680" title="Somali people" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139127" start="65960" end="65967" title="Islam in Madagascar" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q218753" start="66079" end="66088" title="Mahajanga" label="Mahajanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q218928" start="66093" end="66104" title="Antsiranana" label="Antsiranana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="66189" end="66197" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282294" start="66235" end="66250" title="Gujarati people" label="Gujarati people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069636" start="66272" end="66282" title="Saurashtra (region)" label="Saurashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="66293" end="66298" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="66357" end="66365" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="66369" end="66374" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="66453" end="66469" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216952" start="66595" end="66609" title="Messianic Judaism" label="Messianic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="66672" end="66677" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976674" start="66707" end="66732" title="Jews in Madagascar" label="Malagasy Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="68054" end="68065" title="hepatitis B" label="hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="68067" end="68077" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="68083" end="68090" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="68748" end="68763" title="Schistosomiasis" label="Schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="68765" end="68772" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="68862" end="68866" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q42405672" start="69236" end="69245" title="21st century Madagascar plague outbreaks" label="outbreaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="69253" end="69267" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986781" start="69272" end="69288" title="pneumonic plague" label="pneumonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q85730750" start="69391" end="69407" title="2018 Madagascar measles outbreak" label="measles outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q88225303" start="69499" end="69516" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Madagascar" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107417684" start="69730" end="69736" title="2021–2022 Madagascar famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="70044" end="70053" title="Toamasina" label="Toamasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="70072" end="70097" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679151" start="74234" end="74240" title="Hasina (Madagascar)" label="hasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q721579" start="75347" end="75355" title="Antemoro people" label="Antemoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q733370" start="75564" end="75570" title="valiha" label="valiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="75583" end="75589" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30034781" start="75590" end="75601" title="tube zither" label="tube zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906" start="75647" end="75662" title="South Kalimantan" label="southern Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210921" start="75710" end="75719" title="Music of Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328743" start="75728" end="75739" title="Music of the Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787157" start="75759" end="75779" title="Architecture of Madagascar" label="houses in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216602" start="76330" end="76335" title="lamba (garment)" label="lamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34160" start="76445" end="76461" title="Malagasy cuisine" label="Malagasy cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661898" start="76755" end="76770" title="Cattle raiding" label="Cattle rustling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349848" start="77151" end="77161" title="Literature of Madagascar" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125764" start="77296" end="77304" title="hainteny" label="hainteny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984364" start="77451" end="77457" title="Ibonia" label="Ibonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671601" start="77716" end="77739" title="Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo" label="Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360720" start="77796" end="77813" title="Elie Rajaonarison" label="Elie Rajaonarison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091536" start="77900" end="77916" title="Music of Madagascar" label="musical heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032090" start="77990" end="77996" title="salegy" label="salegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553356" start="78021" end="78029" title="hiragasy" label="hiragasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133289" start="78425" end="78431" title="Raffia palm" label="raffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q290286" start="78951" end="78961" title="Zafimaniry" label="Zafimaniry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="79025" end="79061" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="list of Intangible Cultural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290804" start="79288" end="79305" title="drawn thread work" label="drawn thread work"/>
<link wikidata="Q120506904" start="79450" end="79459" title="Madame Zo" label="Madame Zo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505715" start="79897" end="79905" title="Moraingy" label="Moraingy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="80094" end="80098" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395834" start="80285" end="80293" title="fanorona" label="fanorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q510246" start="80407" end="80418" title="Andrianjaka" label="Andrianjaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418104" start="80436" end="80443" title="Ralambo" label="Ralambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378422" start="80711" end="80722" title="Rugby union in Madagascar" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466285" start="80771" end="80777" title="Football in Madagascar" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189317" start="80839" end="80847" title="pétanque" label="pétanque"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="80874" end="80886" title="lawn bowling" label="lawn bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="81133" end="81146" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q391394" start="81185" end="81198" title="African Games" label="African Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="81200" end="81208" title="Scouting" label="Scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451215" start="81245" end="81265" title="Firaisan&amp;#x27;ny Skotisma eto Madagasikara" label="own local federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638878" start="81498" end="81527" title="2011 FIBA Africa Championship" label="2011 FIBA Africa Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821950" start="81533" end="81572" title="2009 FIBA Africa Championship for Women" label="2009 FIBA Africa Championship for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513520" start="81578" end="81616" title="2014 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship" label="2014 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954521" start="81622" end="81660" title="2013 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship" label="2013 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718268" start="81670" end="81718" title="2015 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship for Women" label="2015 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783028" start="81720" end="81766" title="Madagascar&amp;#x27;s national 3x3 basketball team" label="Madagascar&amp;#x27;s national 3x3 basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q66112836" start="81793" end="81811" title="3x3 basketball at the 2019 African Games" label="2019 African Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005639" start="81881" end="81896" title="List of Asian cuisines" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q386284" start="81898" end="81905" title="African cuisine" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068130" start="81907" end="81914" title="Oceanic cuisine" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="81916" end="81922" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="81924" end="81931" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="81937" end="81945" title="European cuisine" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q638022" start="82403" end="82413" title="vegetarian cuisine" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="82724" end="82731" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q622563" start="82736" end="82740" title="curd" label="curd"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="82762" end="82766" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q690292" start="82808" end="82815" title="fritter" label="fritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="83042" end="83045" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q942393" start="83063" end="83080" title="Three Horses Beer" label="Three Horses Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125789" start="83181" end="83217" title="Index of Madagascar-related articles" label="Index of Madagascar-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112342" start="83220" end="83241" title="Outline of Madagascar" label="Outline of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="83417" end="83425" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="83447" end="83465" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="83473" end="83500" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="83602" end="83623" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="83703" end="83729" title="National Library of Israel" label="National Library of Israel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18967" wikidata="Q25314" url="?curid=18967" title="Flowering plant">
<text>Flowering plants are plants that bear flowers and fruits, and form the clade Angiospermae (). The term &#x27;angiosperm&#x27; is derived from the Greek words ἀγγεῖον / (&#x27;container, vessel&#x27;) and σπέρμα / (&#x27;seed&#x27;), meaning that the seeds are enclosed within a fruit. The group was formerly called Magnoliophyta.

Angiosperms are by far the most diverse group of land plants with 64 orders, 416 families, approximately 13,000 known genera and 300,000 known species. They include all forbs (flowering plants without a woody stem), grasses and grass-like plants, a vast majority of broad-leaved trees, shrubs and vines, and most aquatic plants. Angiosperms are distinguished from the other major seed plant clade, the gymnosperms, by having flowers, xylem consisting of vessel elements instead of tracheids, endosperm within their seeds, and fruits that completely envelop the seeds. The ancestors of flowering plants diverged from the common ancestor of all living gymnosperms before the end of the Carboniferous, over 300 million years ago. In the Cretaceous, angiosperms diversified explosively, becoming the dominant group of plants across the planet.

Agriculture is almost entirely dependent on angiosperms, and a small number of flowering plant families supply nearly all plant-based food and livestock feed. Rice, maize and wheat provide half of the world&#x27;s staple calorie intake, and all three plants are cereals from the Poaceae family (colloquially known as grasses). Other families provide important industrial plant products such as wood, paper and cotton, and supply numerous ingredients for beverages, sugar production, traditional medicine and modern pharmaceuticals. Flowering plants are also commonly grown for decorative purposes, with certain flowers playing significant cultural roles in many societies.

Out of the &quot;Big Five&quot; extinction events in Earth&#x27;s history, only the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event had occurred while angiosperms dominated plant life on the planet. Today, the Holocene extinction affects all kingdoms of complex life on Earth, and conservation measures are necessary to protect plants in their habitats in the wild (&quot;in situ&quot;), or failing that, &quot;ex situ&quot; in seed banks or artificial habitats like botanic gardens. Otherwise, around 40% of plant species may become extinct due to human actions such as habitat destruction, introduction of invasive species, unsustainable logging, land clearing and overharvesting of medicinal or ornamental plants. Further, climate change is starting to impact plants and is likely to cause many species to become extinct by 2100.

== Distinguishing features ==

Angiosperms are terrestrial vascular plants; like the gymnosperms, they have roots, stems, leaves, and seeds. They differ from other seed plants in several ways.

== Diversity ==

=== Ecological diversity ===

The largest angiosperms are &quot;Eucalyptus&quot; gum trees of Australia, and &quot;Shorea faguetiana&quot;, dipterocarp rainforest trees of Southeast Asia, both of which can reach almost in height. The smallest are &quot;Wolffia&quot; duckweeds which float on freshwater, each plant less than across.

Considering their method of obtaining energy, some 99% of flowering plants are photosynthetic autotrophs, deriving their energy from sunlight and using it to create molecules such as sugars. The remainder are parasitic, whether on fungi like the orchids for part or all of their life-cycle, or on other plants, either wholly like the broomrapes, &quot;Orobanche&quot;, or partially like the witchweeds, &quot;Striga&quot;.

In terms of their environment, flowering plants are cosmopolitan, occupying a wide range of habitats on land, in fresh water and in the sea. On land, they are the dominant plant group in every habitat except for frigid moss-lichen tundra and coniferous forest. The seagrasses in the Alismatales grow in marine environments, spreading with rhizomes that grow through the mud in sheltered coastal waters.

Some specialised angiosperms are able to flourish in extremely acid or alkaline habitats. The sundews, many of which live in nutrient-poor acid bogs, are carnivorous plants, able to derive nutrients such as nitrate from the bodies of trapped insects. Other flowers such as &quot;Gentiana verna&quot;, the spring gentian, are adapted to the alkaline conditions found on calcium-rich chalk and limestone, which give rise to often dry topographies such as limestone pavement.

As for their growth habit, the flowering plants range from small, soft herbaceous plants, often living as annuals or biennials that set seed and die after one growing season, to large perennial woody trees that may live for many centuries and grow to many metres in height. Some species grow tall without being self-supporting like trees by climbing on other plants in the manner of vines or lianas.

=== Taxonomic diversity ===

The number of species of flowering plants is estimated to be in the range of 250,000 to 400,000. This compares to around 12,000 species of moss and 11,000 species of pteridophytes. The APG system seeks to determine the number of families, mostly by molecular phylogenetics. In the 2009 APG III there were 415 families. The 2016 APG IV added five new orders (Boraginales, Dilleniales, Icacinales, Metteniusales and Vahliales), along with some new families, for a total of 64 angiosperm orders and 416 families.

The diversity of flowering plants is not evenly distributed. Nearly all species belong to the eudicot (75%), monocot (23%), and magnoliid (2%) clades. The remaining five clades contain a little over 250 species in total; i.e. less than 0.1% of flowering plant diversity, divided among nine families. The 25 most species-rich of 443 families, containing over 166,000 species between them in their APG circumscriptions, are:

== Evolution ==

=== History of classification ===


The botanical term &quot;angiosperm&quot;, from Greek words ( &#x27;bottle, vessel&#x27;) and ( &#x27;seed&#x27;), was coined in the form &quot;Angiospermae&quot; by Paul Hermann in 1690, including only flowering plants whose seeds were enclosed in capsules. The term angiosperm fundamentally changed in meaning in 1827 with Robert Brown, when angiosperm came to mean a seed plant with enclosed ovules. In 1851, with Wilhelm Hofmeister&#x27;s work on embryo-sacs, Angiosperm came to have its modern meaning of all the flowering plants including Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons. The APG system treats the flowering plants as an unranked clade without a formal Latin name (angiosperms). A formal classification was published alongside the 2009 revision in which the flowering plants rank as the subclass Magnoliidae. From 1998, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) has reclassified the angiosperms, with updates in the APG II system in 2003, the APG III system in 2009, and the APG IV system in 2016.

=== Phylogeny ===

==== External ====

In 2019, a molecular phylogeny of plants placed the flowering plants in their evolutionary context:

==== Internal ====

The main groups of living angiosperms are:


In 2024, Alexandre R. Zuntini and colleagues constructed a tree of some 6,000 flowering plant genera, representing some 60% of the existing genera, on the basis of analysis of 353 nuclear genes in each specimen. Much of the existing phylogeny is confirmed; the rosid phylogeny is revised.

=== Fossil history ===


Fossilised spores suggest that land plants (embryophytes) have existed for at least 475 million years. However, angiosperms appear suddenly and in great diversity in the fossil record in the Early Cretaceous (~130 mya). Claimed records of flowering plants prior to this are not widely accepted. Molecular evidence suggests that the ancestors of angiosperms diverged from the gymnosperms during the late Devonian, about 365 million years ago. The origin time of the crown group of flowering plants remains contentious. By the Late Cretaceous, angiosperms appear to have dominated environments formerly occupied by ferns and gymnosperms. Large canopy-forming trees replaced conifers as the dominant trees close to the end of the Cretaceous, 66 million years ago. The radiation of herbaceous angiosperms occurred much later.

== Reproduction ==

=== Flowers ===

The characteristic feature of angiosperms is the flower. Its function is to ensure fertilization of the ovule and development of fruit containing seeds. It may arise terminally on a shoot or from the axil of a leaf. The flower-bearing part of the plant is usually sharply distinguished from the leaf-bearing part, and forms a branch-system called an inflorescence.

Flowers produce two kinds of reproductive cells. Microspores, which divide to become pollen grains, are the male cells; they are borne in the stamens. The female cells, megaspores, divide to become the egg cell. They are contained in the ovule and enclosed in the carpel; one or more carpels form the pistil.

The flower may consist only of these parts, as in wind-pollinated plants like the willow, where each flower comprises only a few stamens or two carpels. In insect- or bird-pollinated plants, other structures protect the sporophylls and attract pollinators. The individual members of these surrounding structures are known as sepals and petals (or tepals in flowers such as &quot;Magnolia&quot; where sepals and petals are not distinguishable from each other). The outer series (calyx of sepals) is usually green and leaf-like, and functions to protect the rest of the flower, especially the bud. The inner series (corolla of petals) is, in general, white or brightly colored, is more delicate in structure, and attracts pollinators by colour, scent, and nectar.

Most flowers are hermaphroditic, producing both pollen and ovules in the same flower, but some use other devices to reduce self-fertilization. Heteromorphic flowers have carpels and stamens of differing lengths, so animal pollinators cannot easily transfer pollen between them. Homomorphic flowers may use a biochemical self-incompatibility to discriminate between self and non-self pollen grains. Dioecious plants such as holly have male and female flowers on separate plants. Monoecious plants have separate male and female flowers on the same plant; these are often wind-pollinated, as in maize, but include some insect-pollinated plants such as &quot;Cucurbita&quot; squashes.

=== Fertilisation and embryogenesis ===

Double fertilization requires two sperm cells to fertilise cells in the ovule. A pollen grain sticks to the stigma at the top of the pistil, germinates, and grows a long pollen tube. A haploid generative cell travels down the tube behind the tube nucleus. The generative cell divides by mitosis to produce two haploid (&quot;n&quot;) sperm cells. The pollen tube grows from the stigma, down the style and into the ovary. When it reaches the micropyle of the ovule, it digests its way into one of the synergids, releasing its contents including the sperm cells. The synergid that the cells were released into degenerates; one sperm makes its way to fertilise the egg cell, producing a diploid (2&quot;n&quot;) zygote. The second sperm cell fuses with both central cell nuclei, producing a triploid (3&quot;n&quot;) cell. The zygote develops into an embryo; the triploid cell develops into the endosperm, the embryo&#x27;s food supply. The ovary develops into a fruit and each ovule into a seed.

=== Fruit and seed ===

As the embryo and endosperm develop, the wall of the embryo sac enlarges and combines with the nucellus and integument to form the &quot;seed coat&quot;. The ovary wall develops to form the fruit or pericarp, whose form is closely associated with type of seed dispersal system.

Other parts of the flower often contribute to forming the fruit. For example, in the apple, the hypanthium forms the edible flesh, surrounding the ovaries which form the tough cases around the seeds.

Apomixis, setting seed without fertilization, is found naturally in about 2.2% of angiosperm genera. Some angiosperms, including many citrus varieties, are able to produce fruits through a type of apomixis called nucellar embryony.

=== Sexual selection ===

===Adaptive function of flowers===

Charles Darwin in his 1878 book The Effects of Cross and Self-Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom in the initial paragraph of chapter XII noted &quot;The first and most important of the conclusions which may be drawn from the observations given in this volume, is that generally cross-fertilisation is beneficial and self-fertilisation often injurious, at least with the plants on which I experimented.&quot; Flowers emerged in plant evolution as an adaptation for the promotion of cross-fertilisation (outcrossing), a process that allows the masking of deleterious mutations in the genome of progeny. The masking effect is known as genetic complementation. Meiosis in flowering plants provides a direct mechanism for repairing DNA through genetic recombination in reproductive tissues. Sexual reproduction appears to be required for maintaining long-term genomic integrity and only infrequent combinations of extrinsic and intrinsic factors permit shifts to asexuality. Thus the two fundamental aspects of sexual reproduction in flowering plants, cross-fertilization (outcrossing) and meiosis appear to be maintained respectively by the advantages of genetic complementation and recombinational repair.

== Human uses ==

=== Practical uses ===

Agriculture is almost entirely dependent on angiosperms, which provide virtually all plant-based food and livestock feed. Much of this food derives from a small number of flowering plant families. For instance, half of the world&#x27;s calorie intake is supplied by just three plants – wheat, rice and maize.

Flowering plants provide a diverse range of materials in the form of wood, paper, fibers such as cotton, flax, and hemp, medicines such as digoxin and opioids, and decorative and landscaping plants. Coffee and hot chocolate are beverages from flowering plants (in the Rubiaceae and Malvaceae respectively).

=== Cultural uses ===

Both real and fictitious plants play a wide variety of roles in literature and film. Flowers are the subjects of many poems by poets such as William Blake, Robert Frost, and Rabindranath Tagore. Bird-and-flower painting () is a kind of Chinese painting that celebrates the beauty of flowering plants. Flowers have been used in literature to convey meaning by authors including William Shakespeare. 
Flowers are used in a variety of art forms which arrange cut or living plants, such as bonsai, ikebana, and flower arranging. Ornamental plants have sometimes changed the course of history, as in tulipomania. Many countries and regions have floral emblems; a survey of 70 of these found that the most popular flowering plant family for such emblems is Orchidaceae at 15.7% (11 emblems), followed by Fabaceae at 10% (7 emblems), and Asparagaceae, Asteraceae, and Rosaceae all at 5.7% (4 emblems each).

=== Conservation ===

Human impact on the environment has driven a range of species extinct and is threatening even more today. Multiple organizations such as IUCN and Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew suggest that around 40% of plant species are threatened with extinction. The majority are threatened by habitat loss, but activities such as logging of wild timber trees and collection of medicinal plants, or the introduction of non-native invasive species, also play a role.
Relatively few plant diversity assessments currently consider climate change, yet it is starting to impact plants as well. About 3% of flowering plants are very likely to be driven extinct within a century at of global warming, and 10% at . In worst-case scenarios, half of all tree species may be driven extinct by climate change over that timeframe.

Conservation in this context is the attempt to prevent extinction, whether &quot;in situ&quot; by protecting plants and their habitats in the wild, or &quot;ex situ&quot; in seed banks or as living plants. Some 3000 botanic gardens around the world maintain living plants, including over 40% of the species known to be threatened, as an &quot;insurance policy against extinction in the wild.&quot; The United Nations&#x27; Global Strategy for Plant Conservation asserts that &quot;without plants, there is no life&quot;. It aims to &quot;halt the continuing loss of plant diversity&quot; throughout the world.

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

=== Articles, books and chapters ===
* 
* 
* 
** 1st edition published by Oxford University Press in 1991 
* 
* Cromie, William J. (16 December 1999). &quot;Oldest Known Flowering Plants Identified By Genes&quot;. Harvard University Gazette.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Websites ===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="0" end="16" title="Flowering plant" label="Flowering plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="21" end="26" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="38" end="45" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="50" end="55" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="71" end="76" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="77" end="89" title="Flowering plant" label="Angiospermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="146" end="151" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="250" end="254" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="315" end="328" title="Flowering plant" label="Magnoliophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="380" end="391" title="Embryophyte" label="land plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="400" end="406" title="Order (biology)" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="412" end="420" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="449" end="455" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="474" end="481" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467207" start="500" end="504" title="forb" label="forb"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="534" end="538" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="540" end="544" title="Plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="547" end="552" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q148993" start="597" end="614" title="broad-leaved tree" label="broad-leaved tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="617" end="622" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="628" end="632" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="644" end="657" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="711" end="721" title="seed plant" label="seed plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="733" end="743" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="756" end="762" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="765" end="770" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q987768" start="785" end="799" title="vessel element" label="vessel element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425870" start="812" end="821" title="tracheids" label="tracheids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="823" end="832" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="1015" end="1028" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="1065" end="1075" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184701" start="1089" end="1112" title="Cretaceous Terrestrial Revolution" label="diversified explosively"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1172" end="1183" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="1306" end="1310" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="1315" end="1324" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1331" end="1335" title="Rice" label="Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1337" end="1342" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="1347" end="1352" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="1386" end="1392" title="staple food" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="1393" end="1400" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1434" end="1440" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="1451" end="1458" title="Poaceae" label="Poaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886657" start="1543" end="1556" title="plant product" label="plant product"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="1566" end="1570" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="1572" end="1577" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1582" end="1588" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="1626" end="1634" title="beverage" label="beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q227870" start="1637" end="1653" title="sugar production" label="sugar production"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="1655" end="1675" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="1687" end="1701" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="1749" end="1768" title="ornamental plant" label="decorative purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="1878" end="1894" title="extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="1930" end="1967" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="2046" end="2065" title="Holocene extinction" label="Holocene extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q36732" start="2078" end="2086" title="kingdoms of life" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="2090" end="2102" title="complex life" label="complex life"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="2208" end="2215" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q994064" start="2247" end="2254" title="Ex situ conservation" label="ex situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426613" start="2264" end="2273" title="seed bank" label="seed bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="2303" end="2317" title="botanic garden" label="botanic garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="2370" end="2377" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="2407" end="2426" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="2444" end="2460" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="2476" end="2483" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="2485" end="2498" title="land clearing" label="land clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="2503" end="2517" title="overharvesting" label="overharvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="2521" end="2530" title="medicinal plants" label="medicinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="2534" end="2550" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2562" end="2576" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347223" start="2580" end="2605" title="Effects of climate change on plant biodiversity" label="starting to impact plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="2778" end="2782" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="2785" end="2790" title="plant stem" label="stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2792" end="2798" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="2804" end="2808" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="2834" end="2845" title="Spermatophyte" label="seed plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="2945" end="2955" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130412835" start="2996" end="3013" title="Shorea faguetiana" label="Shorea faguetiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q163015" start="3134" end="3141" title="Wolffia" label="Wolffia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="3294" end="3308" title="photosynthetic" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="3309" end="3318" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="3398" end="3403" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="3424" end="3433" title="parasitic" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420488" start="3443" end="3451" title="myco-heterotrophy" label="on fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="3461" end="3468" title="orchids" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q127498" start="3509" end="3524" title="Parasitic plant" label="on other plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q157302" start="3567" end="3576" title="Orobanche" label="Orobanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q135029" start="3624" end="3630" title="Striga" label="Striga"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="3731" end="3738" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="3870" end="3876" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="3881" end="3898" title="coniferous forest" label="coniferous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="3904" end="3912" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q27341" start="3922" end="3933" title="Alismatales" label="Alismatales"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="3978" end="3985" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q266" start="4137" end="4143" title="sundew" label="sundew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="4187" end="4190" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18240" start="4197" end="4214" title="carnivorous plant" label="carnivorous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="4250" end="4257" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159389" start="4322" end="4336" title="Gentiana verna" label="Gentiana verna"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="4412" end="4419" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="4425" end="4430" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="4435" end="4444" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="4475" end="4487" title="Topography" label="topographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q729136" start="4496" end="4514" title="limestone pavement" label="limestone pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295204" start="4530" end="4542" title="growth habit" label="growth habit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="4588" end="4604" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="4623" end="4630" title="annual plant" label="annuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189774" start="4634" end="4643" title="biennials" label="biennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="4701" end="4710" title="Perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="4717" end="4721" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="4858" end="4866" title="climbing plant" label="climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="4900" end="4904" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="4909" end="4914" title="liana" label="liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="5086" end="5090" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q178249" start="5113" end="5126" title="Pteridophyta" label="pteridophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q433179" start="5132" end="5142" title="APG system" label="APG system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="5176" end="5184" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="5196" end="5219" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="5233" end="5240" title="APG III" label="APG III"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="5275" end="5281" title="APG IV" label="APG IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q66569" start="6101" end="6113" title="Paul Hermann (botanist)" label="Paul Hermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="6260" end="6272" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q215935" start="6352" end="6370" title="Wilhelm Friedrich Benedikt Hofmeister" label="Wilhelm Hofmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q433179" start="6517" end="6527" title="APG system" label="APG system"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="6765" end="6791" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="6852" end="6865" title="APG II system" label="APG II system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="6879" end="6893" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="6911" end="6924" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="6985" end="7004" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="7008" end="7013" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442619" start="7401" end="7406" title="Rosidae" label="rosid"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="7466" end="7471" title="spore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="7499" end="7510" title="embryophyte" label="embryophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226039" start="7579" end="7594" title="abominable mystery" label="appear suddenly"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="7646" end="7662" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="7830" end="7841" title="gymnosperms" label="gymnosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="7858" end="7866" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="7920" end="7931" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="8068" end="8072" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="8097" end="8103" title="Canopy (biology)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="8127" end="8134" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="8398" end="8411" title="Fertilisation" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="8419" end="8424" title="ovule" label="ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="8444" end="8449" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="8461" end="8465" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="8515" end="8519" title="axil" label="axil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="8665" end="8678" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452297" start="8730" end="8740" title="Microspore" label="Microspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="8766" end="8779" title="pollen" label="pollen grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="8823" end="8829" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330966" start="8850" end="8859" title="megaspore" label="megaspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560818" start="8862" end="8891" title="megagametogenesis" label="divide to become the egg cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="8919" end="8924" title="ovule" label="ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="8945" end="8951" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="8982" end="8988" title="pistil" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047706" start="9041" end="9056" title="Anemophily" label="wind-pollinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="9073" end="9079" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="9120" end="9126" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063308" start="9147" end="9154" title="Entomophily" label="insect-"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424557" start="9158" end="9173" title="Ornithophily" label="bird-pollinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333387" start="9211" end="9221" title="sporophyll" label="sporophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="9316" end="9321" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="9327" end="9332" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="9338" end="9343" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157017" start="9370" end="9378" title="Magnolia" label="Magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003157" start="9734" end="9739" title="Floral scent" label="scent"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="9745" end="9751" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9771" end="9785" title="Hermaphrodite#Plants" label="hermaphroditic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="9976" end="9986" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120121" start="10074" end="10094" title="Self-incompatibility in plants" label="self-incompatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="10152" end="10161" title="Dioecious" label="Dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="10177" end="10182" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q66368485" start="10232" end="10242" title="Monoecious" label="Monoecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="10346" end="10351" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="10409" end="10418" title="Cucurbita" label="Cucurbita"/>
<link wikidata="Q277657" start="10477" end="10497" title="Double fertilization" label="Double fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="10558" end="10564" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429464" start="10647" end="10658" title="pollen tube" label="pollen tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="11591" end="11599" title="nucellus" label="nucellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214385" start="11604" end="11614" title="integument" label="integument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364" start="11695" end="11703" title="pericarp" label="pericarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="11860" end="11865" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q887231" start="11871" end="11881" title="hypanthium" label="hypanthium"/>
<link wikidata="Q528033" start="11976" end="11984" title="Apomixis" label="Apomixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="12110" end="12116" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543223" start="12189" end="12206" title="nucellar embryony" label="nucellar embryony"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="12683" end="12689" title="Flower" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="12762" end="12775" title="fertilisation" label="fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779009" start="12777" end="12788" title="outcrossing" label="outcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="12840" end="12848" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="12857" end="12863" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780899" start="12907" end="12930" title="complementation (genetics)" label="genetic complementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="12932" end="12939" title="Meiosis" label="Meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="12992" end="13005" title="DNA repair" label="repairing DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="13061" end="13080" title="Sexual reproduction" label="Sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="13130" end="13137" title="genome" label="genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="13521" end="13532" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="13627" end="13636" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="13757" end="13764" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="13807" end="13812" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="13814" end="13818" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="13823" end="13828" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="13900" end="13904" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="13906" end="13911" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="13928" end="13934" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="13936" end="13940" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="13946" end="13950" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="13952" end="13961" title="medicinal plants" label="medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q422222" start="13970" end="13977" title="digoxin" label="digoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="13982" end="13988" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="14030" end="14036" title="Coffee" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13261" start="14041" end="14054" title="hot chocolate" label="hot chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="14099" end="14108" title="Rubiaceae" label="Rubiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156551" start="14113" end="14122" title="Malvaceae" label="Malvaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244549" start="14176" end="14193" title="Fictional plants" label="fictitious plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244549" start="14217" end="14245" title="List of fictional plants" label="roles in literature and film"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="14303" end="14316" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="14318" end="14330" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="14336" end="14355" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566458" start="14357" end="14381" title="Bird-and-flower painting" label="Bird-and-flower painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q919348" start="14398" end="14414" title="Chinese painting" label="Chinese painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q862550" start="14481" end="14517" title="language of flowers" label="used in literature to convey meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="14539" end="14558" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q64365" start="14648" end="14654" title="bonsai" label="bonsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q178459" start="14656" end="14663" title="ikebana" label="ikebana"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="14687" end="14703" title="Ornamental plant" label="Ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q219217" start="14757" end="14768" title="tulip mania" label="tulipomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q123246832" start="14802" end="14815" title="floral emblem" label="floral emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="15085" end="15116" title="Human impact on the environment" label="Human impact on the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="15159" end="15189" title="Holocene extinction" label="is threatening even more today"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="15222" end="15226" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748726" start="15231" end="15257" title="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew" label="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="15362" end="15374" title="Habitat destruction" label="habitat loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="15498" end="15514" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15596" end="15610" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347223" start="15622" end="15647" title="Effects of climate change on plant biodiversity" label="starting to impact plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="15968" end="15975" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q994064" start="16044" end="16051" title="Ex situ conservation" label="ex situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426613" start="16061" end="16070" title="seed bank" label="seed bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="16103" end="16118" title="botanic gardens" label="botanic gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16289" end="16303" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531704" start="16310" end="16348" title="Global Strategy for Plant Conservation" label="Global Strategy for Plant Conservation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18968" wikidata="Q21908" url="?curid=18968" title="Malvales">
<text>The Malvales are an order of flowering plants. As circumscribed by APG II-system, the order includes about 6000 species within nine families. The order is placed in the eurosids II, which are part of the eudicots.

The plants are mostly shrubs and trees; most of its families have a cosmopolitan distribution in the tropics and subtropics, with limited expansion into temperate regions. An interesting distribution occurs in Madagascar, where three endemic families of Malvales (Sphaerosepalaceae, Sarcolaenaceae and Diegodendraceae) occur.

Many species of Malvaceae, &quot;sensu lato&quot; (in the broad sense), are valued for their wood, with that of &quot;Ochroma&quot; (balsa) being known for its lightness, and that of &quot;Tilia&quot; (lime, linden, or basswood) as a popular wood for carving. Fruit of the cacao tree (&quot;Theobroma cacao&quot;) are used as an ingredient for chocolate. Kola nuts (genus &quot;Cola&quot;) are notable for their high caffeine content and were commonly used in the past in preparation of various cola drinks. They are still in use as a stimulant, particularly in West Africa where they are chewed for this effect. Other well-known members of Malvales in the APG II sense are daphnes, hibiscus, hollyhocks, okra, jute, baobab trees, cotton, kapok (which mostly comes from &quot;Ceiba pentandra&quot;, but also from other &quot;Kapok trees&quot; also of Malvales, such as &quot;Bombax ceiba&quot;), and durian.

==Description==

The morphology of Malvales is diverse, with few common characteristics. Among those most commonly encountered are leaf shapes in palmate form, sepals which are connate, and a specific structure and chemical composition of the seeds. The cortex is often fibrous, built of soft phloem layers.

==Taxonomy==
Early classifications such as that of Dahlgren placed the Malvales in the superorder Malviflorae (also called Malvanae). Family boundaries and circumscriptions of the &quot;core&quot; Malvales families, Malvaceae, Bombacaceae, Tiliaceae, and Sterculiaceae, have long been problematic. A close relationship among these families, and particularly Malvaceae and Bombacaceae, has generally been recognized, although until recently most classification systems have maintained them as separate families. With numerous molecular phylogenies showing Sterculiaceae, Bombacaceae, and Tiliaceae as traditionally defined are either paraphyletic or polyphyletic, a consensus has been emerging for a trend to expand Malvaceae to include these three families. This expanded circumscription of Malvaceae has been recognized in the most recent version of the Thorne system, by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, and in the most recent comprehensive treatment of vascular plant families and genera, the Kubitzki system.

The dominant family in the APG II-system is the extended Malvaceae (Malvaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot;) with over 4000 species, followed by Thymelaeaceae with 750 species. This expanded circumscription of Malvaceae is taken to include the families Bombacaceae, Sterculiaceae and Tiliaceae. Under the older Cronquist system the order contained these four &quot;core Malvales&quot; families plus the Elaeocarpaceae and was placed among the Dilleniidae. Some of the currently included families were placed by Cronquist in the Violales.

==Phylogeny==

The APG IV gives the following cladogram for Malvales phylogeny.

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Alverson, W. S., K. G. Karol, D. A. Baum, M. W. Chase, S. M. Swensen, R. McCourt, and K. J. Sytsma (1998). Circumscription of the Malvales and relationships to other Rosidae: Evidence from rbcL sequence data. &quot;American Journal of Botany&quot; 85, 876–887. (Available online: Abstract )
* Edlin, H. L. 1935. A critical revision of certain taxonomic groups of the Malvales. &quot;New Phytologist&quot; 34: 1-20, 122–143.
* Judd, W.S., C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue (2002). &quot;Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition&quot;. pp. 405–410 (Malvales). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. .
* Kubitzki, K. and M. W. Chase. 2003. Introduction to Malvales, pp. 12– 16. In K. Kubitzki (ed.), &quot;The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants&quot;, vol. 5, Malvales, Capparales and non-betalain Caryophyllales.
* du Mortier, B. C. J. (1829). &quot;Analyse des Familles de Plantes, avec l&#x27;indication des principaux genres qui s&#x27;y rattachent&quot;, p. 43. Imprimerie de J. Casterman, Tournay.
* Watson, L., and Dallwitz, M. J. (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, and information retrievalThe families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, and information retrieval. http://delta-intkey.com
* Whitlock, B. A. (October 2001). Malvales (Mallow). In: &quot;Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences&quot;. Nature Publishing Group, London. (Available online: DOI | ELS site)
==External links==
* Tree of Life Malvales
* Johansson, J.T. 2013 (and onwards). The Phylogeny of Angiosperms. Published online. http://angio.bergianska.se Malvales</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21908" start="4" end="12" title="Malvales" label="Malvales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="20" end="25" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="29" end="44" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="67" end="73" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="112" end="119" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="132" end="140" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="169" end="180" title="eurosids II" label="eurosids II"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="204" end="212" title="eudicots" label="eudicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="237" end="242" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="248" end="252" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="283" end="308" title="cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="316" end="323" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="328" end="338" title="subtropics" label="subtropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="368" end="377" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="425" end="435" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="575" end="585" title="sensu lato" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="660" end="667" title="Ochroma" label="Ochroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="731" end="736" title="Tilia" label="Tilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42385" start="833" end="848" title="Theobroma cacao" label="Theobroma cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="886" end="895" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="897" end="905" title="Kola nut" label="Kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q114264" start="914" end="930" title="Cola (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Cola&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="959" end="967" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="1037" end="1041" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="1104" end="1115" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122990" start="1216" end="1223" title="Daphne (plant)" label="daphnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157124" start="1225" end="1233" title="hibiscus" label="hibiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148371" start="1235" end="1244" title="hollyhock" label="hollyhock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="1247" end="1251" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q161489" start="1253" end="1257" title="Corchorus" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q157991" start="1259" end="1271" title="Adansonia" label="baobab trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1273" end="1279" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q138617" start="1318" end="1333" title="Ceiba pentandra" label="Ceiba pentandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13399160" start="1417" end="1429" title="Bombax ceiba" label="Bombax ceiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309085" start="1442" end="1448" title="Durio" label="durian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="1472" end="1482" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="1582" end="1592" title="leaf shape" label="leaf shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="1597" end="1604" title="palmate" label="palmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="1611" end="1616" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161315" start="1628" end="1635" title="Connation" label="connate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293511" start="1705" end="1711" title="Cortex (botany)" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="1744" end="1750" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="1811" end="1819" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="1847" end="1857" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q567943" start="2615" end="2628" title="Thorne system" label="Thorne system"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="2637" end="2663" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489024" start="2755" end="2770" title="Kubitzki system" label="Kubitzki system"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="2800" end="2806" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156551" start="2976" end="2985" title="Malvaceae" label="Malvaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006755" start="3019" end="3030" title="Bombacaceae" label="Bombacaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071125" start="3032" end="3045" title="Sterculiaceae" label="Sterculiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929656" start="3050" end="3059" title="Tiliaceae" label="Tiliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="3077" end="3093" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131280" start="3169" end="3183" title="Elaeocarpaceae" label="Elaeocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070446" start="3209" end="3220" title="Dilleniidae" label="Dilleniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q902665" start="3294" end="3302" title="Violales" label="Violales"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="3324" end="3330" title="APG IV" label="APG IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q316571" start="4288" end="4308" title="Barthélemy Charles Joseph du Mortier" label="du Mortier, B. C. J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18969" wikidata="Q21866" url="?curid=18969" title="Myrtales">
<text>The Myrtales are an order of flowering plants in the malvid clade of the rosid group of dicotyledons. Well-known members of Myrtales include: myrtle, pōhutukawa, bay rum tree, clove, guava, acca (feijoa), allspice, eucalyptus, crape myrtles, henna tree, pomegranate, water caltrop, loosestrifes, cupheas (cigar plants), evening primroses, fuchsias, willowherbs, white mangrove, leadwood tree, African birch, Koster&#x27;s curse, and velvet tree.

==Taxonomy==
Myrtales include the following nine families, according to the APG III system of classification:
* Alzateaceae
* Combretaceae (leadwood family)
* Crypteroniaceae
* Lythraceae (loosestrife and pomegranate family)
* Melastomataceae (including Memecylaceae)
* Myrtaceae (myrtle family; including Heteropyxidaceae, Psiloxylaceae)
* Onagraceae (evening primrose and Fuchsia family)
* Penaeaceae (including Oliniaceae, Rhynchocalycaceae)
* Vochysiaceae

The APG III system places the order within the eurosids; this is corroborated by the placement of the Myrtales in the Malvid clade by the &quot;One Thousand Plant Transcriptomes&quot; Initiative. 

Myrtales are placed as a sister to the eurosids II clade as of the publishing of the &quot;Eucalyptus grandis&quot; genome in June 2014.

The Cronquist system gives essentially the same composition, except the Vochysiaceae are removed to the order Polygalales, and the Thymelaeaceae are included. The families Sonneratiaceae, Trapaceae, and Punicaceae are removed from the Lythraceae. In the classification system of Dahlgren the Myrtales were in the superorder Myrtiflorae (also called Myrtanae). The APGIII system agrees with the older Cronquist circumscriptions of treating Psiloxylaceae and Heteropyxidaceae within Myrtaceae, and Memecyclaceae within Melastomataceae.

Ellagitannins are reported in dicotyledoneous angiosperms, and notably in species in the order Myrtales.

==Origins==
Myrtales is dated to around 89–99 million years ago (mya) in Australasia; however, there is some contention as to that date, which was obtained using nuclear DNA. When looking at chloroplast DNA, the myrtales&#x27; ancestor is, instead, considered to have evolved during the mid-Cretaceous period (100mya) in Southeast Africa, rather than in Australasia. Although the APG system classifies myrtales as within the eurosids, the recently published genome of &quot;Eucalyptus grandis&quot; places the order myrtales as a sister to the eurosids rather than inside them. The discrepancy is thought to have arisen due to the difference between using numerous taxa versus using various genes for constructing a phylogeny.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21866" start="4" end="12" title="Myrtales" label="Myrtales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="20" end="25" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="29" end="44" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="88" end="99" title="dicotyledon" label="dicotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165152" start="142" end="148" title="Myrtus" label="myrtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313015" start="150" end="160" title="Metrosideros" label="pōhutukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q812057" start="162" end="174" title="Pimenta racemosa" label="bay rum tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q26736" start="176" end="181" title="clove" label="clove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="183" end="188" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603920" start="190" end="203" title="Acca (plant)" label="acca (feijoa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963621" start="205" end="213" title="allspice" label="allspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="215" end="225" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q775229" start="227" end="240" title="Lagerstroemia" label="crape myrtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182448" start="242" end="252" title="Lawsonia inermis" label="henna tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="254" end="265" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487780" start="267" end="280" title="water caltrop" label="water caltrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q156845" start="282" end="294" title="Lythrum" label="loosestrifes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795637" start="296" end="318" title="Cuphea" label="cupheas (cigar plants)"/>
<link wikidata="Q157658" start="320" end="337" title="Oenothera" label="evening primroses"/>
<link wikidata="Q161066" start="339" end="346" title="fuchsia" label="fuchsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157637" start="349" end="360" title="Epilobium" label="willowherbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705317" start="362" end="376" title="Laguncularia" label="white mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q932386" start="378" end="391" title="Combretum imberbe" label="leadwood tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q111427920" start="393" end="406" title="Terminalia leiocarpa" label="African birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979028" start="408" end="427" title="Miconia crenata" label="Koster&amp;#x27;s curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q140905" start="433" end="444" title="Miconia calvescens" label="velvet tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="523" end="537" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="541" end="555" title="Taxonomy" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711589" start="559" end="570" title="Alzateaceae" label="Alzateaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q44002" start="573" end="585" title="Combretaceae" label="Combretaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q932386" start="587" end="595" title="Combretum imberbe" label="leadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q131822" start="606" end="621" title="Crypteroniaceae" label="Crypteroniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156022" start="624" end="634" title="Lythraceae" label="Lythraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156845" start="636" end="647" title="Lythrum" label="loosestrife"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="652" end="663" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q648380" start="674" end="689" title="Melastomataceae" label="Melastomataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134451" start="701" end="713" title="Memecylaceae" label="Memecylaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156563" start="717" end="726" title="Myrtaceae" label="Myrtaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341359" start="753" end="769" title="Heteropyxidaceae" label="Heteropyxidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341366" start="771" end="784" title="Psiloxylaceae" label="Psiloxylaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156179" start="788" end="798" title="Onagraceae" label="Onagraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157658" start="800" end="816" title="evening primrose" label="evening primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q161066" start="821" end="828" title="Fuchsia" label="Fuchsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132777" start="839" end="849" title="Penaeaceae" label="Penaeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133323" start="861" end="871" title="Oliniaceae" label="Oliniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134448" start="873" end="890" title="Rhynchocalycaceae" label="Rhynchocalycaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131743" start="894" end="906" title="Vochysiaceae" label="Vochysiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="955" end="963" title="Rosids" label="eurosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="1145" end="1156" title="eurosids II" label="eurosids II"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1157" end="1162" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1248" end="1264" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131743" start="1316" end="1328" title="Vochysiaceae" label="Vochysiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21878" start="1354" end="1365" title="Polygalales" label="Polygalales"/>
<link wikidata="Q156109" start="1375" end="1388" title="Thymelaeaceae" label="Thymelaeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198585" start="1416" end="1430" title="Sonneratiaceae" label="Sonneratiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487780" start="1432" end="1441" title="Trapaceae" label="Trapaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959355" start="1447" end="1457" title="Punicaceae" label="Punicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="1523" end="1531" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="1557" end="1567" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051341" start="1779" end="1791" title="Ellagitannin" label="Ellagitannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077944" start="1958" end="1969" title="Australasian realm" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="2047" end="2058" title="nuclear DNA" label="nuclear DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182853" start="2076" end="2091" title="chloroplast DNA" label="chloroplast DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="2206" end="2222" title="Southern Africa" label="Southeast Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18970" wikidata="Q21887" url="?curid=18970" title="Malpighiales">
<text>The Malpighiales comprise one of the largest orders of flowering plants. The order is very diverse, with well-known members including willows, violets, aspens and poplars, poinsettia, corpse flower, coca plant, cassava, flaxseed, castor bean, Saint John&#x27;s wort, passionfruit, mangosteen, and manchineel tree.

The order is not part of any of the classification systems based only on plant morphology and the relationships of its diverse members can be hard to recognize except with molecular phylogenetic evidence. Molecular clock calculations estimate the origin of stem group Malpighiales at around 100 million years ago (Mya) and the origin of crown group Malpighiales at about 90 Mya.

The Malpighiales contain about 36 families and more than species, about 7.8% of the eudicots.

== Taxonomy ==
The Malpighiales include the following 36 families, according to the APG IV system of classification:
*Achariaceae
*Balanopaceae
*Bonnetiaceae
*Calophyllaceae
*Caryocaraceae
*Centroplacaceae
*Chrysobalanaceae
*Clusiaceae
*Ctenolophonaceae
*Dichapetalaceae
*Elatinaceae
*Erythroxylaceae
*Euphorbiaceae
*Euphroniaceae
*Goupiaceae
*Humiriaceae
*Hypericaceae
*Irvingiaceae
*Ixonanthaceae
*Lacistemataceae
*Linaceae
*Lophopyxidaceae
*Malpighiaceae
*Ochnaceae
*Pandaceae
*Passifloraceae
*Peraceae
*Phyllanthaceae
*Picrodendraceae
*Podostemaceae
*Putranjivaceae
*Rafflesiaceae
*Rhizophoraceae
*Salicaceae
*Trigoniaceae
*Violaceae

In the APG III system, 35 families were recognized. Medusagynaceae, Quiinaceae, Peraceae, Malesherbiaceae, Turneraceae, Samydaceae, and Scyphostegiaceae were consolidated into other families. The largest family, by far, is the Euphorbiaceae, with about 6300 species in about 245 genera. Changes made in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification of 2016 (APG IV) were the inclusion of Irvingiaceae, Peraceae, Euphorbiaceae and Ixonanthaceae, together with the transfer of the COM clade from the fabids (rosid I) to the malvids (rosid II).

== Phylogeny ==
The phylogenetic tree shown below is from Xi &quot;et al.&quot; (2012). The study presented a more resolved phylogenetic tree than previous studies through the use of data from a large number of genes. They included analyses of 82 plastid genes from 58 species (ignoring the problematic Rafflesiaceae), using partitions identified a posteriori by applying a Bayesian mixture model. Xi &quot;et al.&quot; identified 12 additional clades and three major, basal clades.

===2009 (Older)===
The older phylogenetic tree shown below is from Wurdack and Davis (2009). The DNA sequences of 13 genes, 42 families were placed into 16 groups, ranging in size from one to 10 families. The relationships among these 16 groups were poorly resolved. The statistical support for each branch is 100% bootstrap percentage and 100% posterior probability, except where labeled, with bootstrap percentage followed by posterior probability.

== Circumscription ==
Malpighiales is monophyletic and in molecular phylogenetic studies, it receives strong statistical support. Since the APG II system was published in 2003, minor changes to the circumscription of the order have been made. The family Peridiscaceae has been expanded from two genera to three, and then to four, and transferred to Saxifragales.

The genera &quot;Cyrillopsis&quot; (Ixonanthaceae), &quot;Centroplacus&quot; (Centroplacaceae), &quot;Bhesa&quot; (Centroplacaceae), &quot;Aneulophus&quot; (Erythroxylaceae), &quot;Ploiarium&quot; (Bonnetiaceae), &quot;Trichostephanus&quot; (Samydaceae), &quot;Sapria&quot; (Rafflesiaceae), &quot;Rhizanthes&quot; (Rafflesiaceae), and &quot;Rafflesia&quot; (Rafflesiaceae) had been either added or confirmed as members of Malpighiales by the end of 2009.

Some family delimitations within the order have changed, as well, most notably, the segregation of Calophyllaceae from Clusiaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; when it was shown that the latter is paraphyletic. Some differences of opinion on family delimitation exist, as well. For example, Samydaceae and Scyphostegiaceae may be recognized as families or included in a large version of Salicaceae.

The group is difficult to characterize phenotypically, due to sheer morphological diversity, ranging from tropical holoparasites with giant flowers, such as &quot;Rafflesia&quot;, to temperate trees and herbs with tiny, simple flowers, such as Salix. Members often have dentate leaves, with the teeth having a single vein running into a congested and often deciduous apex (i.e., violoid, salicoid, or theoid). Also, zeylanol has recently been discovered in &quot;Balanops&quot; and &quot;Dichapetalum&quot; which are in the balanops clade (so-called Chrysobalanaceae s. l.). The so-called parietal suborder (the clusioid clade and Ochnaceae s. l. were also part of Parietales) corresponds with the traditional Violales as 8 (Achariaceae, Violaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Lacistemataceae, Scyphostegiaceae, Turneraceae, Malesherbiaceae, and Passifloraceae) of the order&#x27;s 10 families along with Salicaceae, which have usually been assigned as a related order or suborder, are in this most derived malpighian suborder, so that eight of the 10 families of this suborder are Violales. The family Flacourtiaceae has proven to be polyphyletic as the cyanogenic members have been placed in Achariaceae and the ones with salicoid teeth were transferred to Salicaceae. Scyphostegiaceae, consisting of the single genus &quot;Scyphostegia&quot; has been merged into Salicaceae.

== Affinities ==
Malpighiales is a member of a supraordinal group called the COM clade, which consists of the orders Celastrales, Oxalidales, and Malpighiales. Some describe it as containing a fourth order, Huales, separating the family Huaceae into its own order, separate from Oxalidales.

Some recent studies have placed Malpighiales as sister to Oxalidales &quot;sensu lato&quot; (including Huaceae), while others have found a different topology for the COM clade.

The COM clade is part of an unranked group known as malvids (rosid II), though formally placed in Fabidae (rosid I). These in turn are part of a group that has long been recognized, namely, the rosids.

== History ==
The French botanist Charles Plumier named the genus &quot;Malpighia&quot; in honor of Marcello Malpighi&#x27;s work on plants; &quot;Malpighia&quot; is the type genus for the Malpighiaceae, a family of tropical and subtropical flowering plants.

The family Malpighiaceae was the type family for one of the orders created by Jussieu in his 1789 work &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot;. Friedrich von Berchtold and Jan Presl described such an order in 1820. Unlike modern taxonomists, these authors did not use the suffix &quot;ales&quot; in naming their orders. The name &quot;Malpighiales&quot; is attributed by some to Carl von Martius. In the 20th century, it was usually associated with John Hutchinson, who used it in all three editions of his book, &quot;The Families of Flowering Plants&quot;. The name was not used by those who wrote later, in the 1970s, &#x27;80s, and &#x27;90s.

The taxon was largely presaged by Hans Hallier in 1912 in an article in the &quot;Archiv. Néerl. Sci. Exact. Nat.&quot; titled &quot;L&#x27;Origine et le système phylétique des angiospermes&quot;, in which his Passionales and Polygalinae were derived from Linaceae (in Guttales), with Passionales containing seven (of eight) families that also appear in the current Malpighiales, namely Passifloraceae, Salicaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Achariaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Malesherbiaceae, and Turneraceae, and Polygalinae containing four (of 10) families that also appear in the current Malpighiales, namely Malpighiaceae, Violaceae, Dichapetalaceae, and Trigoniaceae.

The molecular phylogenetic revolution led to a major restructuring of the order. The first semblance of Malpighiales as now known came from a phylogeny of seed plants published in 1993 and based upon DNA sequences of the gene &quot;rbcL&quot;. This study recovered a group of rosids unlike any group found in any previous system of plant classification. To make a clear break with classification systems being used at that time, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group resurrected Hutchinson&#x27;s name, though his concept of Malpighiales included much of what is now in Celastrales and Oxalidales.

== Gallery of type genera ==

&quot;Litoh family&quot; is a common name for Ctenolophonaceae, and &quot;koteb family&quot; for Lophopyxidaceae.

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* (&quot;see also&quot; Angiosperm Phylogeny Website)
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21887" start="4" end="16" title="Malpighiales" label="Malpighiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="45" end="51" title="Order (biology)" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="55" end="70" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="134" end="140" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q146095" start="143" end="149" title="Viola (plant)" label="violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087592" start="152" end="157" title="aspen" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="163" end="170" title="Populus" label="poplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q208253" start="172" end="182" title="Euphorbia pulcherrima" label="poinsettia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161888" start="184" end="197" title="Rafflesia arnoldii" label="corpse flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="199" end="209" title="Coca" label="coca plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="211" end="218" title="Manihot esculenta" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="220" end="228" title="Linum usitatissimum" label="flaxseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q155867" start="230" end="241" title="Ricinus communis" label="castor bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="243" end="265" title="Hypericum perforatum" label="Saint John&amp;#x27;s wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="267" end="279" title="Passiflora edulis" label="passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170662" start="281" end="291" title="Garcinia mangostana" label="mangosteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q636480" start="297" end="312" title="Hippomane mancinella" label="manchineel tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="351" end="365" title="Systematics" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q655362" start="388" end="404" title="plant morphology" label="plant morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="487" end="509" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="520" end="535" title="Molecular clock" label="Molecular clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="572" end="582" title="stem group" label="stem group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="629" end="632" title="mya (unit)" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="652" end="663" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="752" end="759" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="779" end="787" title="eudicots" label="eudicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="874" end="887" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q651518" start="908" end="919" title="Achariaceae" label="Achariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131357" start="921" end="933" title="Balanopaceae" label="Balanopaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132706" start="935" end="947" title="Bonnetiaceae" label="Bonnetiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133249" start="949" end="963" title="Calophyllaceae" label="Calophyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131345" start="965" end="978" title="Caryocaraceae" label="Caryocaraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q866451" start="980" end="995" title="Centroplacaceae" label="Centroplacaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q614604" start="997" end="1013" title="Chrysobalanaceae" label="Chrysobalanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132429" start="1015" end="1025" title="Clusiaceae" label="Clusiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132044" start="1027" end="1043" title="Ctenolophonaceae" label="Ctenolophonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132064" start="1045" end="1060" title="Dichapetalaceae" label="Dichapetalaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161855" start="1062" end="1073" title="Elatinaceae" label="Elatinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157231" start="1075" end="1090" title="Erythroxylaceae" label="Erythroxylaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156584" start="1092" end="1105" title="Euphorbiaceae" label="Euphorbiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132707" start="1107" end="1120" title="Euphroniaceae" label="Euphroniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132710" start="1122" end="1132" title="Goupiaceae" label="Goupiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131349" start="1134" end="1145" title="Humiriaceae" label="Humiriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158185" start="1147" end="1159" title="Hypericaceae" label="Hypericaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131363" start="1161" end="1173" title="Irvingiaceae" label="Irvingiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131655" start="1175" end="1188" title="Ixonanthaceae" label="Ixonanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132951" start="1190" end="1205" title="Lacistemataceae" label="Lacistemataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155951" start="1207" end="1215" title="Linaceae" label="Linaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635655" start="1217" end="1232" title="Lophopyxidaceae" label="Lophopyxidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632563" start="1234" end="1247" title="Malpighiaceae" label="Malpighiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133319" start="1249" end="1258" title="Ochnaceae" label="Ochnaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054213" start="1260" end="1269" title="Pandaceae" label="Pandaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157164" start="1271" end="1285" title="Passifloraceae" label="Passifloraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q136819" start="1287" end="1295" title="Peraceae" label="Peraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133206" start="1297" end="1311" title="Phyllanthaceae" label="Phyllanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132054" start="1313" end="1328" title="Picrodendraceae" label="Picrodendraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132061" start="1330" end="1343" title="Podostemaceae" label="Podostemaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068532" start="1345" end="1359" title="Putranjivaceae" label="Putranjivaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="1361" end="1374" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q740873" start="1376" end="1390" title="Rhizophoraceae" label="Rhizophoraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158487" start="1392" end="1402" title="Salicaceae" label="Salicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132697" start="1404" end="1416" title="Trigoniaceae" label="Trigoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156060" start="1418" end="1427" title="Violaceae" label="Violaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="1436" end="1450" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156584" start="1656" end="1669" title="Euphorbiaceae" label="Euphorbiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1708" end="1714" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="1736" end="1762" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131363" start="1823" end="1835" title="Irvingiaceae" label="Irvingiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q136819" start="1837" end="1845" title="Peraceae" label="Peraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156584" start="1847" end="1860" title="Euphorbiaceae" label="Euphorbiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131655" start="1865" end="1878" title="Ixonanthaceae" label="Ixonanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="1998" end="2015" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="2281" end="2294" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q178161" start="2325" end="2337" title="a posteriori" label="a posteriori"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="2352" end="2360" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="2491" end="2508" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="2559" end="2571" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="2579" end="2583" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2618" end="2624" title="clade" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q301990" start="2777" end="2786" title="Bootstrapping (statistics)" label="bootstrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="2807" end="2828" title="posterior probability" label="posterior probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="2952" end="2964" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2972" end="2994" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="3112" end="3127" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q132930" start="3168" end="3181" title="Peridiscaceae" label="Peridiscaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="3263" end="3275" title="Saxifragales" label="Saxifragales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353034" start="3295" end="3306" title="Cyrillopsis" label="Cyrillopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131655" start="3314" end="3327" title="Ixonanthaceae" label="Ixonanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107205" start="3336" end="3348" title="Centroplacus" label="Centroplacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q866451" start="3356" end="3371" title="Centroplacaceae" label="Centroplacaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930885" start="3380" end="3385" title="Bhesa" label="Bhesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9615063" start="3417" end="3427" title="Aneulophus" label="Aneulophus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157231" start="3435" end="3450" title="Erythroxylaceae" label="Erythroxylaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061136" start="3459" end="3468" title="Ploiarium" label="Ploiarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132706" start="3476" end="3488" title="Bonnetiaceae" label="Bonnetiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17563272" start="3497" end="3512" title="Trichostephanus" label="Trichostephanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845706" start="3520" end="3530" title="Samydaceae" label="Samydaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q139481" start="3539" end="3545" title="Sapria" label="Sapria"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="3553" end="3566" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394588" start="3575" end="3585" title="Rhizanthes" label="Rhizanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q158622" start="3619" end="3628" title="Rafflesia" label="Rafflesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446323" start="3818" end="3829" title="Segregate (taxonomy)" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133249" start="3833" end="3847" title="Calophyllaceae" label="Calophyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132429" start="3853" end="3863" title="Clusiaceae" label="Clusiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="3924" end="3936" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845706" start="4018" end="4028" title="Samydaceae" label="Samydaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9075293" start="4033" end="4049" title="Scyphostegiaceae" label="Scyphostegiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158487" start="4114" end="4124" title="Salicaceae" label="Salicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158622" start="4290" end="4299" title="Rafflesia" label="Rafflesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="4371" end="4376" title="Salix" label="Salix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9075293" start="5441" end="5453" title="Scyphostegia" label="Scyphostegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="5541" end="5553" title="Taxonomic rank" label="supraordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21870" start="5611" end="5622" title="Celastrales" label="Celastrales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="5624" end="5634" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131498" start="5701" end="5707" title="Huales" label="Huales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131498" start="5731" end="5738" title="Huaceae" label="Huaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="5861" end="5871" title="sensu lato" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="5935" end="5943" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="5992" end="6000" title="Taxonomic rank" label="unranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906521" start="6016" end="6023" title="malvids" label="malvids"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="6062" end="6069" title="Fabidae" label="Fabidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="6158" end="6164" title="rosids" label="rosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q468460" start="6201" end="6216" title="Charles Plumier" label="Charles Plumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q768283" start="6239" end="6248" title="Malpighia" label="Malpighia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232583" start="6267" end="6284" title="Marcello Malpighi" label="Marcello Malpighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="6337" end="6347" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632563" start="6356" end="6369" title="Malpighiaceae" label="Malpighiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="6460" end="6471" title="Biological type" label="type family"/>
<link wikidata="Q223963" start="6505" end="6512" title="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu" label="Jussieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q940150" start="6560" end="6583" title="Friedrich von Berchtold" label="Friedrich von Berchtold"/>
<link wikidata="Q379593" start="6588" end="6597" title="Jan Svatopluk Presl" label="Jan Presl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="6645" end="6655" title="taxonomist" label="taxonomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q77131" start="6795" end="6811" title="Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius" label="Carl von Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q253917" start="6865" end="6880" title="John Hutchinson (botanist)" label="John Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q75908" start="7098" end="7110" title="Hans Hallier" label="Hans Hallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="7725" end="7747" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="7876" end="7887" title="Spermatophyte" label="seed plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="7921" end="7933" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q422516" start="7947" end="7963" title="RuBisCO" label="&amp;quot;rbcL&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="8053" end="8073" title="Biological classification" label="plant classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138178" start="8102" end="8116" title="Plant taxonomy" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="8154" end="8180" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="8373" end="8384" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q132044" start="8389" end="8405" title="Ctenolophonaceae" label="Ctenolophonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635655" start="8440" end="8455" title="Lophopyxidaceae" label="Lophopyxidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q600295" start="8524" end="8552" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Website" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Website"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18972" wikidata="Q312199" url="?curid=18972" title="Miranda warning">
<text>In the United States, the Miranda&quot; warningis a type of notification customarily given by [[Law enforcement in the United States|police]] to criminal suspects in police custody (or in a [[custodial interrogation]]) advising them of their [[right to silence]] and, in effect, protection from [[Self-incrimination clause|self-incrimination]]; that is, their right to refuse to answer questions or provide information to law enforcement or other officials. Named for the [[U.S. Supreme Court]]&#x27;s 1966 decision &quot;[[Miranda v. Arizona]]&quot;, these rights are often referred to as Miranda&quot; rights. The purpose of such notification is to preserve the admissibility of their statements made during custodial interrogation in later criminal proceedings. The idea came from law professor Yale Kamisar, who subsequently was dubbed &quot;the father of &quot;Miranda&quot;.&quot;

The language used in &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings derives from the Supreme Court&#x27;s opinion in its &quot;Miranda&quot; decision. But the specific language used in the warnings varies between jurisdictions, and the warning is deemed adequate as long as the defendant&#x27;s rights are properly disclosed such that any waiver of those rights by the defendant is knowing, voluntary, and intelligent. For example, the warning may be phrased as follows:

The &quot;Miranda&quot; warning is part of a preventive criminal procedure rule that law enforcement are required to administer to protect an individual who is in custody and subject to direct questioning or its functional equivalent from a violation of their Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination. In &quot;Miranda v. Arizona&quot;, the Supreme Court held that the admission of an elicited incriminating statement by a suspect not informed of these rights violates the Fifth Amendment and the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, through the incorporation of these rights into state law. Thus, if law enforcement officials decline to offer a &quot;Miranda&quot; warning to an individual in their custody, they may interrogate that person and act upon the knowledge gained, but may not ordinarily use that person&#x27;s statements as evidence against them in a criminal trial.

==Origin and development of &quot;Miranda&quot; rights==

The concept of &quot;&quot;Miranda&quot; rights&quot; was enshrined in U.S. law following the 1966 &quot;Miranda v. Arizona&quot; Supreme Court decision, which found that the Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights of Ernesto Arturo Miranda had been violated during his arrest and trial for armed robbery, kidnapping, and rape of a young woman.

Miranda was subsequently retried and convicted, based primarily on his estranged ex-partner, who had been tracked down by the original arresting officer via Miranda&#x27;s own parents, suddenly claiming that Miranda had confessed to her when she had visited him in jail. Miranda&#x27;s lawyer later confessed that he &#x27;goofed&#x27; the case by focusing too much on the constitutional issues (and losing sight of the jury and guilt or innocence).

The circumstances triggering the &quot;Miranda&quot; safeguards, i.e. &quot;Miranda&quot; rights, are &quot;custody&quot; and &quot;interrogation&quot;. Custody means formal arrest or the deprivation of freedom to an extent associated with formal arrest. Interrogation means explicit questioning or actions that are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. The Supreme Court did not specify the exact wording to use when informing a suspect of their rights. However, the Court did create a set of guidelines that must be followed. The ruling states:

From &quot;Miranda rights&quot;, American English developed the verb &quot;Mirandize&quot;, meaning &quot;read the &quot;Miranda&quot; rights to&quot;.

In &quot;Berkemer v. McCarty&quot; (1984), the Supreme Court decided that a person subjected to custodial interrogation is entitled to the benefit of the procedural safeguards enunciated in &quot;Miranda&quot;, regardless of the nature or severity of the offense of which they are suspected or for which they were arrested.

Notably, the &quot;Miranda&quot; rights need not be read in any particular order, and they need not precisely match the language of the &quot;Miranda&quot; case as long as they are adequately and fully conveyed (&quot;California v. Prysock&quot;, ).

In &quot;Berghuis v. Thompkins&quot; (2010), the Supreme Court held that unless a suspect expressly states that they are invoking this right, subsequent voluntary statements made to an officer can be used against them in court, and police can continue to interact with (or question) the alleged criminal.

In &quot;Vega v. Tekoh&quot; (2022), the Supreme Court held that police may not be sued for failing to administer &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings, and that the remedy for such a failure is the exclusion of the acquired statements at trial.

==The warnings==

Every U.S. jurisdiction has its own regulations regarding what, precisely, must be said to a person arrested or placed in a custodial situation. The typical warning states:
* You have the right to remain silent and refuse to answer questions.
* If you give up the right to remain silent, anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law.
* You have the right to consult an attorney before speaking to the police and to have an attorney present during questioning now or in the future.
* If you cannot afford an attorney, one will be appointed for you before any questioning if you wish.
* If you decide to answer questions now without an attorney present, you will still have the right to stop answering at any time until you talk to an attorney.
* Knowing and understanding your rights as I have explained them to you, are you willing to answer my questions without an attorney present?

The courts have since ruled that the warning must be &quot;meaningful&quot;, so it is usually required that the suspect be asked if they understand their rights. Sometimes, firm answers of &quot;yes&quot; are required. Some departments and jurisdictions require that an officer ask &quot;do you understand?&quot; after every sentence in the warning. An arrestee&#x27;s silence is not a waiver, but in Berghuis v. Thompkins (2010), the Supreme Court ruled 5–4 that police are allowed to interrogate suspects who have invoked or waived their rights ambiguously, and any statement given during questioning prior to invocation or waiving is admissible as evidence. Evidence has in some cases been ruled inadmissible because of an arrestee&#x27;s poor knowledge of English and the failure of arresting officers to provide the warning in the arrestee&#x27;s language.

While the exact language above is not required by &quot;Miranda&quot;, the police must advise the suspect that:
# they have the right to remain silent;
# anything the suspect &quot;does&quot; say can and may be used against them in a court of law;
# they have the right to have an attorney present before and during the questioning; and
# they have the right, if they cannot afford the services of an attorney, to have one appointed, at public expense and without cost to them, to represent them before and during the questioning.
There is no precise language that must be used in advising a suspect of their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights. The point is that whatever language is used the substance of the rights outlined above must be communicated to the suspect. The suspect may be advised of their rights orally or in writing. Also, officers must make sure the suspect understands what the officer is saying, taking into account potential education levels. It may be necessary to &quot;translate&quot; to the suspect&#x27;s level of understanding. Courts have ruled this admissible as long as the original waiver is said and the &quot;translation&quot; is recorded either on paper or on tape.

The Supreme Court has resisted efforts to require officers to more fully advise suspects of their rights. For example, the police are not required to advise the suspect that they can stop the interrogation at any time, that the decision to exercise the right cannot be used against the suspect, or that they have a right to talk to a lawyer before being asked any questions. Nor have the courts required to explain the rights. For example, the standard &quot;Miranda&quot; right to counsel states &quot;You have a right to have an attorney present during the questioning&quot;. Police are not required to explain that this right is not merely a right to have a lawyer present while the suspect is being questioned. The right to counsel includes:
* the right to talk to a lawyer before deciding whether to talk to police,
* if the defendant decides to talk to the police, the right to consult with a lawyer before being interrogated,
* the right to answer police only through an attorney.

===Circumstances triggering the &quot;Miranda&quot; requisites===
The circumstances triggering the &quot;Miranda&quot; safeguards, i.e. &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings, are &quot;custody&quot; and &quot;interrogation&quot;. Custody means formal arrest or the deprivation of freedom to an extent associated with formal arrest. Interrogation means explicit questioning or actions that are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. Suspects in &quot;custody&quot; who are about to be interrogated must be properly advised of their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights—namely, the Fifth Amendment right against compelled self incrimination (and, in furtherance of this right, the right to counsel while in custody). The Sixth Amendment right to counsel means that the suspect has the right to consult with an attorney before questioning begins and have an attorney present during the interrogation. The Fifth Amendment right against compelled self incrimination is the right to remain silent—the right to refuse to answer questions or to otherwise communicate information.

The duty to warn only arises when police officers conduct custodial interrogations. The Constitution does not require that a defendant be advised of the &quot;Miranda&quot; rights as part of the arrest procedure, or once an officer has probable cause to arrest, or if the defendant has become a suspect of the focus of an investigation. Custody and interrogation are the events that trigger the duty to warn.

===Use in various U.S. state jurisdictions===

Some jurisdictions provide the right of a juvenile to remain silent if their parent or guardian is not present. Some departments in New Jersey, Nevada, Oklahoma, and Alaska modify the &quot;providing an attorney&quot; clause as follows:

Even though this sentence may be somewhat ambiguous to some laypersons, who can, and who &quot;have&quot; actually interpreted it as meaning that they will not get a lawyer until they confess and are arraigned in court, the U.S. Supreme Court has approved of it as an accurate description of the procedure in those states.

In Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California—the four states that border Mexico—suspects who are not United States citizens are given an additional warning:

After issuance of Miranda warnings, the police may ask waiver questions. Common waiver questions, which may be included on a written warning card or document, are,

An affirmative answer to both of the above questions waives the rights. If the suspect responds &quot;no&quot; to the first question, the officer is required to re-read the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning, while saying &quot;no&quot; to the second question invokes the right at that moment; in either case the interviewing officer or officers cannot question the suspect until the rights are waived.

Generally, when defendants invoke their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and refuse to testify or submit to cross-examination at trial, the prosecutor cannot indirectly punish them for the exercise of a constitutional right by commenting on their silence and insinuating that it is an implicit admission of guilt. Since &quot;Miranda&quot; rights are simply a judicial gloss upon the Fifth Amendment which protects against coercive interrogations, the same rule also prevents prosecutors from commenting about the post-arrest silence of suspects who invoke their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights immediately after arrest. However, neither the Fifth Amendment nor &quot;Miranda&quot; extend to &quot;pre-arrest&quot; silence, which means that if a defendant takes the witness stand at trial (meaning he just waived his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent), the prosecutor can attack his credibility with his pre-arrest silence (based on his failure to immediately turn himself in and confess to the things he voluntarily testified about at trial).

Under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, Article 31 provides for the right against compelled self-incrimination. Interrogation subjects under Army jurisdiction must first be given Department of the Army Form 3881, which informs them of the charges and their rights, and the subjects must sign the form. The United States Navy and United States Marine Corps require that all arrested personnel be read the &quot;rights of the accused&quot; and must sign a form waiving those rights if they so desire; a verbal waiver is not sufficient.

It is unclear whether a &quot;Miranda&quot; warning—if spoken or in writing—could be appropriately given to disabled persons. For example, &quot;the right to remain silent&quot; means little to a deaf individual and the word &quot;constitutional&quot; may not be understood by people with only an elementary education. In one case, a deaf murder suspect was kept at a therapy station until he was able to understand the meaning of the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning and other judicial proceedings.

==The six rules==
The &quot;Miranda&quot; rule applies to the use of testimonial evidence in criminal proceedings that is the product of custodial police interrogation. The &quot;Miranda&quot; right to counsel and right to remain silent are derived from the self-incrimination clause of the Fifth Amendment. Therefore, for the &quot;Miranda&quot; to apply, six requirements must be fulfilled:

; 1. Evidence must have been gathered.
: If the suspect did not make a statement during the interrogation the fact that he was not advised of his &quot;Miranda&quot; rights is of no importance. Nor can the state offer evidence that the defendant asserted his rights—that he refused to talk.
; 2. The evidence must be testimonial.
: &quot;Miranda&quot; applies only to &quot;testimonial&quot; evidence as that term is defined under the Fifth Amendment. For purposes of the Fifth Amendment, testimonial statements mean communications that explicitly or implicitly relate a factual assertion [an assertion of fact or belief] or disclose information. The &quot;Miranda&quot; rule does not prohibit compelling a person to engage in non-assertive conduct that is incriminating or may produce incriminating evidence. Thus, requiring a suspect to participate in identification procedures such as giving handwriting or voice exemplars, fingerprints, DNA samples, hair samples, and dental impressions is not within the Miranda rule. Such physical or real evidence is non-testimonial and not protected by the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination clause. On the other hand, certain non-verbal conduct may be testimonial. For example, if the suspect nodded their head up and down in response to the question &quot;did you kill the victim&quot;, the conduct is testimonial; it is the same as saying &quot;yes I did&quot;, and Miranda would apply.
; 3. The evidence must have been obtained while the suspect was in custody.
: The evidence must have been obtained while the suspect was in custody. This limitation follows from the fact that &quot;Miranda&quot;&#x27;s purpose is to protect suspects from the compulsion inherent in the police-dominated atmosphere attendant to arrest. Custody means either that the suspect was under arrest or that his freedom of movement was restrained to an extent &quot;associated with a formal arrest&quot;. A formal arrest occurs when an officer, with the intent to make an arrest, takes a person into custody by the use of physical force or the person submits to the control of an officer who has indicated his intention to arrest the person. Telling a person he is &quot;under arrest&quot; is sufficient to satisfy this requirement even though the person may not be otherwise physically restrained. Absent a formal arrest, the issue is whether a reasonable person in the suspect&#x27;s position would have believed that he was under &quot;full custodial&quot; arrest. Applying this objective test, the Court has held Miranda does not apply to roadside questioning of a stopped motorist or to questioning of a person briefly detained on the street—a Terry stop. Even though neither the motorist nor the pedestrian is free to leave, this interference with the freedom of action is not considered actual arrest or its functional equivalent for purposes of the Fifth Amendment. The court has similarly held that a person who voluntarily comes to the police station for purposes of questioning is not in custody and thus not entitled to Miranda warnings particularly when the police advise the suspect that he is not under arrest and free to leave.
; 4. The evidence must have been the product of interrogation.
: The evidence must have been the product of interrogation. A defendant who seeks to challenge the admissibility of a statement under &quot;Miranda&quot; must show that the statement was &quot;prompted by police conduct that constituted &#x27;interrogation&#x27;&quot;. A volunteered statement by a person in custody does not implicate &quot;Miranda&quot;. In &quot;Rhode Island v. Innis&quot;, the Supreme Court defined interrogation as express questioning and &quot;any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect&quot;. Thus, a practice that the police &quot;should know is reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response from a suspect ... amounts to interrogation&quot;. For example, confronting the suspect with incriminating evidence may be sufficiently evocative to amount to interrogation because the police are implicitly communicating a question: &quot;How do you explain this?&quot; On the other hand, &quot;unforeseeable results of police words or actions&quot; do not constitute interrogation. Under this definition, routine statements made during the administration of sobriety tests would not implicate Miranda. For example, a police officer arrests a person for impaired driving and takes him to the police station to administer an intoxilyzer test. While at the station the officer also asks the defendant to perform certain psycho-physical tests such as the walk and turn, one leg stand or finger to nose test. It is standard practice to instruct the arrestee on how to perform the test and to demonstrate the test. (The police &quot;will not&quot; tell the person that they have the right to refuse to perform the test, and the refusal cannot be used in evidence against them, nor can they be in any way punished for refusing to perform it, same as the police will not tell someone that they may refuse to perform a roadside sobriety test without penalty). An incriminating statement made by an arrestee during the instruction, &quot;I couldn&#x27;t do that even if I were sober&quot;, would not be the product of interrogation. Similarly, incriminating statements made in response to requests for consent to search a vehicle or other property are not considered to be the product of interrogation.
; 5. The interrogation must have been conducted by state-agents.
: To establish a violation of the defendant&#x27;s Fifth Amendment rights, the defendant must show state action, so the interrogation must have been conducted by state-agents. If the interrogation was conducted by a person known by the suspect to be a law enforcement officer the state action requirement is unquestionably met. On the other hand, where a private citizen obtains a statement there is no state action regardless of the custodial circumstances surrounding the statement. A confession obtained through the interrogation by an undercover police officer or a paid informant does not violate &quot;Miranda&quot; because there is no coercion, no police dominated atmosphere if the suspect does not know that they are being questioned by the police. Private security guards and &quot;private&quot; police present special problems. They are generally not regarded as state-agents. However, an interrogation conducted by a police officer moonlighting as a security guard may well trigger &quot;Miranda&quot;&#x27;s safeguards since an officer is considered to be &quot;on duty&quot; at all times.
; 6. The evidence must be offered by the state during a criminal prosecution.
: The evidence is being offered during a criminal proceeding. Under the exclusionary rule, a &quot;Miranda&quot;-defective statement cannot be used by the prosecution as substantive evidence of guilt. However, the Fifth Amendment exclusionary rule applies only to criminal proceedings. In determining whether a particular proceeding is criminal, the courts look at the punitive nature of the sanctions that could be imposed. Labels are irrelevant. The question is whether the consequences of an outcome adverse to the defendant could be characterized as punishment. Clearly a criminal trial is a criminal proceeding since if convicted the defendant could be fined or imprisoned. However, the possibility of loss of liberty does not make the proceeding criminal in nature. For example, commitment proceedings are not criminal proceedings even though they can result in long confinement because the confinement is considered rehabilitative in nature and not punishment. Similarly, &quot;Miranda&quot; does not apply directly to probation revocation proceedings because the evidence is not being used as a basis for imposing additional punishment.

===Application of the prerequisites===
Assuming that the six requirements are present and &quot;Miranda&quot; applies, the statement will be subject to suppression unless the prosecution can demonstrate:
* that the suspect was advised of their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights, and
* that the suspect voluntarily waived those rights or that the circumstances fit an exception to the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule.
The defendant may also be able to challenge the admissibility of the statement under provisions of state constitutions and state criminal procedure statutes.

Immigrants who live in the United States illegally are also protected and should receive their &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings as well when being interrogated or placed under arrest. &quot;Aliens receive constitutional protections when they have come within the territory of the United States and [have] developed substantial connections with this country&quot;.

The Fifth Amendment right to counsel, a component of the &quot;Miranda&quot; Rule, is different from the Sixth Amendment right to counsel. In the context of the law of confessions the Sixth Amendment right to counsel is defined by the Massiah Doctrine.

==Waiver==
Simply advising the suspect of their rights does not fully comply with the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule. The suspect must also voluntarily waive their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights before questioning can proceed. An express waiver is not necessary. However, most law enforcement agencies use written waiver forms. These include questions designed to establish that the suspect expressly waived their rights. Typical waiver questions are
* &quot;Do you understand each of these rights?&quot; 
and
* &quot;Understanding each of these rights, do you now wish to speak to the police without a lawyer being present?&quot;

The waiver must be &quot;knowing and intelligent&quot; and it must be &quot;voluntary&quot;. These are separate requirements. To satisfy the first requirement the state must show that the suspect generally understood their rights (right to remain silent and right to counsel) and the consequences of forgoing those rights (that anything they said could be used against them in court). To show that the waiver was &quot;voluntary&quot; the state must show that the decision to waive the rights was not the product of police coercion. If police coercion is shown or evident, then the court proceeds to determine the voluntariness of the waiver under the totality of circumstances test focusing on the personal characteristics of the accused and the particulars of the coercive nature of the police conduct. The ultimate issue is whether the coercive police conduct was sufficient to overcome the will of a person under the totality of the circumstances. Courts traditionally focused on two categories of factors in making this determination: (1) the personal characteristics of the suspect and (2) the circumstances attendant to the waiver. However, the Supreme Court significantly altered the voluntariness standard in the case of &quot;Colorado v. Connelly&quot;. In &quot;Connelly&quot;, the Court held that &quot;Coercive police activity is a necessary predicate to a finding that a confession is not &#x27;voluntary&#x27; within the meaning of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.&quot; The Court has applied this same standard of voluntariness in determining whether a waiver of a suspect&#x27;s Fifth Amendment &quot;Miranda&quot; rights was voluntary. Thus, a waiver of &quot;Miranda&quot; rights is voluntary unless the defendant can show that their decision to waive their rights and speak to the police was the product of police misconduct and coercion that overcame the defendant&#x27;s free will. After &quot;Connelly&quot;, the traditional totality of circumstances analysis is not even reached unless the defendant can first show such coercion by the police. Under &quot;Connelly&quot;, a suspect&#x27;s decisions need not be the product of rational deliberations. In addition to showing that the waiver was &quot;voluntary&quot;, the prosecution must also show that the waiver was &quot;knowing&quot; and &quot;intelligent&quot;. Essentially this means the prosecution must prove that the suspect had a basic understanding of their rights and an appreciation of the consequences of forgoing those rights. The focus of the analysis is directly on the personal characteristics of the suspect. If the suspect was under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, or suffered from an emotional or mental condition that substantially impaired their capacity to make rational decisions, the courts may well decide that the suspect&#x27;s waiver was not knowing and intelligent.

A waiver must also be clear and unequivocal. An equivocal statement is ineffective as a waiver and the police may not proceed with the interrogation until the suspect&#x27;s intentions are made clear. The requirement that a waiver be unequivocal must be distinguished from situations in which the suspect made an equivocal assertion of their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights after the interrogation began. Any post-waiver assertion of a suspect&#x27;s &quot;Miranda&quot; rights must be clear and unequivocal. Any ambiguity or equivocation will be ineffective. If the suspect&#x27;s assertion is ambiguous, the interrogating officers are permitted to ask questions to clarify the suspect&#x27;s intentions, although they are not required to. In other words, if a suspect&#x27;s assertion is ambiguous, the police may either attempt to clarify the suspect&#x27;s intentions or they may simply ignore the ineffective assertion and continue with the interrogation. The timing of the assertion is significant. Requesting an attorney prior to arrest is of no consequence because &quot;Miranda&quot; applies only to custodial interrogations. The police may simply ignore the request and continue with the questioning; however, the suspect is also free to leave.

==Assertion==
If the defendant asserts his right to remain silent, all interrogation must immediately stop and the police may not resume the interrogation unless they have &quot;scrupulously honored&quot; the defendant&#x27;s assertion and subsequently obtained a valid waiver before resuming the interrogation. In determining whether the police &quot;scrupulously honored&quot; the assertion the courts apply a totality of the circumstances test. The most important factors are the length of time between termination of the original interrogation and the commencement of the second, and issuing a new set of &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings before resumption of interrogation.

The consequences of assertion of the right to counsel are stricter. The police must immediately cease all interrogation and the police cannot reinitiate interrogation unless counsel is present (merely consulting with counsel is insufficient) or the defendant of his own volition contacts the police. If the defendant does reinitiate contact, a valid waiver must be obtained before interrogation may resume.

In &quot;Berghuis v. Thompkins&quot; (2010), the Supreme Court declared in a 5–4 decision that criminal defendants who have been read their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights (and who have indicated they understand them and have not already waived them), must explicitly state during or before an interrogation begins that they wish to be silent and not speak to police for that protection against self-incrimination to apply. If they speak to police about the incident before invoking the &quot;Miranda&quot; right to remain silent, or afterwards at any point during the interrogation or detention, the words they speak may be used against them if they have not stated they do not want to speak to police. Those who oppose the ruling contend that the requirement that the defendant must speak to indicate his intention to remain silent further erodes the ability of the defendant to stay completely silent about the case. This opposition must be put in context with the second option offered by the majority opinion, which allowed that the defendant had the option of remaining silent, saying: &quot;Had he wanted to remain silent, he could have said nothing in response or unambiguously invoked his Miranda rights, ending the interrogation.&quot; Thus, having been &quot;&quot;Mirand&quot;ized&quot;, a suspect may avow explicitly the invocation of these rights, or, alternatively, simply remain silent. Absent the former, &quot;anything [said] can and will be used against [the defendant] in a court of law&quot;.

==Exceptions==
Assuming that the six factors are present, the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule would apply unless the prosecution can establish that the statement falls within an exception to the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule. The three exceptions are:

# the routine booking question exception
# the jail house informant exception
# the public safety exception.

Arguably only the last is a true exception—the first two can better be viewed as consistent with the &quot;Miranda&quot; factors. For example, questions that are routinely asked as part of the administrative process of arrest and custodial commitment are not considered &quot;interrogation&quot; under &quot;Miranda&quot; because they are not intended or likely to produce incriminating responses. Nonetheless, all three circumstances are treated as exceptions to the rule. The jail house informant exception applies to situations where the suspect does not know that he is speaking to a state-agent; either a police officer posing as a fellow inmate, a cellmate working as an agent for the state or a family member or friend who has agreed to cooperate with the state in obtaining incriminating information.

===Public safety exception===
The &quot;public safety&quot; exception is a limited and case-specific exception, allowing certain unadvised statements (given without &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings) to be admissible into evidence at trial when they were elicited in circumstances where there was great danger to public safety; thus, the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule provides some elasticity.

The public safety exception derives from &quot;New York v. Quarles&quot; (1984), a case in which the Supreme Court considered the admissibility of a statement elicited by a police officer who apprehended a rape suspect who was thought to be carrying a firearm. The arrest took place during the middle of the night in a supermarket that was open to the public but apparently deserted except for the clerks at the checkout counter. When the officer arrested the suspect, he found an empty shoulder holster, handcuffed the suspect, and asked him where the gun was. The suspect nodded in the direction of the gun (which was near some empty cartons) and said, &quot;The gun is over there.&quot; The Supreme Court found that such an unadvised statement was admissible in evidence because &quot;[i]n a kaleidoscopic situation such as the one confronting these officers, where spontaneity rather than adherence to a police manual is necessarily the order of the day, the application of the exception we recognize today should not be made to depend on &quot;post hoc&quot; findings at a suppression hearing concerning the subjective motivation of the police officer.&quot; Thus, the jurisprudential rule of &quot;Miranda&quot; must yield in &quot;a situation where concern for public safety must be paramount to adherence to the literal language of the prophylactic rules enunciated in &quot;Miranda&quot;.&quot;

Under this exception, to be admissible in the government&#x27;s direct case at a trial, the questioning must not be &quot;actually compelled by police conduct which overcame his will to resist,&quot; and must be focused and limited, involving a situation &quot;in which police officers ask questions reasonably prompted by a concern for the public safety.&quot;

In 2010, the Federal Bureau of Investigation encouraged agents to use a broad interpretation of public safety-related questions in terrorism cases, stating that the &quot;magnitude and complexity&quot; of terrorist threats justified &quot;a significantly more extensive public safety interrogation without &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings than would be permissible in an ordinary criminal case,&quot; continuing to list such examples as: &quot;questions about possible impending or coordinated terrorist attacks; the location, nature and threat posed by weapons that might pose an imminent danger to the public; and the identities, locations, and activities or intentions of accomplices who may be plotting additional imminent attacks.&quot; A Department of Justice spokesman described this position as not altering the constitutional right, but as clarifying existing flexibility in the rule.

Prosecutors initially argued that Tsarnaev&#x27;s pre-&quot;Miranda&quot; statements should be admissible under this exception. However, the exception was not considered by the court because the prosecutors later decided not to use any of that evidence in their case against Tsarnaev.

The New York Court of Appeals upheld the exception in a 2013 murder case, &quot;People v Doll&quot;, where a man with blood on his clothes was detained and questioned.

The window of opportunity for the exception is small. Once the suspect is formally charged, the Sixth Amendment right to counsel would attach and surreptitious interrogation would be prohibited. The public safety exception applies where circumstances present a clear and present danger to the public&#x27;s safety and the officers have reason to believe that the suspect has information that can end the emergency.

==Consequences of violation==
Assuming that a &quot;Miranda&quot; violation occurred—the six factors are present and no exception applies—the statement will be subject to suppression under the &quot;Miranda&quot; exclusionary rule. That is, if the defendant objects or files a motion to suppress, the exclusionary rule would prohibit the prosecution from offering the statement as proof of guilt. However, the statement can be used to impeach the defendant&#x27;s testimony. Further, the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine does not apply to Miranda violations. Therefore, the exclusionary rule exceptions, attenuation, independent source and inevitable discovery, do not come into play, and derivative evidence would be fully admissible. For example, suppose the police continue with a custodial interrogation after the suspect has asserted his right to silence. During his post-assertion statement the suspect tells the police the location of the gun he used in the murder. Using this information the police find the gun. Forensic testing identifies the gun as the murder weapon, and fingerprints lifted from the gun match the suspect&#x27;s. The contents of the Miranda-defective statement could not be offered by the prosecution as substantive evidence, but the gun itself and all related forensic evidence could be used as evidence at trial.

===Procedural requirements===
Although the rules vary by jurisdiction, generally a person who wishes to contest the admissibility of evidence on the grounds that it was obtained in violation of his constitutional rights must comply with the following procedural requirements:

# The defendant must file a motion.
# The motion must be in writing.
# The motion must be filed before trial.
# The motion must allege the factual and legal grounds on which the defendant seeks suppression of evidence.
# The motion must be supported by affidavits or other documentary evidence.
# The motion must be served on the state.

Failure to comply with a procedural requirement may result in summary dismissal of the motion. If the defendant meets the procedural requirement, the motion will normally be considered by the judge outside the presence of the jury. The judge hears evidence, determines the facts, makes conclusions of law and enters an order allowing or denying the motion.

==Related doctrines==

In addition to &quot;Miranda&quot;, confession may be challenged under the &quot;Massiah&quot; Doctrine, the voluntariness standard, provisions of federal and state rules of criminal procedure and state constitutional provisions.

===&quot;Massiah&quot; Doctrine===
The &quot;Massiah&quot; Doctrine (established by &quot;Massiah v. United States&quot;) prohibits the admission of a confession obtained in violation of the defendant&#x27;s Sixth Amendment right to counsel. Specifically, the &quot;Massiah&quot; rule applies to the use of testimonial evidence in criminal proceedings deliberately elicited by the police from a defendant after formal charges have been filed. The events that trigger the Sixth Amendment safeguards under &quot;Massiah&quot; are (1) the commencement of adversarial criminal proceedings and (2) deliberate elicitation of information from the defendant by governmental agents.

The Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant a right to counsel in all criminal prosecutions. The purposes of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel are to protect a defendant&#x27;s right to a fair trial and to assure that the adversarial system of justice functions properly by providing competent counsel as an advocate for the defendant in his contest against the &quot;prosecutorial forces&quot; of the state.

====Commencement of adversarial criminal proceedings====
The Sixth Amendment right &quot;attaches&quot; once the government has committed itself to the prosecution of the case by the initiation of adversarial judicial proceedings &quot;by way of formal charge, preliminary hearing, indictment, information or arraignment&quot;. Determining whether a particular event or proceeding constitutes the commencement of adversarial criminal proceedings requires both an examination of the rules of criminal procedure for the jurisdiction in which the crime is charged and the Supreme Court cases dealing with the issue of when formal prosecution begins. Once adversarial criminal proceedings commence the right to counsel applies to all critical stages of the prosecution and investigation. A critical stage is &quot;any stage of the prosecution, formal or informal, in court or out, where counsel&#x27;s absence might derogate from the accused&#x27;s right to a fair trial&quot;.

Government attempts to obtain incriminating statement related to the offense charged from the defendant by overt interrogation or surreptitious means is a critical stage and any information thus obtained is subject to suppression unless the government can show that an attorney was present or the defendant knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently waived his right to counsel.

====Deliberate elicitation of information from the defendant by governmental agents====
Deliberate elicitation is defined as the intentional creation of circumstances by government agents that are likely to produce incriminating information from the defendant. Clearly express questioning (interrogation) would qualify but the concept also extends to surreptitious attempts to acquire information from the defendant through the use of undercover agents or paid informants.

The definition of &quot;deliberate elicitation&quot; is not the same as the definition of &quot;interrogation&quot; under the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule. &quot;Miranda&quot; interrogation includes express questioning and any actions or statements that an officer would reasonably foresee as likely to cause an incriminating response. &quot;Massiah&quot; applies to express questioning and any attempt to deliberately and intentionally obtain incriminating information from the defendant regarding the crime charged. The difference is purposeful creation of an environment likely to produce incriminating information (&quot;Massiah&quot;) and action likely to induce an incriminating response even if that was not the officer&#x27;s purpose or intent (&quot;Miranda&quot;).

The Sixth Amendment right to counsel is offense-specific – the right only applies to post-commencement attempts to obtain information relating to the crime charged. The right does not extend to uncharged offenses if factually related to the charged crime.

Information obtained in violation of the defendant&#x27;s Sixth Amendment right to counsel is subject to suppression unless the government can establish that the defendant waived his right to counsel. The waiver must be knowing, intelligent and voluntary. A valid &quot;Miranda&quot; waiver operates as a waiver of Sixth Amendment right.

====&quot;Miranda&quot; and &quot;Massiah&quot; compared====
# Constitutional basis:
#* &quot;Miranda&quot; is based on the Sixth Amendment right to counsel and the Fifth Amendment right to remain silent.
#* &quot;Massiah&quot; is based on the Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
# Attachment:
#* &quot;Miranda&quot;: Custody + interrogation (charging status irrelevant).
#* &quot;Massiah&quot;: Formally charged + deliberate elicitation (custodial status irrelevant).
# Scope:
#*a. &quot;Miranda&quot; applies to custodial interrogation by known governmental agents. Surreptitious acquisition of incriminating information allowed.
#*a. &quot;Massiah&quot; applies to overt and surreptitious interrogation.
#*b. &quot;Miranda&quot; is not offense specific.
#*b. &quot;Massiah&quot; is offense specific.
#*c. &quot;Miranda&quot;: interrogation + &quot;functional equivalent&quot;
#*c. &quot;Massiah&quot;: interrogation + &quot;deliberate elicitation&quot;
# Waiver: Both &quot;Miranda&quot; and &quot;Massiah&quot; rights may be waived.
# Assertion: In each case, the assertion must be clear and unequivocal. The effects of assertion are not identical. For purposes of &quot;Miranda&quot;, the police must immediately cease the interrogation and cannot resume interrogating the defendant about any offense charged or uncharged unless counsel is present or the defendant initiates contact for purposes of resuming interrogation and valid waiver obtained. Because &quot;Massiah&quot; is offense-specific, an assertion of the sixth amendment right to counsel requires the police to cease interrogating the defendant about any charged offense. Apparently the police could continue questioning the defendant about uncharged crimes assuming that the defendant was not in custody. The defendant&#x27;s remedy would be to leave or to refuse to answer questions.
# Remedy for violation: The remedy for violation of Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights to counsel is identical: the statements and testimonial information are subject to suppression. Derivative evidence is not subject to suppression under &quot;Miranda &quot;– fruit of poisonous tree doctrine may apply to &quot;Massiah&quot; violation. Both &quot;Miranda&quot; and &quot;Massiah&quot; defective statements can be used for impeachment purposes.
# Exceptions: The primary exceptions to &quot;Miranda&quot; are (1) the routine booking questions exception (2) the jail house informant exception and (3) the public safety exception. In &quot;Moulton v. Maine,&quot; the Supreme Court refused to recognize a public safety exception to the &quot;Massiah&quot; rule. &quot;Massiah&quot; allows for the use of jail house informants provided the informants serve merely as &quot;passive listeners&quot;.

===The voluntariness standard===
The voluntariness standard applies to all police interrogations regardless of the custodial status of the suspect and regardless of whether the suspect has been formally charged. The remedy for a violation of the standard is complete suppression of the statement and any evidence derived from the statement. The statement cannot be used as either substantive evidence of guilt or to impeach the defendant&#x27;s testimony. The reason for the strictness is the common law&#x27;s aversion to the use of coerced confessions because of their inherent unreliability. Further the rights to be free from coerced confession cannot be waived nor is it necessary that the victim of coercive police conduct assert his right. In considering the voluntariness standard one must consider the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Colorado v. Connelly&quot;. Although federal courts&#x27; application of the &quot;Connelly&quot; rule has been inconsistent and state courts have often failed to appreciate the consequences of the case, &quot;Connelly&quot; clearly marked a significant change in the application of the voluntariness standard. Before &quot;Connelly,&quot; the test was whether the confession was voluntary considering the totality of the circumstances. &quot;Voluntary&quot; carried its everyday meaning: the confession had to be a product of the exercise of the defendant&#x27;s free will rather than police coercion. After &quot;Connelly,&quot; the totality of circumstances test is not even triggered unless the defendant can show coercive police conduct. Questions of free will and rational decision making are irrelevant to a due process claim unless police misconduct existed and a causal connection can be shown between the misconduct and the confession.

===State constitutional challenges===
Every state constitution has articles and provision guaranteeing individual rights. In most cases the subject matter is similar to the federal bill of rights. Most state courts interpretation of their constitution is consistent with the interpretation federal court&#x27;s of analogous provisions of the federal constitution. With regard to &quot;Miranda&quot; issues, state courts have exhibited significant resistance to incorporating into their state jurisprudence some of the limitations on the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule that have been created by the federal courts. As a consequence a defendant may be able to circumvent the federal limitation on the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule and successfully challenge the admissibility under state constitutional provisions. Practically every aspect of the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule has drawn state court criticism. However the primary point of contention involve the following limitations on the scope of the &quot;Miranda&quot; rule: (1) the &quot;Harris&quot; exception (2) the &quot;Burbine&quot; rule and (3) the &quot;Fare&quot; rule.

===State statutory challenges===
In addition to constitutionally based challenge, states permit a defendant to challenge the admissibility of a confession on the grounds that the confession was obtained in violation of a defendant&#x27;s statutory rights. For example, North Carolina Criminal Procedure Act permits a defendant to move to suppress evidence obtained as a result of a &quot;substantial&quot; violation of the provision of the North Carolina Rules of Criminal Procedure.

==Confusion regarding use==
Due to the prevalence of American television programs and motion pictures in which the police characters frequently read suspects their rights, it has become an expected element of arrest procedure—in the 2000 &quot;Dickerson&quot; decision, Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote that &quot;Miranda&quot; warnings had &quot;become embedded in routine police practice to the point where the warnings have become part of our national culture&quot;.

While arrests and interrogations can legally occur without the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning being given, this procedure would generally make the arrestee&#x27;s pre-&quot;Miranda&quot; statements inadmissible at trial. (However, pursuant to the plurality opinion in &quot;United States v. Patane&quot;, physical evidence obtained as a result of pre-&quot;Miranda&quot; statements may still be admitted. There was no majority opinion of the Court in that case.)

In some jurisdictions, a &quot;detention&quot; differs at law from an &quot;arrest&quot;, and police are not required to give the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning until the person is arrested for a crime. In those situations, a person&#x27;s statements made to police are generally admissible even though the person was not advised of their rights. Similarly, statements made while an arrest is in progress before the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning was given or completed are also generally admissible.

Because &quot;Miranda&quot; applies only to custodial interrogations, it does not protect detainees from standard booking questions such as name and address. Because it is a protective measure intended to safeguard the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, it does not prevent the police from taking blood without a warrant from persons suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol. (Such evidence may be self-incriminatory, but are not considered statements of self-incrimination.)

If an inmate is in jail and invoked &quot;Miranda&quot; on one case, it is unclear whether this extends to any other cases that they may be charged with while in custody. For example, a subject is arrested, charged with cattle raiding, and is held in county jail awaiting trial. He invokes his &quot;Miranda&quot; rights on the cattle case. While in custody, he is involved in a fight where a staff member loses his ability to walk. He speaks to the custodial staff regarding the fight without first invoking &quot;Miranda&quot;. It is unclear if this statement is admissible because of the original &quot;Miranda&quot; statement.

Many police departments give special training to interrogators with regard to the &quot;Miranda&quot; warning; specifically, how to influence a suspect&#x27;s decision to waive the right. For instance, the officer may be required to specifically ask if the rights are understood and if the suspect wishes to talk. The officer is allowed, before asking the suspect a question, to speak at length about evidence collected, witness statements, etc. The officer will &quot;then&quot; ask if the suspect wishes to talk, and the suspect is then more likely to talk in an attempt to refute the evidence presented. Another tactic commonly taught is never to ask a question; the officer may simply sit the suspect down in an interrogation room, sit across from him and do paperwork, and wait for the suspect to begin talking. These tactics are intended to mitigate the restrictions placed on law officers against compelling a suspect to give evidence, and have stood up in court as valid lawful tactics. Nevertheless, such tactics are condemned by legal rights groups as deceptive.

===Exemption for interrogations conducted by undercover agents===
In &quot;Illinois v. Perkins&quot;, 496 U.S. 292 (1990), the United States Supreme Court held that undercover officers are not required to give suspects a &quot;Miranda&quot; warning prior to asking questions that may elicit incriminating responses. In this case, an undercover agent posed as an inmate and carried on a 35-minute conversation with another inmate that he suspected of committing a murder that was being investigated. During this conversation, the suspect implicated himself in the murder that the undercover agent was investigating.

The Supreme Court came to this conclusion despite the government&#x27;s admission that a custodial interrogation had been conducted by a government agent.

===Report of warnings being given to detainees in Afghanistan===
Beginning in 2009, some detainees captured in Afghanistan have been read their &quot;Miranda&quot; rights by the FBI, according to Congressman Michael Rogers of Michigan, who claims to have witnessed this himself. According to the Justice Department, &quot;There has been no policy change nor blanket instruction for FBI agents to &quot;Mirandize&quot; detainees overseas. While there have been specific cases in which FBI agents have &quot;Mirandized&quot; suspects overseas at both Bagram and in other situations, in order to preserve the quality of evidence obtained, there has been no overall policy change with respect to detainees.&quot;

==Equivalent rights in other countries==

Whether arising from their constitutions, common law, or statute, many nations recognize a defendant&#x27;s right to silence.

==See also==
* Arrest
* Civil rights
* Criminal justice
* Garrity warning
* Kalkines warning
* Right to silence
* Uniform Code of Military Justice
* United States constitutional criminal procedure

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Coldrey, J. (1990). &quot;The Right to Silence Reassessed&quot;. 74 &quot;Victorian Bar News&quot; 25.
* Coldrey, J. (1991). &quot;The Right to Silence: Should It Be Curtailed or Abolished?&quot;, 20 &quot;Anglo-American Law Review&quot; 51. .
* &quot;Rehnquist&#x27;s legacy&quot; &quot;The Economist&quot;. July 2–8, 2005. p. 28.
* Stevenson, N. (1982). &quot;Criminal Cases in the NSW District Court: A Pilot Study&quot;. In J. Basten, M. Richardson, C. Ronalds and G. Zdenkowski (eds.), &quot;The Criminal Injustice System&quot;. Sydney: Australian Legal Workers Group (NSW) and Legal Service Bulletin.
* &quot;The Miranda Warning&quot;. The U.S. Constitution Online. N.p., n.d. Web. November 4, 2012.

==External links==
* Don&#x27;t Talk to the Police—Lecture by Professor James Duane of the Regent University School of Law and Officer George Bruch from the Virginia Beach police department.
* Miranda Rights and Illegal Immigrants on Real Law Radio—Host Bob DiCello discusses the Miranda rights of illegal immigrants in Arizona with author, Gary L. Stuart on the legal news talk radio program, &quot;Real Law Radio&quot; (Saturday, May 8, 2010).
* Shahzad and Miranda Rights Prof. Orin Kerr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312199" start="47" end="610" title="Miranda warning" label="is a type of notification customarily given by [[Law enforcement in the United States|police]] to criminal suspects in police custody (or in a [[custodial interrogation]]) advising them of their [[right to silence]] and, in effect, protection from [[Self-incrimination clause|self-incrimination]]; that is, their right to refuse to answer questions or provide information to law enforcement or other officials. Named for the [[U.S. Supreme Court]]&amp;#x27;s 1966 decision &amp;quot;[[Miranda v. Arizona]]&amp;quot;, these rights are often referred to as Miranda&amp;quot; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q852633" start="664" end="697" title="Admissible evidence" label="admissibility of their statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047396" start="798" end="810" title="Yale Kamisar" label="Yale Kamisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="1602" end="1617" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q852633" start="1729" end="1738" title="admissible evidence" label="admission"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="1857" end="1889" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment right to counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002253" start="1903" end="1916" title="Incorporation of the Bill of Rights" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642249" start="2401" end="2419" title="Miranda v. Arizona" label="Miranda v. Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034475" start="2507" end="2529" title="Ernesto Miranda" label="Ernesto Arturo Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="3684" end="3700" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="3715" end="3719" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892143" start="3813" end="3832" title="Berkemer v. McCarty" label="Berkemer v. McCarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q130342509" start="4347" end="4368" title="California v. Prysock" label="California v. Prysock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891665" start="4389" end="4410" title="Berghuis v. Thompkins" label="Berghuis v. Thompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612729" start="4695" end="4708" title="Vega v. Tekoh" label="Vega v. Tekoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891665" start="6251" end="6272" title="Berghuis v. Thompkins" label="Berghuis v. Thompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="10554" end="10564" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="10566" end="10572" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="10574" end="10582" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="10588" end="10594" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="10987" end="10992" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="10994" end="11004" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="11006" end="11013" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="11745" end="11760" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424958" start="12776" end="12808" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice" label="Uniform Code of Military Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="13413" end="13429" title="disability" label="disabled persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="13501" end="13505" title="deaf" label="deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647698" start="15090" end="15101" title="handwriting exemplar" label="handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209345" start="16865" end="16875" title="Terry stop" label="Terry stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320986" start="17789" end="17810" title="Rhode Island v. Innis" label="Rhode Island v. Innis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25059627" start="19426" end="19448" title="Field sobriety testing" label="roadside sobriety test"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="22949" end="22955" title="Alien (law)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784634" start="23359" end="23366" title="Massiah v. United States" label="Massiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245643" start="24652" end="24677" title="totality of the circumstances" label="totality of circumstances"/>
<link wikidata="Q4228479" start="25236" end="25256" title="Colorado v. Connelly" label="Colorado v. Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11632323" start="25846" end="25863" title="police misconduct" label="police misconduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891665" start="29242" end="29263" title="Berghuis v. Thompkins" label="Berghuis v. Thompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931224" start="32336" end="32355" title="New York v. Quarles" label="New York v. Quarles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33338" end="33346" title=":wikt:post hoc" label="post hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250314" start="33633" end="33651" title="Prophylactic rule" label="prophylactic rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="34070" end="34101" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="34797" end="34818" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835959" start="34982" end="34990" title="Dzhokhar Tsarnaev" label="Tsarnaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="35238" end="35263" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192345" start="36307" end="36334" title="fruit of the poisonous tree" label="fruit of the poisonous tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784634" start="38485" end="38509" title="Massiah v. United States" label="Massiah v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="49108" end="49125" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893428" start="49571" end="49594" title="United States v. Patane" label="United States v. Patane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833741" start="50619" end="50657" title="Drunk driving (United States)" label="driving under the influence of alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661898" start="50980" end="50994" title="cattle raiding" label="cattle raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q19064642" start="52541" end="52560" title="Illinois v. Perkins" label="Illinois v. Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="52593" end="52620" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="53349" end="53360" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="53416" end="53419" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q970515" start="53446" end="53460" title="Mike Rogers (Michigan politician)" label="Michael Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="53534" end="53552" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q196995" start="54098" end="54114" title="right to silence" label="right to silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403016" start="54132" end="54138" title="Arrest" label="Arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="54141" end="54153" title="Civil rights" label="Civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q117488" start="54156" end="54172" title="Criminal justice" label="Criminal justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524072" start="54175" end="54190" title="Garrity warning" label="Garrity warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353415" start="54193" end="54209" title="Kalkines warning" label="Kalkines warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q196995" start="54212" end="54228" title="Right to silence" label="Right to silence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54231" end="54263" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice#Pre-trial procedure" label="Uniform Code of Military Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892396" start="54266" end="54313" title="United States constitutional criminal procedure" label="United States constitutional criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="54664" end="54677" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q99298382" start="55174" end="55205" title="Regent University School of Law" label="Regent University School of Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18973" wikidata="Q6908717" url="?curid=18973" title="Moot">
<text>Moot may refer to:

* Mootness, in American law: a point where further proceedings have lost practical significance; whereas in British law: the issue remains debatable
* Moot court, an activity in many law schools where participants take part in simulated court proceedings
* moot, the pseudonym for Christopher Poole (born c. 1988), founder of the anonymous imageboard 4chan.org
* The Moot, a discussion group of Christian intellectuals active in Britain from 1938 to 1947

==See also==
* Meeting (Old English (Anglo-Saxon): &quot;Moot&quot;)
** Folkmoot
** Jamtamót, the old assembly of Jämtland
** Witenagemot, the High Council of Anglo-Saxon England
** Moot hall, a meeting or assembly building, traditionally to decide local issues
** Moot hill, a hill or mound historically used as an assembly or meeting place
** World Scout Moot, a gathering of older Scouts, mainly Rover Scouts, ages 18–26 from all over the world
** Entmoot, a gathering of Ents in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;
** MoodleMoot, a gathering or conference relating to the Moodle Learning Management System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6908717" start="0" end="4" title="Moot" label="Moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="22" end="30" title="Mootness" label="Mootness"/>
<link wikidata="Q382310" start="171" end="181" title="Moot court" label="Moot court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135308" start="301" end="318" title="Christopher Poole" label="Christopher Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752219" start="383" end="391" title="The Moot" label="The Moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761147" start="491" end="498" title="Meeting" label="Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="548" end="556" title="Folkmoot" label="Folkmoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298734" start="560" end="568" title="Jamtamót" label="Jamtamót"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="602" end="613" title="Witenagemot" label="Witenagemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908719" start="658" end="667" title="Moot hall" label="Moot hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260913" start="741" end="750" title="Moot hill" label="Moot hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q948651" start="821" end="837" title="World Scout Moot" label="World Scout Moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667893" start="927" end="934" title="Entmoot" label="Entmoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q190434" start="996" end="1006" title="MoodleMoot" label="MoodleMoot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18974" wikidata="Q744718" url="?curid=18974" title="Mississippian (geology)">
<text>The Mississippian ( ), also known as Lower Carboniferous or Early Carboniferous, is a subperiod in the geologic timescale or a subsystem of the geologic record. It is the earlier of two subperiods of the Carboniferous period lasting from roughly 358.9 to 323.2 million years ago. As with most other geochronologic units, the rock beds that define the Mississippian are well identified, but the exact start and end dates are uncertain by a few million years. The Mississippian is so named because rocks with this age are exposed in the Mississippi Valley.

The Mississippian was a period of marine transgression in the Northern Hemisphere: the sea level was so high that only the Fennoscandian Shield and the Laurentian Shield were dry land. The cratons were surrounded by extensive delta systems and lagoons, and carbonate sedimentation on the surrounding continental platforms, covered by shallow seas.

In North America, where the interval consists primarily of marine limestones, it is treated as a geologic period between the Devonian and the Pennsylvanian. During the Mississippian an important phase of orogeny occurred in the Appalachian Mountains. The USGS geologic time scale shows its relation to other periods.

In Europe, the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian are grouped together as the Carboniferous system, and traditionally referred to as the &quot;Upper Carboniferous&quot; and &quot;Lower Carboniferous&quot; instead.

==Subdivisions==
In the international geologic timescale, the Mississippian is subdivided into three stages:
*Serpukhovian ( to mya)
*Visean ( to mya)
*Tournaisian ( to mya)

The lower two come from European stratigraphy, the top from Russian stratigraphy. Besides Europe and Russia, there are many local subdivisions that are used as alternatives for the international timescale. In the North American system, the Mississippian is subdivided into four stages:
*Chesterian (top of the Visean plus the Serpukhovian)
*Meramecian (middle Visean)
*Osagean (top of the Tournaisian and bottom of the Visean)
*Kinderhookian (the lower two-thirds of the Tournaisian)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="4" end="17" title="Mississippian (geology)" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="37" end="56" title="Mississippian (geology)" label="Lower Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="60" end="79" title="Mississippian (geology)" label="Early Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="86" end="95" title="period (geology)" label="subperiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="103" end="121" title="geologic timescale" label="geologic timescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q403523" start="127" end="136" title="system (stratigraphy)" label="subsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887426" start="144" end="159" title="geologic record" label="geologic record"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="204" end="217" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="218" end="224" title="period (geology)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q213891" start="299" end="313" title="geochronology" label="geochronologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="325" end="333" title="stratum" label="rock bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="535" end="553" title="Mississippi Valley" label="Mississippi Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q301920" start="590" end="610" title="marine transgression" label="marine transgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q580133" start="679" end="699" title="Baltic Shield" label="Fennoscandian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="708" end="725" title="Canadian Shield" label="Laurentian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="745" end="751" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="800" end="806" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="908" end="921" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="971" end="980" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="1030" end="1038" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="1047" end="1060" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="1109" end="1116" title="orogeny" label="orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="1133" end="1154" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1226" end="1232" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="1298" end="1311" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q403523" start="1312" end="1318" title="system (stratigraphy)" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="1363" end="1382" title="Upper Carboniferous" label="Upper Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068088" start="1545" end="1557" title="Serpukhovian" label="Serpukhovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q647290" start="1569" end="1575" title="Visean" label="Visean"/>
<link wikidata="Q940381" start="1587" end="1598" title="Tournaisian" label="Tournaisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911434" start="1951" end="1961" title="Meramecian" label="Meramecian"/>
<link wikidata="Q940381" start="2038" end="2051" title="Kinderhookian" label="Kinderhookian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18976" wikidata="Q16424695" url="?curid=18976" title="Meiosis">
<text>Meiosis (; (since it is a reductional division)) is a special type of cell division of germ cells in sexually-reproducing organisms that produces the gametes, the sperm or egg cells. It involves two rounds of division that ultimately result in four cells, each with only one copy of each chromosome (haploid). Additionally, prior to the division, genetic material from the paternal and maternal copies of each chromosome is crossed over, creating new combinations of code on each chromosome. Later on, during fertilisation, the haploid cells produced by meiosis from a male and a female will fuse to create a zygote, a cell with two copies of each chromosome again.

Errors in meiosis resulting in aneuploidy (an abnormal number of chromosomes) are the leading known cause of miscarriage and the most frequent genetic cause of developmental disabilities.

In meiosis, DNA replication is followed by two rounds of cell division to produce four daughter cells, each with half the number of chromosomes as the original parent cell. The two meiotic divisions are known as meiosis I and meiosis II. Before meiosis begins, during S phase of the cell cycle, the DNA of each chromosome is replicated so that it consists of two identical sister chromatids, which remain held together through sister chromatid cohesion. This S-phase can be referred to as &quot;premeiotic S-phase&quot; or &quot;meiotic S-phase&quot;. Immediately following DNA replication, meiotic cells enter a prolonged G2-like stage known as meiotic prophase. During this time, homologous chromosomes pair with each other and undergo genetic recombination, a programmed process in which DNA may be cut and then repaired, which allows them to exchange some of their genetic information. A subset of recombination events results in crossovers, which create physical links known as chiasmata (singular: chiasma, for the Greek letter Chi, Χ) between the homologous chromosomes. In most organisms, these links can help direct each pair of homologous chromosomes to segregate away from each other during meiosis I, resulting in two haploid cells that have half the number of chromosomes as the parent cell.

During meiosis II, the cohesion between sister chromatids is released and they segregate from one another, as during mitosis. In some cases, all four of the meiotic products form gametes such as sperm, spores or pollen. In female animals, three of the four meiotic products are typically eliminated by extrusion into polar bodies, and only one cell develops to produce an ovum. Because the number of chromosomes is halved during meiosis, gametes can fuse (i.e. fertilization) to form a diploid zygote that contains two copies of each chromosome, one from each parent. Thus, alternating cycles of meiosis and fertilization enable sexual reproduction, with successive generations maintaining the same number of chromosomes. For example, diploid human
cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes including 1 pair of sex chromosomes (46 total), half of maternal origin and half of paternal origin. Meiosis produces haploid gametes (ova or sperm) that contain one set of 23 chromosomes. When two gametes (an egg and a sperm) fuse, the resulting zygote is once again diploid, with the mother and father each contributing 23 chromosomes. This same pattern, but not the same number of chromosomes, occurs in all organisms that utilize meiosis.

Meiosis occurs in all sexually-reproducing single-celled and multicellular organisms (which are all eukaryotes), including animals, plants and fungi. It is an essential process for oogenesis and spermatogenesis.

==Overview==
Although the process of meiosis is related to the more general cell division process of mitosis, it differs in two important respects:
Meiosis begins with a diploid cell, which contains two copies of each chromosome, termed homologs. First, the cell undergoes DNA replication, so each homolog now consists of two identical sister chromatids. Then each set of homologs pair with each other and exchange genetic information by homologous recombination often leading to physical connections (crossovers) between the homologs. In the first meiotic division, the homologs are segregated to separate daughter cells by the spindle apparatus. The cells then proceed to a second division without an intervening round of DNA replication. The sister chromatids are segregated to separate daughter cells to produce a total of four haploid cells. Female animals employ a slight variation on this pattern and produce one large ovum and three small polar bodies. Because of recombination, an individual chromatid can consist of a new combination of maternal and paternal genetic information, resulting in offspring that are genetically distinct from either parent. Furthermore, an individual gamete can include an assortment of maternal, paternal, and recombinant chromatids. This genetic diversity resulting from sexual reproduction contributes to the variation in traits upon which natural selection can act.

Meiosis uses many of the same mechanisms as mitosis, the type of cell division used by eukaryotes to divide one cell into two identical daughter cells. In some plants, fungi, and protists meiosis results in the formation of spores: haploid cells that can divide vegetatively without undergoing fertilization. Some eukaryotes, like bdelloid rotifers, do not have the ability to carry out meiosis and have acquired the ability to reproduce by parthenogenesis.

Meiosis does not occur in archaea or bacteria, which generally reproduce asexually via binary fission. However, a &quot;sexual&quot; process known as horizontal gene transfer involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium or archaeon to another and recombination of these DNA molecules of different parental origin.

==History==
Meiosis was discovered and described for the first time in sea urchin eggs in 1876 by the German biologist Oscar Hertwig. It was described again in 1883, at the level of chromosomes, by the Belgian zoologist Edouard Van Beneden, in &quot;Ascaris&quot; roundworm eggs. The significance of meiosis for reproduction and inheritance, however, was described only in 1890 by German biologist August Weismann, who noted that two cell divisions were necessary to transform one diploid cell into four haploid cells if the number of chromosomes had to be maintained. In 1911, the American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan detected crossovers in meiosis in the fruit fly &quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot;, which helped to establish that genetic traits are transmitted on chromosomes.

The term &quot;meiosis&quot; is derived from the Greek word , meaning &#x27;lessening&#x27;. It was introduced to biology by J.B. Farmer and J.E.S. Moore in 1905, using the idiosyncratic rendering &quot;maiosis&quot;:
&quot;We propose to apply the terms Maiosis or Maiotic phase to cover the whole series of nuclear changes included in the two divisions that were designated as Heterotype and Homotype by Flemming&quot;.

The spelling was changed to &quot;meiosis&quot; by Koernicke (1905) and by Pantel and De Sinety (1906) to follow the usual conventions for transliterating Greek.

==Phases==

Meiosis is divided into meiosis I and meiosis II which are further divided into Karyokinesis I, Cytokinesis I, Karyokinesis II, and Cytokinesis II, respectively. The preparatory steps that lead up to meiosis are identical in pattern and name to interphase of the mitotic cell cycle. Interphase is divided into three phases:
* Growth 1 (G1) phase: In this very active phase, the cell synthesizes its vast array of proteins, including the enzymes and structural proteins it will need for growth. In G1, each of the chromosomes consists of a single linear molecule of DNA.
* Synthesis (S) phase: The genetic material is replicated; each of the cell&#x27;s chromosomes duplicates to become two identical sister chromatids attached at a centromere. This replication does not change the ploidy of the cell since the centromere number remains the same. The identical sister chromatids have not yet condensed into the densely packaged chromosomes visible with the light microscope. This will take place during prophase I in meiosis.
* Growth 2 (G2) phase: G2 phase as seen before mitosis is not present in meiosis. Meiotic prophase corresponds most closely to the G2 phase of the mitotic cell cycle.

Interphase is followed by meiosis I and then meiosis II. Meiosis I separates replicated homologous chromosomes, each still made up of two sister chromatids, into two daughter cells, thus reducing the chromosome number by half. During meiosis II, sister chromatids decouple and the resultant daughter chromosomes are segregated into four daughter cells. For diploid organisms, the daughter cells resulting from meiosis are haploid and contain only one copy of each chromosome. In some species, cells enter a resting phase known as interkinesis between meiosis I and meiosis II.

Meiosis I and II are each divided into prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase stages, similar in purpose to their analogous subphases in the mitotic cell cycle. Therefore, meiosis includes the stages of meiosis I (prophase I, metaphase I, anaphase I, telophase I) and meiosis II (prophase II, metaphase II, anaphase II, telophase II).

During meiosis, specific genes are more highly transcribed. In addition to strong meiotic stage-specific expression of mRNA, there are also pervasive translational controls (e.g. selective usage of preformed mRNA), regulating the ultimate meiotic stage-specific protein expression of genes during meiosis. Thus, both transcriptional and translational controls determine the broad restructuring of meiotic cells needed to carry out meiosis.

===Meiosis I===
Meiosis I segregates homologous chromosomes, which are joined as tetrads (2n, 4c), producing two haploid cells (n chromosomes, 23 in humans) which each contain chromatid pairs (1n, 2c). Because the ploidy is reduced from diploid to haploid, meiosis I is referred to as a &quot;reductional division&quot;. Meiosis II is an &quot;equational division&quot; analogous to mitosis, in which the sister chromatids are segregated, creating four haploid daughter cells (1n, 1c).

====Prophase I====
Prophase I is by far the longest phase of meiosis (lasting 13 out of 14 days in mice). During prophase I, homologous maternal and paternal chromosomes pair, synapse, and exchange genetic information (by homologous recombination), forming at least one crossover per chromosome. These crossovers become visible as chiasmata (plural; singular chiasma). This process facilitates stable pairing between homologous chromosomes and hence enables accurate segregation of the chromosomes at the first meiotic division. The paired and replicated chromosomes are called bivalents (two chromosomes) or tetrads (four chromatids), with one chromosome coming from each parent. Prophase I is divided into a series of substages which are named according to the appearance of chromosomes.

===== Leptotene =====
The first stage of prophase I is the &quot;leptotene&quot; stage, also known as &quot;leptonema&quot;, from Greek words meaning &quot;thin threads&quot;. In this stage of prophase I, individual chromosomes—each consisting of two replicated sister chromatids—become &quot;individualized&quot; to form visible strands within the nucleus. The chromosomes each form a linear array of loops mediated by cohesin, and the lateral elements of the synaptonemal complex assemble forming an &quot;axial element&quot; from which the loops emanate. Recombination is initiated in this stage by the enzyme SPO11 which creates programmed double strand breaks (around 300 per meiosis in mice). This process generates single stranded DNA filaments coated by RAD51 and DMC1 which invade the homologous chromosomes, forming inter-axis bridges, and resulting in the pairing/co-alignment of homologues (to a distance of ~400 nm in mice).

=====Zygotene=====
Leptotene is followed by the &quot;zygotene&quot; stage, also known as &quot;zygonema&quot;, from Greek words meaning &quot;paired threads&quot;, which in some organisms is also called the bouquet stage because of the way the telomeres cluster at one end of the nucleus. In this stage the homologous chromosomes become much more closely (~100 nm) and stably paired (a process called synapsis) mediated by the installation of the transverse and central elements of the synaptonemal complex. Synapsis is thought to occur in a zipper-like fashion starting from a recombination nodule. The paired chromosomes are called bivalent or tetrad chromosomes.

=====Pachytene=====

The &quot;pachytene&quot; stage ( ), also known as &quot;pachynema&quot;, from Greek words meaning &quot;thick threads&quot;. is the stage at which all autosomal chromosomes have synapsed. In this stage homologous recombination, including chromosomal crossover (crossing over), is completed through the repair of the double strand breaks formed in leptotene. Most breaks are repaired without forming crossovers resulting in gene conversion. However, a subset of breaks (at least one per chromosome) form crossovers between non-sister (homologous) chromosomes resulting in the exchange of genetic information. The exchange of information between the homologous chromatids results in a recombination of information; each chromosome has the complete set of information it had before, and there are no gaps formed as a result of the process. Because the chromosomes cannot be distinguished in the synaptonemal complex, the actual act of crossing over is not perceivable through an ordinary light microscope, and chiasmata are not visible until the next stage.

=====Diplotene=====
During the &quot;diplotene&quot; stage, also known as &quot;diplonema&quot;, from Greek words meaning &quot;two threads&quot;, the synaptonemal complex disassembles and homologous chromosomes separate from one another a little. However, the homologous chromosomes of each bivalent remain tightly bound at chiasmata, the regions where crossing-over occurred. The chiasmata remain on the chromosomes until they are severed at the transition to anaphase I to allow homologous chromosomes to move to opposite poles of the cell.

In human fetal oogenesis, all developing oocytes develop to this stage and are arrested in prophase I before birth. This suspended state is referred to as the &quot;dictyotene stage&quot; or dictyate. It lasts until meiosis is resumed to prepare the oocyte for ovulation, which happens at puberty or even later.

=====Diakinesis=====
Chromosomes condense further during the &quot;diakinesis&quot; stage, from Greek words meaning &quot;moving through&quot;. This is the first point in meiosis where the four parts of the tetrads are actually visible. Sites of crossing over entangle together, effectively overlapping, making chiasmata clearly visible. Other than this observation, the rest of the stage closely resembles prometaphase of mitosis; the nucleoli disappear, the nuclear membrane disintegrates into vesicles, and the meiotic spindle begins to form.

=====Meiotic spindle formation=====
Unlike mitotic cells, human and mouse oocytes do not have centrosomes to produce the meiotic spindle. In mice, approximately 80 MicroTubule Organizing Centers (MTOCs) form a sphere in the ooplasm and begin to nucleate microtubules that reach out towards chromosomes, attaching to the chromosomes at the kinetochore. Over time, the MTOCs merge until two poles have formed, generating a barrel shaped spindle. In human oocytes spindle microtubule nucleation begins on the chromosomes, forming an aster that eventually expands to surround the chromosomes. Chromosomes then slide along the microtubules towards the equator of the spindle, at which point the chromosome kinetochores form end-on attachments to microtubules.

====Metaphase I====
Homologous pairs move together along the metaphase plate: As &quot;kinetochore microtubules&quot; from both spindle poles attach to their respective kinetochores, the paired homologous chromosomes align along an equatorial plane that bisects the spindle, due to continuous counterbalancing forces exerted on the bivalents by the microtubules emanating from the two kinetochores of homologous chromosomes. This attachment is referred to as a bipolar attachment. The physical basis of the independent assortment of chromosomes is the random orientation of each bivalent along with the metaphase plate, with respect to the orientation of the other bivalents along the same equatorial line. The protein complex cohesin holds sister chromatids together from the time of their replication until anaphase. In mitosis, the force of kinetochore microtubules pulling in opposite directions creates tension. The cell senses this tension and does not progress with anaphase until all the chromosomes are properly bi-oriented. In meiosis, establishing tension ordinarily requires at least one crossover per chromosome pair in addition to cohesin between sister chromatids (see Chromosome segregation).

====Anaphase I====
Kinetochore microtubules shorten, pulling homologous chromosomes (which each consist of a pair of sister chromatids) to opposite poles. Nonkinetochore microtubules lengthen, pushing the centrosomes farther apart. The cell elongates in preparation for division down the center. Unlike in mitosis, only the cohesin from the chromosome arms is degraded while the cohesin surrounding the centromere remains protected by a protein named Shugoshin (Japanese for &quot;guardian spirit&quot;), what prevents the sister chromatids from separating. This allows the sister chromatids to remain together while homologs are segregated.

====Telophase I====
The first meiotic division effectively ends when the chromosomes arrive at the poles. Each daughter cell now has half the number of chromosomes but each chromosome consists of a pair of chromatids. The microtubules that make up the spindle network disappear, and a new nuclear membrane surrounds each haploid set. Cytokinesis, the pinching of the cell membrane in animal cells or the formation of the cell wall in plant cells, occurs, completing the creation of two daughter cells. However, cytokinesis does not fully complete resulting in &quot;cytoplasmic bridges&quot; which enable the cytoplasm to be shared between daughter cells until the end of meiosis II. Sister chromatids remain attached during telophase I.

Cells may enter a period of rest known as interkinesis or interphase II. No DNA replication occurs during this stage.

===Meiosis II===
Meiosis II is the second meiotic division, and usually involves equational segregation, or separation of sister chromatids. Mechanically, the process is similar to mitosis, though its genetic results are fundamentally different. The result is the production of four haploid cells (n chromosomes; 23 in humans) from the two haploid cells (with n chromosomes, each consisting of two sister chromatids) produced in meiosis I. The four main steps of meiosis II are: prophase II, metaphase II, anaphase II, and telophase II.

In prophase II, we see the disappearance of the nucleoli and the nuclear envelope again as well as the shortening and thickening of the chromatids. Centrosomes move to the polar regions and arrange spindle fibers for the second meiotic division.

In metaphase II, the centromeres contain two kinetochores that attach to spindle fibers from the centrosomes at opposite poles. The new equatorial metaphase plate is rotated by 90 degrees when compared to meiosis I, perpendicular to the previous plate.

This is followed by anaphase II, in which the remaining centromeric cohesin, not protected by Shugoshin anymore, is cleaved, allowing the sister chromatids to segregate. The sister chromatids by convention are now called sister chromosomes as they move toward opposing poles.

The process ends with telophase II, which is similar to telophase I, and is marked by decondensation and lengthening of the chromosomes and the disassembly of the spindle. Nuclear envelopes re-form and cleavage or cell plate formation eventually produces a total of four daughter cells, each with a haploid set of chromosomes.

Meiosis is now complete and ends up with four new daughter cells.

==Origin and function==

===Origin of meiosis===

Meiosis appears to be a fundamental characteristic of eukaryotic organisms and to have been present early in eukaryotic evolution. Eukaryotes that were once thought to lack meiotic sex have recently been shown to likely have, or once have had, this capability. As one example, &quot;Giardia intestinalis&quot;, a common intestinal parasite, was previously considered to have descended from a lineage that predated the emergence of meiosis and sex. However, &quot;G. intestinalis&quot; has now been found to possess a core set of meiotic genes, including five meiosis specific genes. Also evidence for meiotic recombination, indicative of sexual reproduction, was found in &quot;G. intestinalis&quot;. Another example of organisms previously thought to be asexual are parasitic protozoa of the genus &quot;Leishmania&quot;, which cause human disease. However, these organisms were shown to have a sexual cycle consistent with a meiotic process. Although amoeba were once generally regarded as asexual, evidence has been presented that most lineages are anciently sexual and that the majority of asexual groups probably arose recently and independently. Dacks and Rogers proposed, based on a phylogenetic analysis, that facultative sex was likely present in the common ancestor of eukaryotes.

===Genetic variation===

The new combinations of DNA created during meiosis are a significant source of genetic variation alongside mutation, resulting in new combinations of alleles, which may be beneficial. Meiosis generates gamete genetic diversity in two ways: (1) Law of Independent Assortment. The independent orientation of homologous chromosome pairs along the metaphase plate during metaphase I and orientation of sister chromatids in metaphase II, this is the subsequent separation of homologs and sister chromatids during anaphase I and II, it allows a random and independent distribution of chromosomes to each daughter cell (and ultimately to gametes); and (2) Crossing Over. The physical exchange of homologous chromosomal regions by homologous recombination during prophase I results in new combinations of genetic information within chromosomes. However, such physical exchange does not always occur during meiosis. In the oocytes of the silkworm &quot;Bombyx mori&quot;, meiosis is completely achiasmate (lacking crossovers). Although synaptonemal complexes are present during the pachytene stage of meiosis in &quot;B. mori&quot;, crossing-over homologous recombination is absent between the paired chromosomes.

===Prophase I arrest===
Female mammals and birds are born possessing all the oocytes needed for future ovulations, and these oocytes are arrested at the prophase I stage of meiosis. In humans, as an example, oocytes are formed between three and four months of gestation within the fetus and are therefore present at birth. During this prophase I arrested stage (dictyate), which may last for decades, four copies of the genome are present in the oocytes. The arrest of ooctyes at the four genome copy stage was proposed to provide the informational redundancy needed to repair damage in the DNA of the germline. The repair process used appears to involve homologous recombinational repair Prophase I arrested oocytes have a high capability for efficient repair of DNA damage, particularly exogenously induced double-strand breaks. DNA repair capability appears to be a key quality control mechanism in the female germ line and a critical determinant of fertility.

===Meiosis as an adaptation for repairing germline DNA===

Genetic recombination can be viewed as fundamentally a DNA repair process, and that when it occurs during meiosis it is an adaptation for repairing the genomic DNA that is passed on to progeny. Experimental findings indicate that a substantial benefit of meiosis is recombinational repair of DNA damage in the germline, as indicated by the following examples. Hydrogen peroxide is an agent that causes oxidative stress leading to oxidative DNA damage. Treatment of the yeast &quot;Schizosaccharomyces pombe&quot; with hydrogen peroxide increased the frequency of mating and the formation of meiotic spores by 4 to 18-fold. &quot;Volvox carteri&quot;, a haploid multicellular, facultatively sexual green algae, can be induced by heat shock to reproduce by meiotic sex. This induction can be inhibited by antioxidants indicating that the induction of meiotic sex by heat shock is likely mediated by oxidative stress leading to increased DNA damage.

==Occurrence==
===In life cycles===


Meiosis occurs in eukaryotic life cycles involving sexual reproduction, consisting of the cyclical process of growth and development by mitotic cell division, production of gametes by meiosis and fertilization. At certain stages of the life cycle, germ cells produce gametes. Somatic cells make up the body of the organism and are not involved in gamete production.

Cycling meiosis and fertilization events results in alternation between haploid and diploid states. The organism phase of the life cycle can occur either during the diploid state (&quot;diplontic&quot; life cycle), during the haploid state (&quot;haplontic&quot; life cycle), or both (&quot;haplodiplontic&quot; life cycle), in which there are two distinct organism phases, one with haploid cells and the other with diploid cells.

In the &quot;diplontic life cycle&quot; (with pre-gametic meiosis), as in humans, the organism is multicellular and diploid, grown by mitosis from a diploid cell called the zygote. The organism&#x27;s diploid germ-line stem cells undergo meiosis to make haploid gametes (the spermatozoa in males and ova in females), which fertilize to form the zygote. The diploid zygote undergoes repeated cellular division by mitosis to grow into the organism.

In the &quot;haplontic life cycle&quot; (with post-zygotic meiosis), the organism is haploid, by the proliferation and differentiation of a single haploid cell called the gamete. Two organisms of opposing sex contribute their haploid gametes to form a diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes meiosis immediately, creating four haploid cells. These cells undergo mitosis to create the organism. Many fungi and many protozoa utilize the haplontic life cycle. 

In the &quot;haplodiplontic life cycle&quot; (with sporic or intermediate meiosis), the living organism alternates between haploid and diploid states. Consequently, this cycle is also known as the alternation of generations. The diploid organism&#x27;s germ-line cells undergo meiosis to produce spores. The spores proliferate by mitosis, growing into a haploid organism. The haploid organism&#x27;s gamete then combines with another haploid organism&#x27;s gamete, creating the zygote. The zygote undergoes repeated mitosis and differentiation to produce a new diploid organism. The haplodiplontic life cycle can be considered a fusion of the diplontic and haplontic life cycles.

===In plants and animals===

Meiosis occurs in all animals and plants. The result, the production of gametes with half the number of chromosomes as the parent cell, is the same, but the detailed process is different. In animals, meiosis produces gametes directly. In land plants and some algae, there is an alternation of generations such that meiosis in the diploid sporophyte generation produces haploid spores instead of gametes. When they germinate, these spores undergo repeated cell division by mitosis, developing into a multicellular haploid gametophyte generation, which then produces gametes directly (i.e. without further meiosis).

In both animals and plants, the final stage is for the gametes to fuse to form a zygote in which the original number of chromosomes is restored.

===In mammals===
In females, meiosis occurs in cells known as oocytes (singular: oocyte). Each primary oocyte divides twice in meiosis, unequally in each case. The first division produces a daughter cell, and a much smaller polar body which may or may not undergo a second division. In meiosis II, division of the daughter cell produces a second polar body, and a single haploid cell, which enlarges to become an ovum. Therefore, in females each primary oocyte that undergoes meiosis results in one mature ovum and two or three polar bodies.

There are pauses during meiosis in females. Maturing oocytes are arrested in prophase I of meiosis I and lie dormant within a protective shell of somatic cells called the follicle. At this stage, the oocyte nucleus is called the germinal vesicle. At the beginning of each menstrual cycle, FSH secretion from the anterior pituitary stimulates a few follicles to mature in a process known as folliculogenesis. During this process, the maturing oocytes resume meiosis and continue until metaphase II of meiosis II, where they are again arrested just before ovulation. The breakdown of the germinal vesicle, condensation of chromosomes, and assembly of the bipolar metaphase I spindle are all clear indications that meiosis has resumed. If these oocytes are fertilized by sperm, they will resume and complete meiosis. During folliculogenesis in humans, usually one follicle becomes dominant while the others undergo atresia. The process of meiosis in females occurs during oogenesis, and differs from the typical meiosis in that it features a long period of meiotic arrest known as the dictyate stage and lacks the assistance of centrosomes.

In males, meiosis occurs during spermatogenesis in the seminiferous tubules of the testicles. Meiosis during spermatogenesis is specific to a type of cell called spermatocytes, which will later mature to become spermatozoa. Meiosis of primordial germ cells happens at the time of puberty, much later than in females. Tissues of the male testis suppress meiosis by degrading retinoic acid, proposed to be a stimulator of meiosis. This is overcome at puberty when cells within seminiferous tubules called Sertoli cells start making their own retinoic acid. Sensitivity to retinoic acid is also adjusted by proteins called nanos and DAZL. Genetic loss-of-function studies on retinoic acid-generating enzymes have shown that retinoic acid is required postnatally to stimulate spermatogonia differentiation which results several days later in spermatocytes undergoing meiosis, however retinoic acid is not required during the time when meiosis initiates.

In female mammals, meiosis begins immediately after primordial germ cells migrate to the ovary in the embryo. Some studies suggest that retinoic acid derived from the primitive kidney (mesonephros) stimulates meiosis in embryonic ovarian oogonia and that tissues of the embryonic male testis suppress meiosis by degrading retinoic acid. However, genetic loss-of-function studies on retinoic acid-generating enzymes have shown that retinoic acid is not required for initiation of either female meiosis which occurs during embryogenesis or male meiosis which initiates postnatally.

=== Flagellates ===
While the majority of eukaryotes have a two-divisional meiosis (though sometimes achiasmatic), a very rare form, one-divisional meiosis, occurs in some flagellates (parabasalids and oxymonads) from the gut of the wood-feeding cockroach &quot;Cryptocercus&quot;.

==Role in human genetics and disease==
Recombination among the 23 pairs of human chromosomes is responsible for redistributing not just the actual chromosomes, but also pieces of each of them. There is also an estimated 1.6-fold more recombination in females relative to males. In addition, average, female recombination is higher at the centromeres and male recombination is higher at the telomeres. On average, 1 million bp (1 Mb) correspond to 1 cMorgan (cm = 1% recombination frequency). The frequency of cross-overs remain uncertain. In yeast, mouse and human, it has been estimated that ≥200 double-strand breaks (DSBs) are formed per meiotic cell. However, only a subset of DSBs (~5–30% depending on the organism), go on to produce crossovers, which would result in only 1-2 cross-overs per human chromosome.

In humans, recombination rates differ between maternal and paternal DNA:

* Maternal DNA: Recombines approximately 42 times on average.
* Paternal DNA: Recombines approximately 27 times on average.

===Nondisjunction===
The normal separation of chromosomes in meiosis I or sister chromatids in meiosis II is termed &quot;disjunction&quot;. When the segregation is not normal, it is called &quot;nondisjunction&quot;. This results in the production of gametes which have either too many or too few of a particular chromosome, and is a common mechanism for trisomy or monosomy. Nondisjunction can occur in the meiosis I or meiosis II, phases of cellular reproduction, or during mitosis.

Most monosomic and trisomic human embryos are not viable, but some aneuploidies can be tolerated, such as trisomy for the smallest chromosome, chromosome 21. Phenotypes of these aneuploidies range from severe developmental disorders to asymptomatic. Medical conditions include but are not limited to:
* Down syndrome – trisomy of chromosome 21
* Patau syndrome – trisomy of chromosome 13
* Edwards syndrome – trisomy of chromosome 18
* Klinefelter syndrome – extra X chromosomes in males – i.e. XXY, XXXY, XXXXY, etc.
* Turner syndrome – lacking of one X chromosome in females – i.e. X0
* Triple X syndrome – an extra X chromosome in females
* Jacobs syndrome – an extra Y chromosome in males.

The probability of nondisjunction in human oocytes increases with increasing maternal age, presumably due to loss of cohesin over time.

==Comparison to mitosis==
In order to understand meiosis, a comparison to mitosis is helpful. The table below shows the differences between meiosis and mitosis.
==Molecular regulation==
Maturation promoting factor (MPF) seems to have a role in meiosis based on experiments with &quot;Xenopus laevis&quot; oocytes. Mammalian oocyte MPF induced germinal vesicle breakdown (GVB) in starfish and &quot;Xenopus laevis&quot; oocytes. MPF is active prior to GVB but falls off toward the end of meiosis I. CDK1 and cyclin B levels are correlated with oocyte GVB competence and are likely under translational rather than transcriptional control. In meiosis II, MPF reappears ahead of metaphase II, and its activity remains high up to fertilization.

In mammals, meiotic arrest begins with natriuretic peptide type C (NPPC) from mural granulosa cells, which activates production of cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cGMP) in concert with natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) on cumulus cells. cGMP diffuses into oocytes and halts meiosis by inhibiting phosphodiesterase 3A (PDE3A) and cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cAMP) hydrolysis. In the oocyte, G-protein-coupled receptor GPR3/12 activates adenylyl cyclase to generate cAMP. cAMP stimulates protein kinase A (PKA) to activate the nuclear kinase WEE2 by phosphorylation. PKA also assists in phosphorylation of the CDK1 phosphatase CDC25B to keep it in the cytoplasm; in its unphosphorylated form, CDC25B migrates to the nucleus. Protein kinase C (PKC) may also have a role in inhibiting meiotic progression to metaphase II. Overall, CDK1 activity is suppressed to prevent resumption of meiosis. Oocytes further promote expression of NPR2 and inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (and thereby the production of cGMP) in cumulus cells. Follicle-stimulating hormone and estradiol likewise promote expression of NPPC and NPR2. Hypoxanthine, a purine apparently originating in the follicle, also inhibits in vitro oocyte meiosis. A spike in luteinizing hormone (LH) spurs oocyte maturation, in which oocytes are released from meiotic arrest and progress from prophase I through metaphase II. LH-induced epidermal growth factor-like factors like amphiregulin and epiregulin synthesized in mural granulosa cells reduce levels of cGMP in oocytes by restricting cGMP transport through cumulus cell-oocyte gap junctions and lowering NPPC levels and NPR2 activity. In fact, LH-induced epidermal growth factor-like factors may cause the destabilization and breakdown of gap junctions altogether. LH-induced epidermal growth factor-like factors may trigger production of additional oocyte maturation factors like steroids and follicular fluid-derived meiosis-activating sterol (FF-MAS) in cumulus cells. FF-MAS promotes progression from metaphase I to metaphase II, and it may help stabilize metaphase II arrest. Meiosis resumption is reinforced by the exit of WEE2 from the nucleus due to CDK1 activation. Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) metabolize cAMP and may be temporarily activated by PKA-mediated phosphorylation. Longer-term regulation of phosphodiesterases may require modulation of protein expression. For example, hypoxanthine is a PDE inhibitor that may stymie cAMP metabolism. Kinases like protein kinase B, Aurora kinase A, and polo-like kinase 1 contribute to the resumption of meiosis. There are similarities between the mechanisms of meiotic prophase I arrest and resumption and the mitotic G2 DNA damage checkpoint: CDC14B-based activation of APC-CDH1 in arrest and CDC25B-based resumption. Meiotic arrest requires inhibitory phosphorylation of CDK1 at amino acid residues Thr-14 and Tyr-15 by MYT1 and WEE1 as well as regulation of cyclin B levels facilitated by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC). CDK1 is regulated by cyclin B, whose synthesis peaks at the end of meiosis I. At anaphase I, cyclin B is degraded by an ubiquitin-dependent pathway. Cyclin B synthesis and CDK1 activation prompt oocytes to enter metaphase, while entry into anaphase follows ubiquitin-mediated cyclin B degradation, which brings down CDK1 activity. Proteolysis of adhesion proteins between homologous chromosomes is involved in anaphase I, while proteolysis of adhesion proteins between sister chromatids is involved in anaphase II. Meiosis II arrest is effected by cytostatic factor (CSF), whose elements include the MOS protein, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK/MEK1), and MAPK. The protein kinase p90 (RSK) is one critical target of MAPK and may help block entry into S-phase between meiosis I and II by reactivating CDK1. There&#x27;s evidence that RSK aids entry into meiosis I by inhibiting MYT1, which activates CDK1. CSF arrest might take place through regulation of the APC as part of the spindle assembly checkpoint.

In the budding yeast &quot;S. cerevisiae&quot;, Clb1 is the main meiotic regulatory cyclin, though Clb3 and Clb4 are also expressed during meiosis and activate a p34cdc28-associated kinase immediately prior to the first meiotic division. The IME1 transcription factor drives entry into meiotic S-phase and is regulated according to inputs like nutrition. a1/α2 represses a repressor of &quot;IME1&quot;, initiating meiosis. Numerous &quot;S. cerevisiae&quot; meiotic regulatory genes have been identified. A few are presented here. &quot;IME1&quot; enables sporulation of non-a/α diploids. &quot;IME2&quot;/&quot;SME1&quot; enables sporulation when nitrogen is present, supports recombination in a/α cells expressing &quot;RME1&quot;, an inhibitor of meiosis, and encodes a protein kinase homolog. &quot;MCK1&quot; (meiosis and centromere regulatory kinase) also supports recombination in a/α cells expressing &quot;RME1&quot; and encodes a protein kinase homolog. &quot;SME2&quot; enables sporulation when ammonia or glucose are present. &quot;UME1-5&quot; enable expression of certain early meiotic genes in vegetative, non-a/α cells.

In the fission yeast &quot;S. pombe&quot;, the Cdc2 kinase and Cig2 cyclin together initiate the premeiotic S phase, while cyclin Cdc13 and the CDK activator Cdc25 are necessary for both meiotic divisions. However, the Pat1-Mei2 system is at the heart of &quot;S. pombe&quot; meiotic regulation. Mei2 is the major meiotic regulator. It moves between the nucleus and cytoplasm and works with meiRNA to promote meiosis I. Moreover, Mei2 is implicated in exit from mitosis and induction of premeiotic S phase. Mei2 may inactivate the DSR-Mmi1 system through sequestration of Mmi1 to stabilize meiosis-specific transcript expression. Mei2 may stall growth and bring about G1 arrest. Pat1 is a Ser/Thr protein kinase that phosphorylates Mei2, an RNA-binding protein, on residues Ser438 and Thr527. This phosphorylation may decrease the half-life of Mei2 by making it more likely to be destroyed by a proteasome working with E2 Ubc2 and E3 Ubr1. The Mei4 transcription factor is necessary to transcriptionally activate &quot;cdc25&quot; in meiosis, and the &quot;mei4&quot; mutant experiences cell cycle arrest. Mes1 inhibits the APC/C activator Slp1 such that the Cdc2-Cdc13 MPF activity can drive the second meiotic division.

It has been suggested that Yeast CEP1 gene product, that binds centromeric region CDE1, may play a role in chromosome pairing during meiosis-I.

Meiotic recombination is mediated through double stranded break, which is catalyzed by Spo11 protein. Also Mre11, Sae2 and Exo1 play role in breakage and recombination. After the breakage happen, recombination take place which is typically homologous. The recombination may go through either a double Holliday junction (dHJ) pathway or synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA). (The second one gives to noncrossover product).

Seemingly there are checkpoints for meiotic cell division too. In S. pombe, Rad proteins, S. pombe Mek1 (with FHA kinase domain), Cdc25, Cdc2 and unknown factor is thought to form a checkpoint.

In vertebrate oogenesis, maintained by cytostatic factor (CSF) has role in switching into meiosis-II.

== See also ==

* Fertilisation
* Coefficient of coincidence
* DNA repair
* Oxidative stress
* Synizesis (biology)
* Biological life cycle
* Apomixis
* Parthenogenesis
* Alternation of generations
* Brachymeiosis
* Mitotic recombination
* Dikaryon
* Mating of yeast

== References ==
===Cited texts===

== External links ==

* Meiosis Flash Animation 
* Animations from the U. of Arizona Biology Dept.
* Meiosis at Kimball&#x27;s Biology Pages
* Khan Academy, video lecture
* CCO The Cell-Cycle Ontology
* Stages of Meiosis animation
** &quot;Abby Dernburg Seminar: Chromosome Dynamics During Meiosis&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="0" end="7" title="Meiosis" label="Meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="70" end="83" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="87" end="97" title="germ cells" label="germ cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="101" end="121" title="Sexual reproduction" label="sexually-reproducing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="150" end="157" title="gametes" label="gametes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="163" end="168" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="172" end="181" title="egg cells" label="egg cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="288" end="298" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="300" end="307" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="424" end="436" title="Chromosomal crossover" label="crossed over"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="509" end="522" title="fertilisation" label="fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="609" end="615" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q529622" start="698" end="708" title="aneuploidy" label="aneuploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="776" end="787" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="827" end="853" title="developmental disabilities" label="developmental disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="868" end="883" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="988" end="998" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="1068" end="1077" title="meiosis I" label="meiosis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="1082" end="1092" title="meiosis II" label="meiosis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289513" start="1124" end="1131" title="S phase" label="S phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q188941" start="1139" end="1149" title="cell cycle" label="cell cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066168" start="1229" end="1246" title="sister chromatids" label="sister chromatids"/>
<link wikidata="Q306379" start="1479" end="1481" title="G2 phase" label="G2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013254" start="1510" end="1518" title="prophase" label="prophase"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="1538" end="1559" title="homologous chromosome" label="homologous chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="1594" end="1615" title="genetic recombination" label="genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="1725" end="1744" title="genetic information" label="genetic information"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="1790" end="1800" title="chromosomal crossover" label="crossovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="1839" end="1848" title="Chiasma (genetics)" label="chiasmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q14425" start="1890" end="1893" title="Chi (letter)" label="Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113927" start="2020" end="2029" title="chromosome segregation" label="segregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="2086" end="2093" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="2279" end="2286" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="2341" end="2348" title="gametes" label="gametes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="2357" end="2362" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="2364" end="2370" title="spores" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="2374" end="2380" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q139143" start="2464" end="2473" title="extrusion" label="extrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890716" start="2479" end="2491" title="polar bodies" label="polar bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="2534" end="2538" title="ovum" label="ovum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="2623" end="2636" title="fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="2656" end="2662" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="2791" end="2810" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="2897" end="2904" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="3067" end="3074" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="3454" end="3467" title="Multicellular organism" label="multicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="3493" end="3502" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="3516" end="3522" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="3525" end="3530" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="3536" end="3541" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q507032" start="3574" end="3583" title="oogenesis" label="oogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36961" start="3588" end="3603" title="spermatogenesis" label="spermatogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="3707" end="3714" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="3843" end="3851" title="homologs" label="homologs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="3879" end="3894" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="4044" end="4068" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="4108" end="4118" title="Chromosomal crossover" label="crossovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q918594" start="4235" end="4252" title="spindle apparatus" label="spindle apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="4988" end="5005" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="5060" end="5067" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="5103" end="5112" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="5195" end="5202" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="5240" end="5245" title="spore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q430301" start="5347" end="5364" title="bdelloid rotifers" label="bdelloid rotifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="5457" end="5472" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="5501" end="5508" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5512" end="5520" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="5562" end="5576" title="binary fission" label="binary fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="5625" end="5649" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="5701" end="5709" title="archaea" label="archaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="5864" end="5874" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="5875" end="5878" title="egg (biology)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q68753" start="5912" end="5925" title="Oscar Hertwig" label="Oscar Hertwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="5975" end="5985" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55015815" start="6013" end="6032" title="Edouard Van Beneden" label="Edouard Van Beneden"/>
<link wikidata="Q310838" start="6043" end="6050" title="Ascaris" label="Ascaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q76465" start="6191" end="6206" title="August Weismann" label="August Weismann"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6375" end="6383" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="6395" end="6413" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="6468" end="6491" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223090" start="6703" end="6714" title="John Bretland Farmer" label="J.B. Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995317" start="6719" end="6731" title="John Edmund Sharrock Moore" label="J.E.S. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60423" start="6983" end="6991" title="Walther Flemming" label="Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q466126" start="7139" end="7160" title="Romanization of Greek" label="transliterating Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="7199" end="7208" title="meiosis I" label="meiosis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="7213" end="7223" title="meiosis II" label="meiosis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q835950" start="7458" end="7468" title="Interphase" label="Interphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q306383" start="7501" end="7520" title="G1 phase" label="Growth 1 (G1) phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289513" start="7747" end="7766" title="S phase" label="Synthesis (S) phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066168" start="7875" end="7891" title="sister chromatid" label="sister chromatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="7956" end="7962" title="ploidy" label="ploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q306379" start="8202" end="8221" title="G2 phase" label="Growth 2 (G2) phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046812" start="8898" end="8910" title="interkinesis" label="interkinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013254" start="8985" end="8993" title="prophase" label="prophase"/>
<link wikidata="Q574427" start="8995" end="9004" title="metaphase" label="metaphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22299157" start="9006" end="9014" title="anaphase" label="anaphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q12565265" start="9020" end="9029" title="telophase" label="telophase"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="9335" end="9346" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="transcribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="9407" end="9411" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="9766" end="9787" title="homologous chromosome" label="homologous chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175967" start="10392" end="10399" title="Synapsis" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="10438" end="10462" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="10575" end="10582" title="chiasma (genetics)" label="chiasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q623749" start="10839" end="10849" title="chromatids" label="chromatids"/>
<link wikidata="Q21103063" start="11427" end="11434" title="cohesin" label="cohesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064069" start="11468" end="11488" title="synaptonemal complex" label="synaptonemal complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037548" start="11620" end="11625" title="Spo11" label="SPO11"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="11651" end="11671" title="Double-strand breaks" label="double strand breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235015" start="11769" end="11774" title="RAD51" label="RAD51"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036155" start="11779" end="11783" title="DMC1 (gene)" label="DMC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064069" start="12433" end="12453" title="synaptonemal complex" label="synaptonemal complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q471134" start="13059" end="13074" title="gene conversion" label="gene conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064069" start="13843" end="13863" title="synaptonemal complex" label="synaptonemal complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q507032" start="14252" end="14261" title="oogenesis" label="oogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q690281" start="14396" end="14424" title="dictyotene" label="&amp;quot;dictyotene stage&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763006" start="14957" end="14969" title="prometaphase" label="prometaphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q30869" start="14986" end="14994" title="Nucleolus" label="nucleoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q465608" start="15010" end="15026" title="nuclear membrane" label="nuclear membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q918594" start="15064" end="15079" title="Spindle apparatus" label="meiotic spindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190769" start="15191" end="15201" title="centrosome" label="centrosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q908912" start="15436" end="15447" title="kinetochore" label="kinetochore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="16360" end="16382" title="independent assortment" label="independent assortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21103063" start="16580" end="16587" title="cohesin" label="cohesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113927" start="17037" end="17059" title="Chromosome segregation" label="Chromosome segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046812" start="18487" end="18499" title="interkinesis" label="interkinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q465608" start="19167" end="19183" title="nuclear envelope" label="nuclear envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q908912" start="19394" end="19405" title="kinetochore" label="kinetochore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="20379" end="20399" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryotic organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q155630" start="20602" end="20634" title="Giardia duodenalis" label="&amp;quot;Giardia intestinalis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="20926" end="20947" title="genetic recombination" label="meiotic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="20963" end="20982" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q524818" start="21130" end="21140" title="Leishmania" label="Leishmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q506524" start="21278" end="21284" title="amoeba" label="amoeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q349856" start="21721" end="21738" title="genetic variation" label="genetic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="21792" end="21799" title="alleles" label="alleles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="21886" end="21915" title="Law of Independent Assortment" label="Law of Independent Assortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="22291" end="22304" title="Crossing over, genetic" label="Crossing Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="22376" end="22389" title="Homologous recombination" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="22586" end="22597" title="Bombyx mori" label="Bombyx mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="22627" end="22637" title="chiasma (genetics)" label="achiasmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064069" start="22669" end="22689" title="synaptonemal complex" label="synaptonemal complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q10344426" start="22715" end="22724" title="pachytene" label="pachytene"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="22780" end="22804" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="22834" end="22844" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246226" start="22973" end="22979" title="oocyte" label="oocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="23108" end="23117" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q690281" start="23210" end="23218" title="dictyate" label="dictyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="23268" end="23274" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="23418" end="23442" title="DNA repair" label="repair damage in the DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139164" start="23450" end="23458" title="germline" label="germline"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="23503" end="23527" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="23612" end="23622" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="23801" end="23810" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="23872" end="23893" title="Genetic recombination" label="Genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="23927" end="23937" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="24024" end="24031" title="genome" label="genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="24032" end="24035" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="24138" end="24160" title="homologous recombination" label="recombinational repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="24164" end="24174" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139164" start="24182" end="24190" title="germline" label="germline"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="24232" end="24249" title="Hydrogen peroxide" label="Hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="24274" end="24290" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236682" start="24353" end="24378" title="Schizosaccharomyces pombe" label="Schizosaccharomyces pombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="24390" end="24407" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563059" start="24501" end="24515" title="Volvox carteri" label="Volvox carteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="24675" end="24686" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="24769" end="24785" title="oxidative stress" label="oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="24887" end="24898" title="biological life cycle" label="life cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="24909" end="24928" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="24994" end="25001" title="mitosis" label="mitotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="25106" end="25115" title="germ cell" label="germ cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q725508" start="25134" end="25146" title="Somatic cell" label="Somatic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="25830" end="25836" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="25932" end="25943" title="spermatozoa" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="25957" end="25960" title="ovum" label="ova"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="26069" end="26076" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="26276" end="26282" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="26501" end="26506" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="26516" end="26524" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q725951" start="26758" end="26784" title="alternation of generations" label="alternation of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q725951" start="27550" end="27576" title="alternation of generations" label="alternation of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q647173" start="27610" end="27620" title="sporophyte" label="sporophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q189951" start="27793" end="27804" title="gametophyte" label="gametophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="27968" end="27974" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246226" start="28095" end="28101" title="oocyte" label="oocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="28446" end="28450" title="egg cell" label="ovum"/>
<link wikidata="Q953556" start="28747" end="28755" title="ovarian follicle" label="follicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="28848" end="28863" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="28865" end="28868" title="follicle-stimulating hormone" label="FSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142940" start="28966" end="28982" title="folliculogenesis" label="folliculogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435532" start="29488" end="29495" title="Follicular atresia" label="atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q507032" start="29545" end="29554" title="oogenesis" label="oogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q690281" start="29658" end="29666" title="dictyate" label="dictyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190769" start="29701" end="29711" title="centrosome" label="centrosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q36961" start="29747" end="29762" title="spermatogenesis" label="spermatogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503431" start="29770" end="29789" title="seminiferous tubule" label="seminiferous tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="29798" end="29806" title="testicle" label="testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486515" start="29877" end="29889" title="spermatocyte" label="spermatocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="29926" end="29937" title="spermatozoon" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30669" end="30683" title="Female#Mammalian females" label="female mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="31348" end="31359" title="Chiasma (genetics)" label="achiasmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134585" start="31432" end="31443" title="parabasalid" label="parabasalid"/>
<link wikidata="Q618894" start="31449" end="31457" title="oxymonad" label="oxymonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q139704" start="31509" end="31521" title="Cryptocercus" label="Cryptocercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q844903" start="32902" end="32909" title="trisomy" label="trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321288" start="32913" end="32921" title="monosomy" label="monosomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="33023" end="33030" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="33336" end="33349" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q284219" start="33379" end="33393" title="Patau syndrome" label="Patau syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="33423" end="33439" title="Edwards syndrome" label="Edwards syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q207133" start="33469" end="33489" title="Klinefelter syndrome" label="Klinefelter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="33553" end="33568" title="Turner syndrome" label="Turner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q510912" start="33622" end="33639" title="Triple X syndrome" label="Triple X syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q267602" start="33677" end="33692" title="Jacobs syndrome" label="Jacobs syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21103063" start="33845" end="33852" title="cohesin" label="cohesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q417889" start="34051" end="34084" title="Maturation promoting factor" label="Maturation promoting factor (MPF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236682" start="39803" end="39823" title="Schizosaccharomyces pombe" label="&amp;quot;S. pombe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236682" start="40037" end="40057" title="Schizosaccharomyces pombe" label="&amp;quot;S. pombe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="41896" end="41909" title="Fertilisation" label="Fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140574" start="41912" end="41938" title="Coefficient of coincidence" label="Coefficient of coincidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="41941" end="41951" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="41954" end="41970" title="Oxidative stress" label="Oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662487" start="41973" end="41992" title="Synizesis (biology)" label="Synizesis (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="41995" end="42016" title="Biological life cycle" label="Biological life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q528033" start="42019" end="42027" title="Apomixis" label="Apomixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="42030" end="42045" title="Parthenogenesis" label="Parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725951" start="42048" end="42074" title="Alternation of generations" label="Alternation of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816884" start="42077" end="42090" title="Brachymeiosis" label="Brachymeiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356161" start="42093" end="42114" title="Mitotic recombination" label="Mitotic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923203" start="42117" end="42125" title="Dikaryon" label="Dikaryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604177" start="42128" end="42143" title="Mating of yeast" label="Mating of yeast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18977" wikidata="Q187906" url="?curid=18977" title="Minix">
<text>MINIX is a Unix-like operating system based on a microkernel architecture, first released in 1987 and written by American-Dutch computer scientist Andrew S. Tanenbaum. It was designed as a clone of the Unix operating system and one that could run on affordable, Intel 8086-based home computers; MINIX was targeted for use in classrooms by computer science students at universities.

Its name comes from &quot;mini-Unix&quot;. MINIX was initially proprietary source-available, but was relicensed under the BSD 3-Clause to become free and open-source in 2000. MINIX was ported to various additional platforms in the 1990s, and version 2.0 was released in 1997 and was the first to be POSIX compliant. Starting with MINIX 3, released in 2005, the primary aim of development shifted from education to the creation of a highly reliable and self-healing microkernel OS.

==Implementation==

===MINIX 1.0===
Andrew S. Tanenbaum created MINIX at Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam to exemplify the principles conveyed in his textbook, &quot;Operating Systems: Design and Implementation&quot; (1987). (Despite sharing a name, it has no relation to the older MINIX from Digital Systems House, Inc. based on AT&amp;T Unix code.)

An abridged 12,010 lines of the C source code of the kernel, memory manager, and file system of MINIX 1.0 are printed in the book. Prentice-Hall also released MINIX source code and binaries on floppy disk with a reference manual. MINIX 1 was system-call compatible with Seventh Edition Unix.

Tanenbaum originally developed MINIX for compatibility with the IBM PC and IBM PC/AT 8088 microcomputers available at the time.

===MINIX 1.4===
There is a version of MINIX floating around that supports the Peripheral Technology PT68K-2 and PT68K-4 computers. The PT68K-2 and the PT68K-4 are both 68000 based computers with a standard 8 bit IBM PC ISA bus that has 6 connectors on the main board. It was ported to the PT68K machines by Gary Mills and Sidney Thompson. The port was adapted from the Atari port since it too is a 68000 based machine. The PT68K version has added support for the PT XT-IDE card from Peripheral Technology. I currently only supports the MDA display adapter (no CGA, EGA or VGA). For this reason, it has not yet been ported to the PT68K-5 (aka CDS68020). There is an SD Card image available from https://github.com/mevenson/minix-for-the-PT68K-2-4.

===MINIX 1.5===
MINIX 1.5, released in 1991, included support for MicroChannel IBM PS/2 systems and was also ported to the Motorola 68000 and SPARC architectures, supporting the Atari ST, Amiga, Macintosh, and Sun SPARCstation computer platforms. There were also unofficial ports to Intel 386 PC compatibles (in 32-bit protected mode), National Semiconductor NS32532, ARM and Inmos transputer processors. Meiko Scientific used an early version of MINIX as the basis for the MeikOS operating system for its transputer-based Computing Surface parallel computers.

===MINIX 2.0===

Demand for the 68k-architectures waned, however, and MINIX 2.0, released in 1997, was only available for the x86 and Solaris-hosted SPARC architectures. It was the subject of the second edition of Tanenbaum&#x27;s textbook, cowritten with Albert Woodhull and was distributed on a CD-ROM included with the book. MINIX 2.0 added POSIX.1 compliance, support for 386 and later processors in 32-bit mode and replaced the Amoeba network protocols included in MINIX 1.5 with a TCP/IP stack. A version of MINIX running as a user process under SunOS and Solaris was also available, a simulator named SMX (operating system) or just &quot;SMX&quot; for short.

Version 2.0.3 was released in May 2001. It was the first version after MINIX had been relicensed under the BSD-3-Clause license, which was retroactively applied to all previous versions.

====Minix-vmd====
Minix-vmd is a variant of MINIX 2.0 for Intel IA-32-compatible processors, created by two Vrije Universiteit researchers, which adds virtual memory and support for the X Window System.

===MINIX 3===


MINIX 3 was publicly announced on 24 October 2005 by Tanenbaum during his keynote speech at the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP). Although it still serves as an example for the new edition of Tanenbaum&#x27;s textbook, coauthored by Albert S. Woodhull, it is comprehensively redesigned to be &quot;usable as a serious system on resource-limited and embedded computers and for applications requiring high reliability.&quot;

MINIX 3 currently supports IA-32 and ARM architecture systems. It is available in a live CD format that allows it to be used on a computer without installing it on the hard drive, and in versions compatible with hardware emulating and virtualizing systems, including Bochs, QEMU, VMware Workstation and Fusion, VirtualBox, and Microsoft Virtual PC.

Version 3.1.2 was released on 18 April 2006. It was the first version after MINIX had been relicensed under the BSD-3-Clause license with a new fourth clause.
Version 3.1.5 was released on 5 November 2009. It contains X11, emacs, vi, cc, gcc, perl, python, ash, bash, zsh, ftp, ssh, telnet, pine, and over 400 other common Unix utility programs. With the addition of X11, this version marks the transition away from a text-only system. In many cases it can automatically restart a crashed driver without affecting running processes. In this way, MINIX is self-healing and can be used in applications demanding high reliability. MINIX 3 also has support for virtual memory management, making it suitable for desktop OS use. Desktop applications such as Firefox and OpenOffice.org are not yet available for MINIX 3 however.
As of version 3.2.0, the userland was mostly replaced by that of NetBSD and support from pkgsrc became possible, increasing the available software applications that MINIX can use. Clang replaced the prior compiler (with GCC now having to be manually compiled), and GDB, the GNU debugger, was ported.

MINIX 3.3.0, released in September 2014, brought ARM support.

MINIX 3.4.0RC, Release Candidates became available in January 2016. However, a stable release of MINIX 3.4.0 is yet to be announced, and MINIX development has been dormant since 2018.

MINIX supports many programming languages, including C, C++, FORTRAN, Modula-2, Pascal, Perl, Python, and Tcl.

Over 50 people attended MINIXCon 2016, a conference to discuss the history and future of MINIX.

All Intel chipsets post-2015 are running MINIX 3 internally as the software component of the Intel Management Engine.

==Relationship with Linux==

===Early influence===
Linus Torvalds used and appreciated MINIX, but his design deviated from the MINIX architecture in significant ways, most notably by employing a monolithic kernel instead of a microkernel. This was disapproved of by Tanenbaum in the Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate. Tanenbaum explained again his rationale for using a microkernel in May 2006.

Early Linux kernel development was done on a MINIX host system, which led to Linux inheriting various features from MINIX, such as the MINIX file system. Eric Raymond claimed that Linus hasn&#x27;t actually written Linux from scratch, but rather reused source code of MINIX itself to have working codebase. As the development progressed, MINIX code was gradually phased out completely.

===&quot;Samizdat&quot; claims===
In May 2004, Kenneth Brown of the Alexis de Tocqueville Institution made the accusation that major parts of the Linux kernel had been copied from the MINIX codebase, in a book named &quot;Samizdat&quot;. These accusations were rebutted universally—most prominently by Tanenbaum, who strongly criticised Brown and published a long rebuttal on his own personal Web site, also claiming that Brown was funded by Microsoft.

==Licensing==
At the time of MINIX&#x27;s original development, its license was relatively liberal. Its licensing fee was very small ($69) relative to those of other operating systems. Tanenbaum wished for MINIX to be as accessible as possible to students, but his publisher was unwilling to offer material (such as the source code) that could be copied freely, so a restrictive license requiring a nominal fee (included in the price of Tanenbaum&#x27;s book) was applied as a compromise. This prevented the use of MINIX as the basis for a freely distributed software system.

When free and open-source Unix-like operating systems such as Linux and 386BSD became available in the early 1990s, many volunteer software developers abandoned MINIX in favor of these. In April 2000, MINIX became free and open-source software under the BSD-3-Clause license, which was retroactively applied to all previous versions. However, by this time other operating systems had surpassed its capabilities, and it remained primarily an operating system for students and hobbyists. In late 2005, MINIX was relicensed with a fourth clause added to the BSD-3-Clause license.

==See also==

*MINIX file system
*Redox, an operating system in Rust using a MINIX-like kernel
*Xinu
*xv6

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*
*The Minix Operating System (Minix 2 support)
*History of MINIX from Andrew Tanenbaum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="0" end="5" title="Minix" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="11" end="20" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="21" end="37" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="49" end="60" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q846636" start="61" end="73" title="Software architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q92621" start="147" end="166" title="Andrew S. Tanenbaum" label="Andrew S. Tanenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="202" end="206" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="262" end="272" title="Intel 8086" label="Intel 8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="279" end="292" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="339" end="355" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273712" start="446" end="474" title="Source-available software" label="proprietary source-available"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="505" end="517" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD 3-Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="528" end="548" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="682" end="687" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q770573" start="713" end="720" title="MINIX 3" label="MINIX 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622420" start="815" end="830" title="high availability" label="highly reliable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117674" start="835" end="847" title="Self-management (computer science)" label="self-healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92621" start="901" end="920" title="Andrew S. Tanenbaum" label="Andrew S. Tanenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065414" start="938" end="956" title="Vrije Universiteit" label="Vrije Universiteit"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="960" end="969" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="1014" end="1022" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1030" end="1074" title="Operating Systems: Design and Implementation" label="Operating Systems: Design and Implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752932" start="1194" end="1207" title="Ancient UNIX" label="AT&amp;amp;T Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1248" end="1249" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="1250" end="1261" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="1269" end="1275" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="1277" end="1291" title="Memory management" label="memory manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="1297" end="1308" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="1347" end="1360" title="Prentice-Hall" label="Prentice-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="1409" end="1420" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740168" start="1486" end="1506" title="Seventh Edition Unix" label="Seventh Edition Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="1573" end="1579" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="1584" end="1593" title="IBM PC/AT" label="IBM PC/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="1594" end="1598" title="8088" label="8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="1599" end="1612" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455915" start="2452" end="2464" title="MicroChannel" label="MicroChannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284518" start="2465" end="2473" title="IBM PS/2" label="IBM PS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="2495" end="2501" title="Porting" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="2509" end="2523" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="2528" end="2533" title="SPARC" label="SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="2564" end="2572" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="2574" end="2579" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="2581" end="2590" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="2596" end="2599" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q985148" start="2600" end="2612" title="SPARCstation" label="SPARCstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="2613" end="2631" title="Platform (computing)" label="computer platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="2669" end="2678" title="Intel 386" label="Intel 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="2679" end="2692" title="PC compatible" label="PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="2698" end="2704" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q841064" start="2705" end="2719" title="protected mode" label="protected mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q432492" start="2722" end="2744" title="National Semiconductor" label="National Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789318" start="2745" end="2752" title="NS320xx" label="NS32532"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="2754" end="2757" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663844" start="2762" end="2767" title="Inmos" label="Inmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q776861" start="2768" end="2778" title="transputer" label="transputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043934" start="2791" end="2807" title="Meiko Scientific" label="Meiko Scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043934" start="2860" end="2866" title="MeikOS" label="MeikOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043934" start="2909" end="2926" title="Computing Surface" label="Computing Surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="2927" end="2944" title="parallel computer" label="parallel computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="3074" end="3077" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="3082" end="3089" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="3245" end="3251" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="3292" end="3297" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q473800" start="3381" end="3387" title="Amoeba (operating system)" label="Amoeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="3435" end="3441" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="3500" end="3505" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="3510" end="3517" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="3722" end="3734" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD-3-Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="3867" end="3872" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="3954" end="3968" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="3989" end="4004" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="4119" end="4154" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="4532" end="4537" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="4542" end="4558" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q215552" start="4589" end="4596" title="live CD" label="live CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q778082" start="4772" end="4777" title="Bochs" label="Bochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q624699" start="4779" end="4783" title="QEMU" label="QEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q200789" start="4785" end="4803" title="VMware Workstation" label="VMware Workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q935100" start="4808" end="4814" title="VMware Fusion" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11393" start="4816" end="4826" title="VirtualBox" label="VirtualBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q748417" start="4832" end="4852" title="Microsoft Virtual PC" label="Microsoft Virtual PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="4967" end="4979" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD-3-Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="5073" end="5076" title="X11" label="X11"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="5078" end="5083" title="emacs" label="emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214743" start="5085" end="5087" title="Vi (text editor)" label="vi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634850" start="5089" end="5091" title="C compiler" label="cc"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="5093" end="5096" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="gcc"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="5098" end="5102" title="perl" label="perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="5104" end="5110" title="Python (programming language)" label="python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641209" start="5112" end="5115" title="Almquist shell" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q189248" start="5117" end="5121" title="Bash (Unix shell)" label="bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q227308" start="5123" end="5126" title="zsh" label="zsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="5128" end="5131" title="ftp" label="ftp"/>
<link wikidata="Q170460" start="5133" end="5136" title="Secure Shell" label="ssh"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="5138" end="5144" title="telnet" label="telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q598868" start="5146" end="5150" title="Pine (e-mail client)" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="5178" end="5182" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="5512" end="5526" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="5607" end="5614" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q511977" start="5619" end="5633" title="OpenOffice.org" label="OpenOffice.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="5702" end="5710" title="User space" label="userland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="5742" end="5748" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q310603" start="5766" end="5772" title="pkgsrc" label="pkgsrc"/>
<link wikidata="Q864915" start="5857" end="5862" title="Clang" label="Clang"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="5897" end="5900" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q464113" start="5942" end="5945" title="GDB" label="GDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="6279" end="6280" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="6282" end="6285" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="6287" end="6294" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q777358" start="6296" end="6304" title="Modula-2" label="Modula-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="6306" end="6312" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="6314" end="6318" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="6320" end="6326" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="6332" end="6335" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915608" start="6528" end="6551" title="Intel Management Engine" label="Intel Management Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="6605" end="6619" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="6749" end="6766" title="monolithic kernel" label="monolithic kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="6780" end="6791" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576065" start="6837" end="6862" title="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate" label="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="6948" end="6960" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="7019" end="7024" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q685924" start="7077" end="7094" title="MINIX file system" label="MINIX file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188954" start="7096" end="7108" title="Eric Raymond" label="Eric Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721554" start="7397" end="7430" title="Alexis de Tocqueville Institution" label="Alexis de Tocqueville Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620418" start="7551" end="7559" title="Samizdat (book)" label="Samizdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="7771" end="7780" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q207621" start="7851" end="7858" title="software license" label="license"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="8030" end="8037" title="student" label="student"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="8365" end="8385" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="8422" end="8427" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q228413" start="8432" end="8438" title="386BSD" label="386BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="8481" end="8490" title="Volunteering" label="volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="8491" end="8509" title="software developer" label="software developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="8574" end="8603" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="8614" end="8626" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD-3-Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="8835" end="8843" title="hobbyist" label="hobbyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="8915" end="8927" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD-3-Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q685924" start="8953" end="8970" title="MINIX file system" label="MINIX file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q23665359" start="8972" end="8977" title="Redox (operating system)" label="Redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q615787" start="9034" end="9038" title="Xinu" label="Xinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053414" start="9040" end="9043" title="xv6" label="xv6"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18982" wikidata="Q1137767" url="?curid=18982" title="Muscular dystrophy">
<text>Muscular dystrophies (MD) are a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of rare neuromuscular diseases that cause progressive weakness and breakdown of skeletal muscles over time. The disorders differ as to which muscles are primarily affected, the degree of weakness, how fast they worsen, and when symptoms begin. Some types are also associated with problems in other organs.
Over 30 different disorders are classified as muscular dystrophies. Of those, Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) accounts for approximately 50% of cases and affects males beginning around the age of four. Other relatively common muscular dystrophies include Becker muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, and myotonic dystrophy, whereas limb–girdle muscular dystrophy and congenital muscular dystrophy are themselves groups of several – usually extremely rare – genetic disorders.

Muscular dystrophies are caused by mutations in genes, usually those involved in making muscle proteins. The muscle protein, dystrophin, is in most muscle cells and works to strengthen the muscle fibers and protect them from injury as muscles contract and relax. It links the muscle membrane to the thin muscular filaments within the cell. Dystrophin is an integral part of the muscular structure. An absence of dystrophin can cause impairments: healthy muscle tissue can be replaced by fibrous tissue and fat, causing an inability to generate force. Respiratory and cardiac complications can occur as well. These mutations are either inherited from parents or may occur spontaneously during early development. Muscular dystrophies may be X-linked recessive, autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant. Diagnosis often involves blood tests and genetic testing.
There is no cure for any disorder from the muscular dystrophy group. Several drugs designed to address the root cause are currently available including gene therapy (Elevidys), and antisense drugs (Ataluren, Eteplirsen etc.). Other medications used include glucocorticoids (Deflazacort, Vamorolone); calcium channel blockers (Diltiazem); to slow skeletal and cardiac muscle degeneration, anticonvulsants to control seizures and some muscle activity, and Histone deacetylase inhibitors (Givinostat) to delay damage to dying muscle cells. Physical therapy, braces, and corrective surgery may help with some symptoms while assisted ventilation may be required in those with weakness of breathing muscles.

Outcomes depend on the specific type of disorder. Many affected people will eventually become unable to walk and Duchenne muscular dystrophy in particular is associated with shortened life expectancy.

Muscular dystrophy was first described in the 1830s by Charles Bell. The word &quot;dystrophy&quot; comes from the Greek &quot;dys&quot;, meaning &quot;no, un-&quot; and &quot;troph-&quot; meaning &quot;nourish&quot;.

==Signs and symptoms==

The signs and symptoms consistent with muscular dystrophy are:

==Causes==
The majority of muscular dystrophies are inherited; the different muscular dystrophies follow various inheritance patterns (X-linked, autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant). In a small percentage of patients, the disorder may have been caused by a &quot;de novo&quot; (spontaneous) mutation.

==Diagnosis==
The diagnosis of muscular dystrophy is based on the results of muscle biopsy, increased creatine phosphokinase (CpK3), electromyography, and genetic testing. A physical examination and the patient&#x27;s medical history will help the doctor determine the type of muscular dystrophy. Specific muscle groups are affected by different types of muscular dystrophy.

An MRI can be used to assess the white matter of the nervous system and measure the merosin levels in young boys. An absence of merosin in young boys will result with neurological deficits and changes in the white matter.

===Classification===
==Management==

Currently, there is no cure for muscular dystrophy. In terms of management, physical therapy, occupational therapy, orthotic intervention (e.g., ankle-foot orthosis), speech therapy, and respiratory therapy may be helpful. Low intensity corticosteroids such as prednisone, and deflazacort may help to maintain muscle tone. Orthoses (orthopedic appliances used for support) and corrective orthopedic surgery may be needed to improve the quality of life in some cases. The cardiac problems that occur with Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) and myotonic muscular dystrophy may require a pacemaker. The myotonia (delayed relaxation of a muscle after a strong contraction) occurring in myotonic muscular dystrophy may be treated with medications such as quinine.

Low-intensity, assisted exercises, dynamic exercise training, or assisted bicycle training of the arms and legs during a 24-week trial significantly delayed the functional loss of muscular dystrophy. It can be done in a safe and feasible manner, even with boys late in their ambulation stage. However, eccentric exercises, or intense exercises causing soreness should not be used as they can cause further damage.

Occupational therapy assists the individual with MD to engage in activities of daily living (such as self-feeding and self-care activities) and leisure activities at the most independent level possible. This may be achieved with use of adaptive equipment or the use of energy-conservation techniques. Occupational therapy may implement changes to a person&#x27;s environment, both at home or work, to increase the individual&#x27;s function and accessibility; furthermore, it addresses psychosocial changes and cognitive decline which may accompany MD, and provides support and education about the disease to the family and individual.

==Prognosis==
Prognosis depends on the individual form of muscular dystrophy. Some dystrophies cause progressive weakness and loss of muscle function, which may result in severe physical disability and a life-threatening deterioration of respiratory muscles or heart. Other dystrophies do not affect life expectancy and only cause relatively mild impairment.

==History==
In the 1860s, descriptions of boys who grew progressively weaker, lost the ability to walk, and died at an early age became more prominent in medical journals. In the following decade, French neurologist Guillaume Duchenne gave a comprehensive account of the most common and severe form of the disease, which now carries his name – Duchenne MD.

== Society and culture ==
In 1966 in the US and Canada, Jerry Lewis and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA) began the annual Labor Day telecast &quot;The Jerry Lewis Telethon&quot;, significant in raising awareness of muscular dystrophy in North America. Disability rights advocates, however, have criticized the telethon for portraying those living with the disease as deserving pity rather than respect.

On December 18, 2001, the MD CARE Act was signed into law in the US; it amends the Public Health Service Act to provide research for the various muscular dystrophies. This law also established the Muscular Dystrophy Coordinating Committee to help focus research efforts through a coherent research strategy.

== Research and Advocacy ==
The [Muscular Dystrophy Association](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muscular_Dystrophy_Association) (MDA) is involved in research, advocacy, and services for individuals affected by muscular dystrophy. The organization provides resources that contribute to understanding and addressing this condition.

==See also==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="0" end="20" title="Muscular dystrophy" label="Muscular dystrophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="22" end="24" title="Muscular dystrophy" label="MD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246789" start="87" end="108" title="neuromuscular disease" label="neuromuscular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="159" end="175" title="skeletal muscles" label="skeletal muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="377" end="383" title="human organs" label="organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="463" end="490" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484592" start="642" end="667" title="Becker muscular dystrophy" label="Becker muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399182" start="669" end="707" title="facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy" label="facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860507" start="713" end="731" title="myotonic dystrophy" label="myotonic dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="741" end="771" title="limb–girdle muscular dystrophy" label="limb–girdle muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321884" start="776" end="805" title="congenital muscular dystrophy" label="congenital muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="921" end="929" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="934" end="938" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="1521" end="1543" title="Heredity" label="inherited from parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330942" start="1557" end="1570" title="De novo mutation" label="spontaneously"/>
<link wikidata="Q964797" start="1578" end="1595" title="human embryogenesis" label="early development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988987" start="1625" end="1643" title="X-linked recessive" label="X-linked recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="1645" end="1664" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="1669" end="1687" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="1714" end="1725" title="blood tests" label="blood tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="1730" end="1745" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="1899" end="1911" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q120434975" start="1913" end="1921" title="Delandistrogene moxeparvovec" label="Elevidys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4067124" start="1928" end="1943" title="Antisense therapy" label="antisense drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q753330" start="1945" end="1953" title="Ataluren" label="Ataluren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402585" start="1955" end="1965" title="Eteplirsen" label="Eteplirsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="2004" end="2018" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q779118" start="2021" end="2032" title="Deflazacort" label="Deflazacort"/>
<link wikidata="Q27089127" start="2034" end="2044" title="Vamorolone" label="Vamorolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="2047" end="2071" title="calcium channel blockers" label="calcium channel blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q422229" start="2073" end="2082" title="Diltiazem" label="Diltiazem"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="2135" end="2150" title="anticonvulsants" label="anticonvulsants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="2162" end="2169" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569101" start="2201" end="2230" title="Histone deacetylase inhibitor" label="Histone deacetylase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q426257" start="2233" end="2243" title="Givinostat" label="Givinostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q428914" start="2270" end="2281" title="muscle cell" label="muscle cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="2284" end="2300" title="Physical therapy" label="Physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="2302" end="2308" title="orthopedic brace" label="braces"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="2325" end="2332" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="2367" end="2387" title="assisted ventilation" label="assisted ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754337" start="2430" end="2447" title="breathing muscles" label="breathing muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q451727" start="2707" end="2719" title="Charles Bell" label="Charles Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="3011" end="3020" title="Heredity" label="inherited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142188" start="3094" end="3102" title="X-linked" label="X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="3104" end="3123" title="Autosomal Recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="3127" end="3145" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="3222" end="3264" title="spontaneous mutation" label="&amp;quot;de novo&amp;quot; (spontaneous) mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094702" start="3344" end="3357" title="muscle biopsy" label="muscle biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="3369" end="3391" title="creatine phosphokinase" label="creatine phosphokinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="3400" end="3416" title="electromyography" label="electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="3422" end="3437" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="3979" end="3995" title="physical therapy" label="physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="3997" end="4017" title="occupational therapy" label="occupational therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="4048" end="4067" title="ankle-foot orthosis" label="ankle-foot orthosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424972" start="4164" end="4174" title="prednisone" label="prednisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q779118" start="4180" end="4191" title="deflazacort" label="deflazacort"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="4226" end="4234" title="Orthosis" label="Orthoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="4291" end="4309" title="orthopedic surgery" label="orthopedic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="4494" end="4503" title="artificial pacemaker" label="pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277793" start="4509" end="4517" title="myotonia" label="myotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q551417" start="6297" end="6315" title="Guillaume Duchenne" label="Guillaume Duchenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="6495" end="6506" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940370" start="6515" end="6545" title="Muscular Dystrophy Association" label="Muscular Dystrophy Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="6569" end="6578" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479290" start="6594" end="6618" title="The Jerry Lewis MDA Labor Day Telethon" label="The Jerry Lewis Telethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940376" start="6877" end="6888" title="MD CARE Act" label="MD CARE Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257410" start="6934" end="6959" title="Public Health Service Act" label="Public Health Service Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940376" start="7048" end="7089" title="Muscular Dystrophy Coordinating Committee" label="Muscular Dystrophy Coordinating Committee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18984" wikidata="Q41975" url="?curid=18984" title="Mongols">
<text>The Mongols are an East Asian ethnic group native to Mongolia, China (Inner Mongolia and other 11 autonomous territories), as well as Buryatia and Kalmykia republics of Russia. The Mongols are the principal member of the large family of Mongolic peoples. The Oirats and the Buryats are classified either as distinct ethno-linguistic groups or subgroups of Mongols.

The Mongols are bound together by a common heritage and ethnic identity. Their indigenous dialects are collectively known as the Mongolian language. The contiguous geographical area in which the Mongols primarily live is referred to as the Mongol heartland, especially in history books. The ancestors of the modern-day Mongols are referred to as Proto-Mongols.

== Definition ==
Broadly defined, the term includes the Mongols proper (also known as the Khalkha Mongols), Buryats, Oirats, the Kalmyks and the Southern Mongols. The latter comprises the Abaga Mongols, Abaganar, Aohans, Arkhorchin, Asud, Baarins, Chahars, Darkhan (Shar Darkhad), Dörvön Khüükhed, Eastern Dorbets, Gorlos Mongols, Ikhmyangan, Jalaids, Jaruud, Kharchins, Khishigten, Khorchins, Khuuchid, Muumyangan, Naimans, Onnigud, Ordos, Sunud, Tumed, Urad and Üzemchins.

The designation &quot;Mongol&quot; briefly appeared in 8th century records of Tang China to describe a tribe of Shiwei. It resurfaced in the late 11th century during the Khitan-ruled Liao dynasty. After the fall of the Liao in 1125, the Khamag Mongols became a leading tribe on the Mongolian Plateau. However, their wars with the Jurchen-ruled Jin dynasty and the Tatar confederation had weakened them.

In the thirteenth century, the word Mongol grew into an umbrella term for a large group of Mongolic-speaking tribes united under the rule of Genghis Khan.

=== Etymology ===

There are several proposals for the ethnonym Mongol&#x27;s etymology:
* A change from &quot;Mongkhe-tengri-gal&quot; (&quot;Eternal Sky Fire&quot;);
* A derivation from the personal name, transcribed in Chinese-language sources as Mùgǔlǘ (from Middle Chinese *&quot;muwk-kwot-ljo&quot;), of the progenitor of Rouran Khaganate.

== History ==


The ethnogenesis of Mongolic peoples is largely linked with the expansion of Ancient Northeast Asians. The Mongolian pastoralist lifestyle may in part be derived from the Western Steppe Herders, but without much geneflow between these two groups, suggesting cultural transmission.

In various times Mongolic peoples have been equated with the Scythians, the Magog, and the Tungusic peoples. Based on Chinese historical texts the ancestry of the Mongolic peoples can be traced back to the Donghu, a nomadic confederation occupying eastern Mongolia and Manchuria. The Donghu neighboured the Xiongnu, whose identity is still debated today. Although some scholars maintain that they were proto-Mongols, they were more likely a multi-ethnic group of Mongolic and Turkic tribes. It has been suggested that the language of the Huns was related to the Xiongnu.
The Donghu, however, can be much more easily labeled proto-Mongol since the Chinese histories trace only Mongolic tribes and kingdoms (Xianbei and Wuhuan peoples) from them, although some historical texts claim a mixed Xiongnu-Donghu ancestry for some tribes (e.g. the Khitan).

=== In the Chinese classics ===
The Donghu are mentioned by Sima Qian as already existing in Inner Mongolia north of Yan in 699–632 BCE along with the Shanrong. Unofficial Chinese sources such as &quot;Yi Zhou Shu&quot; (&quot;Lost Book of Zhou&quot;) and the &quot;Classic of Mountains and Seas&quot; project the Donghu&#x27;s activities back to the Shang dynasty (1600–1046 BCE). However, the Hu (胡) were not mentioned among the non-Shang &quot;fang&quot; (方 &quot;border-region&quot;; modern term &quot;fāngguó&quot; 方國 &quot;fang-countries&quot;) in the extant oracle bones from the Shang period.

The Xianbei formed part of the Donghu confederation, and possibly had in earlier times some independence within the Donghu confederation as well as from the Zhou dynasty. During the Warring States the poem &quot;The Great Summons&quot; () in the anthology Verses of Chu mentions small-waisted and long-necked Xianbei women, and possibly also the book &quot;Discourses of the States&quot;, which states that during the reign of King Cheng of Zhou (reigned 1042–1021 BCE) the Xianbei came to participate at a meeting of Zhou subject-lords at Qiyang (岐阳) (now Qishan County) but were only allowed to perform the fire ceremony under the supervision of Chu since they were not vassals (诸侯) by enfeoffment and establishment. The Xianbei chieftain was appointed joint guardian of the ritual torch along with Chu viscount Xiong Yi.

These early Xianbei came from the nearby Zhukaigou culture (2200–1500 BCE) in the Ordos Desert, where maternal DNA corresponds to the Mongol Daur people and the Tungusic Evenks. The Zhukaigou Xianbei (part of the Ordos culture of Inner Mongolia and northern Shaanxi) had trade relations with the Shang. Liu Song dynasty commentator Pei Yin (裴駰), in his Jixie (集解), quoted Eastern Han dynasty scholar Fu Qian (服虔)&#x27;s assertion that Shanrong (山戎) and Beidi (北狄) are ancestors of the present-day Xianbei (鮮卑). Again in Inner Mongolia another closely connected core Mongolic Xianbei region was the Upper Xiajiadian culture (1000–600 BCE) where the Donghu confederation was centered.

After the Donghu were defeated by Xiongnu king Modu Chanyu, the Xianbei and Wuhuan survived as the main remnants of the confederation. Tadun Khan of the Wuhuan (died 207 AD) was the ancestor of the proto-Mongolic Kumo Xi. The Wuhuan are of the direct Donghu royal line and the &quot;New Book of Tang&quot; says that in 209 BCE, Modu Chanyu defeated the Wuhuan instead of using the word Donghu. The Xianbei, however, were of the lateral Donghu line and had a somewhat separate identity, although they shared the same language with the Wuhuan. In 49 CE the Xianbei ruler Bianhe (Bayan Khan?) raided and defeated the Xiongnu, killing 2000, after having received generous gifts from Emperor Guangwu of Han. The Xianbei reached their peak under Tanshihuai Khan (reigned 156–181) who expanded the vast, but short lived, Xianbei state (93–234).

Three prominent groups split from the Xianbei state as recorded by the Chinese histories: the Rouran (claimed by some to be the Pannonian Avars), the Khitan people and the Shiwei (a subtribe called the &quot;Shiwei Menggu&quot; is held to be the origin of the Genghisid Mongols). Besides these three Xianbei groups, there were others such as the Murong, Duan and Tuoba. Their culture was nomadic, their religion shamanism or Buddhism and their military strength formidable. There is still no direct evidence that the Rouran spoke Mongolic languages, although most scholars agree that they were Proto-Mongolic. The Khitan, however, had two scripts of their own and many Mongolic words are found in their half-deciphered writings.

Geographically, the Tuoba Xianbei ruled the southern part of Inner Mongolia and northern China, the Rouran (Yujiulü Shelun was the first to use the title khagan in 402) ruled eastern Mongolia, western Mongolia, the northern part of Inner Mongolia and northern Mongolia, the Khitan were concentrated in eastern part of Inner Mongolia north of Korea and the Shiwei were located to the north of the Khitan. These tribes and kingdoms were soon overshadowed by the rise of the First Turkic Khaganate in 555, the Uyghur Khaganate in 745 and the Yenisei Kirghiz states in 840. The Tuoba were eventually absorbed into China. The Rouran fled west from the Göktürks and either disappeared into obscurity or, as some say, invaded Europe as the Avars under their Khan, Bayan I. Some Rouran under Tatar Khan migrated east, founding the Tatar confederation, who became part of the Shiwei. The Khitans, who were independent after their separation from the Kumo Xi (of Wuhuan origin) in 388, continued as a minor power in Manchuria until one of them, Abaoji (872–926), established the Liao dynasty (916–1125).

===Mongol Empire===


The destruction of Uyghur Khaganate by the Kirghiz resulted in the end of Turkic dominance in Mongolia. According to historians, Kirghiz were not interested in assimilating newly acquired lands; instead, they controlled local tribes through various manaps (tribal leaders). The Khitans occupied the areas vacated by the Turkic Uyghurs bringing them under their control. The Yenisei Kirghiz state was centered on Khakassia and they were expelled from Mongolia by the Khitans in 924. Beginning in the 10th century, the Khitans, under the leadership of Abaoji, prevailed in several military campaigns against the Tang dynasty″s border guards, and the Xi, Shiwei and Jurchen nomadic groups.

Remnants of the Liao dynasty led by Yelü Dashi fled west through Mongolia after being defeated by the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty and founded the Qara Khitai (Western Liao dynasty) in 1124 while still maintaining control over western Mongolia. In 1218, Genghis Khan incorporated the Qara Khitai after which the Khitan passed into obscurity. Some remnants surfaced as the Qutlugh-Khanid dynasty (1222–1306) in Iran and the Dai Khitai in Afghanistan. With the expansion of the Mongol Empire, the Mongolic peoples settled over almost all Eurasia and carried on military campaigns from the Adriatic Sea to Indonesian Java and from Japan to Palestine. They simultaneously became Padishahs of Persia, Emperors of China, and Great Khans of the Mongols, and one (Al-Adil Kitbugha) became Sultan of Egypt. The Mongolic peoples of the Golden Horde established themselves to govern Russia by 1240. By 1279, they conquered the Song dynasty and brought all of China proper under the control of the Yuan dynasty.

With the breakup of the empire, the dispersed Mongolic peoples quickly adopted the mostly Turkic cultures surrounding them and were assimilated, forming parts of Afghanistan&#x27;s Hazaras, Azerbaijanis, Uzbeks, Karakalpaks, Tatars, Bashkirs, Turkmens, Uyghurs, Nogais, Kyrgyzs, Kazakhs, Caucasus peoples, Iranian peoples and Moghuls; linguistic and cultural Persianization also began to be prominent in these territories. Some Mongols assimilated into the Yakuts after their migration to northern Siberia and about 30% of Yakut words have Mongol origin. However, remnants of the Yuan imperial family retreated north to Mongolia in 1368, retaining their language and culture. There were 250,000 Mongols in southern China and many Mongols were massacred by the rebel army. The survivors were trapped in southern China and eventually assimilated. The Dongxiangs, Bonans, Yugur and Monguor people were invaded by the Ming dynasty.

===Northern Yuan===
After the fall of the Yuan dynasty in 1368, the Mongols continued to rule the Northern Yuan in northern China and the Mongolian steppe. However, the Oirads began to challenge the Eastern Mongols under the Borjigin monarchs in the late 14th century and Mongolia was divided into two parts: Western Mongolia (Oirats) and Eastern Mongolia (Khalkha, Inner Mongols, Barga, Buryats). The earliest written references to the plough in Middle Mongol language sources appear towards the end of the 14th c.

In 1434, Eastern Mongol Taisun Khan&#x27;s (1433–1452) Oirat prime minister Togoon Taish reunited the Mongols after killing Adai Khan in Khorchin. Togoon died in 1439 and his son Esen Taish became ruler of Northern Yuan dynasty. Esen later unified the Mongol tribes. The Ming dynasty attempted to invade the Northern Yuan in the 14–16th centuries, however, the Ming dynasty was defeated by the Oirat, Southern Mongol, Eastern Mongol and united Mongol armies. Esen&#x27;s 30,000 cavalries defeated 500,000 Chinese soldiers in the 1449 Tumu Crisis. Within eighteen months of his defeat of the titular Khan Taisun, in 1453, Esen himself took the title of Great Khan (1454–1455) of the Great Yuan.

The Khalkha emerged during the reign of Dayan Khan (1479–1543) as one of the six tumens of the Eastern Mongolic peoples. They quickly became the dominant Mongolic clan in Mongolia proper. He reunited the Mongols again. In 1550, Altan Khan led a Khalkha Mongol raid on Beijing. The Mongols voluntarily reunified during Eastern Mongolian Tümen Zasagt Khan rule (1558–1592) for the last time (the Mongol Empire united all Mongols before this).

Eastern Mongolia was divided into three parts in the 17th century: Outer Mongolia (Khalkha), Inner Mongolia (Inner Mongols) and the Buryat region in southern Siberia.

The last Mongol khagan was Ligdan in the early 17th century. He got into conflicts with the Manchus over the looting of Chinese cities, and managed to alienate most Mongol tribes. In 1618, Ligdan signed a treaty with the Ming dynasty to protect their northern border from the Manchus attack in exchange for thousands of taels of silver. By the 1620s, only the Chahars remained under his rule.

=== Qing era ===


The Chahar army was defeated in 1625 and 1628 by the Inner Mongol and Manchu armies due to Ligdan&#x27;s faulty tactics. The Qing forces secured their control over Inner Mongolia by 1635, and the army of the last khan Ligdan moved to battle against Tibetan Gelugpa sect (Yellow Hat sect) forces. The Gelugpa forces supported the Manchus, while Ligdan supported Kagyu sect (Red Hat sect) of Tibetan Buddhism. Ligden died in 1634 on his way to Tibet. By 1636, most Inner Mongolian nobles had submitted to the Qing dynasty founded by the Manchus. Inner Mongolian Tengis noyan revolted against the Qing in the 1640s and the Khalkha battled to protect Sunud.

Western Mongol Oirats and Eastern Mongolian Khalkhas vied for domination in Mongolia since the 15th century and this conflict weakened Mongol strength. In 1688, the Western Mongol Dzungar Khanate&#x27;s king Galdan Boshugtu attacked Khalkha after murder of his younger brother by Tusheet Khan Chakhundorj (main or Central Khalkha leader) and the Khalkha-Oirat War began. Galdan threatened to kill Chakhundorj and Zanabazar (Javzandamba Khutagt I, spiritual head of Khalkha) but they escaped to Sunud (Inner Mongolia). Many Khalkha nobles and folks fled to Inner Mongolia because of the war. Few Khalkhas fled to the Buryat region and Russia threatened to exterminate them if they did not submit, but many of them submitted to Galdan Boshugtu.

In 1683 Galdan&#x27;s armies reached Tashkent and the Syr Darya and crushed two armies of the Kazakhs. After that Galdan subjugated the Black Khirgizs and ravaged the Fergana Valley. From 1685 Galdan&#x27;s forces aggressively pushed the Kazakhs. While his general Rabtan took Taraz, and his main force forced the Kazakhs to migrate westwards. In 1687, he besieged the City of Turkistan. Under the leadership of Abul Khair Khan, the Kazakhs won major victories over the Dzungars at the Bulanty River in 1726, and at the Battle of Anrakay in 1729.

The Khalkha eventually submitted to Qing rule in 1691 by Zanabazar&#x27;s decision, thus bringing all of today&#x27;s Mongolia under the rule of the Qing dynasty but Khalkha &quot;de facto&quot; remained under the rule of Galdan Boshugtu Khaan until 1696. The Mongol-Oirat&#x27;s Code (a treaty of alliance) against foreign invasion between the Oirats and Khalkhas was signed in 1640, however, the Mongols could not unite against foreign invasions. Chakhundorj fought against Russian invasion of Outer Mongolia until 1688 and stopped Russian invasion of Khövsgöl Province. Zanabazar struggled to bring together the Oirats and Khalkhas before the war.

Galdan Boshugtu sent his army to &quot;liberate&quot; Inner Mongolia after defeating the Khalkha&#x27;s army and called Inner Mongolian nobles to fight for Mongolian independence. Some Inner Mongolian nobles, Tibetans, Kumul Khanate and some Moghulistan&#x27;s nobles supported his war against the Manchus, however, Inner Mongolian nobles did not battle against the Qing.

There were three khans in Khalkha and Zasagt Khan Shar (Western Khalkha leader) was Galdan&#x27;s ally. Tsetsen Khan (Eastern Khalkha leader) did not engage in this conflict. While Galdan was fighting in Eastern Mongolia, his nephew Tseveenravdan seized the Dzungarian throne in 1689 and this event made Galdan impossible to fight against the Qing Empire. The Russian and Qing Empires supported his action because this coup weakened Western Mongolian strength. Galdan Boshugtu&#x27;s army was defeated by the outnumbering Qing army in 1696 and he died in 1697. The Mongols who fled to the Buryat region and Inner Mongolia returned after the war. Some Khalkhas mixed with the Buryats.

The Buryats fought against Russian invasion since the 1620s and thousands of Buryats were massacred. The Buryat region was formally annexed to Russia by treaties in 1689 and 1727, when the territories on both the sides of Lake Baikal were separated from Mongolia. In 1689 the Treaty of Nerchinsk established the northern border of Manchuria north of the present line. The Russians retained Trans-Baikalia between Lake Baikal and the Argun River north of Mongolia. The Treaty of Kyakhta (1727), along with the Treaty of Nerchinsk, regulated the relations between Russian and Qing empires until the mid-nineteenth century, and established the Mongolia-Russia border. Oka Buryats revolted in 1767 and Russia completely conquered the Buryat region in the late 18th century. Russia and Qing were rival empires until the early 20th century, however, both empires carried out united policy against Central Asians.

The Qing Empire conquered Upper Mongolia or the Oirat&#x27;s Khoshut Khanate in the 1720s and 80,000 people were killed. By that period, Upper Mongolian population reached 200,000. The Dzungar Khanate conquered by the Qing dynasty in 1755–1758 because of their leaders and military commanders conflicts. Some scholars estimate that about 80% of the Dzungar population were destroyed by a combination of warfare and disease during the Qing conquest of the Dzungar Khanate in 1755–1758. Mark Levene, a historian whose recent research interests focus on genocide, has stated that the extermination of the Dzungars was &quot;arguably the eighteenth century genocide par excellence.&quot; The Dzungar population reached 600,000 in 1755.

About 200,000–250,000 Oirats migrated from western Mongolia to Volga River in 1607 and established the Kalmyk Khanate.The Torghuts were led by their Tayishi, Kho Orluk. Russia was concerned about their attack but the Kalmyks became a Russian ally and a treaty to protect the southern Russian border was signed between the Kalmyk Khanate and Russia. In 1724 the Kalmyks came under control of Russia. By the early 18th century, there were approximately 300,000–350,000 Kalmyks and 15,000,000 Russians. The Tsardom of Russia gradually chipped away at the autonomy of the Kalmyk Khanate. These policies, for instance, encouraged the establishment of Russian and German settlements on pastures the Kalmyks used to roam and feed their livestock. In addition, the Tsarist government imposed a council on the Kalmyk Khan, thereby diluting his authority, while continuing to expect the Kalmyk Khan to provide cavalry units to fight on behalf of Russia. The Russian Orthodox church, by contrast, pressured Buddhist Kalmyks to adopt Orthodoxy. In January 1771, approximately 200,000 (170,000) Kalmyks began the migration from their pastures on the left bank of the Volga to Dzungaria, through the territories of their Bashkir and Kazakh enemies. The last Kalmyk khan Ubashi led the migration to restore Mongolian independence. Ubashi Khan sent his 30,000 cavalries to the Russo-Turkish War (1768–74) to gain weapon before the migration. The Empress Catherine the Great ordered the Russian army, Bashkirs and Kazakhs to exterminate all migrants and the Empress abolished the Kalmyk Khanate. The Kyrgyzs attacked them near Balkhash Lake. About 100,000–150,000 Kalmyks who settled on the west bank of the Volga River could not cross the river because the river did not freeze in the winter of 1771 and Catherine the Great executed influential nobles of them. After seven months of travel, only one-third (66,073) of the original group reached Dzungaria (Balkhash Lake, western border of the Qing Empire). The Qing Empire transmigrated the Kalmyks to five different areas to prevent their revolt and influential leaders of the Kalmyks died soon (killed by the Manchus). Russia states that Buryatia voluntarily merged with Russia in 1659 due to Mongolian oppression and the Kalmyks voluntarily accepted Russian rule in 1609 but only Georgia voluntarily accepted Russian rule.

In the early 20th century, the late Qing government encouraged Han Chinese settlement of Mongolian lands under the name of &quot;New Policies&quot; or &quot;New Administration&quot; (xinzheng). As a result, some Mongol leaders, especially those of Outer Mongolia, decided to seek Mongolian independence. After the Xinhai Revolution, the Mongolian Revolution on 30 November 1911 in Outer Mongolia ended an over 200-year rule of the Qing dynasty.

=== Post-Qing era ===

With the independence of Outer Mongolia, the Mongolian army controlled Khalkha and Khovd regions (modern day Uvs, Khovd, and Bayan-Ölgii provinces), but Northern Xinjiang (the Altai and Ili regions of the Qing empire), Upper Mongolia, Barga and Inner Mongolia came under control of the newly formed Republic of China. On February 2, 1913, the Bogd Khanate of Mongolia sent Mongolian cavalries to &quot;liberate&quot; Inner Mongolia from China. Russia refused to sell weapons to the Bogd Khanate, and the Russian czar, Nicholas II, referred to it as &quot;Mongolian imperialism&quot;. Additionally, the United Kingdom urged Russia to abolish Mongolian independence as it was concerned that &quot;if Mongolians gain independence, then Central Asians will revolt&quot;. 10,000 Khalkha and Inner Mongolian cavalries (about 3,500 Inner Mongols) defeated 70,000 Chinese soldiers and controlled almost all of Inner Mongolia; however, the Mongolian army retreated due to lack of weapons in 1914. 400 Mongol soldiers and 3,795 Chinese soldiers died in this war. The Khalkhas, Khovd Oirats, Buryats, Dzungarian Oirats, Upper Mongols, Barga Mongols, most Inner Mongolian and some Tuvan leaders sent statements to support Bogd Khan&#x27;s call of Mongolian reunification. In reality however, most of them were too prudent or irresolute to attempt joining the Bogd Khan regime. Russia encouraged Mongolia to become an autonomous region of China in 1914. Mongolia lost Barga, Dzungaria, Tuva, Upper Mongolia and Inner Mongolia in the 1915 Treaty of Kyakhta.

In October 1919, the Republic of China occupied Mongolia after the suspicious deaths of Mongolian patriotic nobles. On 3 February 1921 the White Russian army—led by Baron Ungern and mainly consisting of Mongolian volunteer cavalries, and Buryat and Tatar cossacks—liberated Ulaanbaatar. Baron Ungern&#x27;s purpose was to find allies to defeat the Soviet Union. The Statement of Reunification of Mongolia was adopted by Mongolian revolutionaries in 1921. The Soviet, however, considered Mongolia to be Chinese territory in 1924 during a secret meeting with the Republic of China. However, the Soviets officially recognized Mongolian independence in 1945 but carried out various policies (political, economic and cultural) against Mongolia until its fall in 1991 to prevent Pan-Mongolism and other irredentist movements.

On 10 April 1932, Mongolians revolted against the government&#x27;s new policy and Soviets. The government and Soviet soldiers defeated the rebels in October.

The Buryats started to migrate to Mongolia in the 1900s due to Russian oppression. Joseph Stalin&#x27;s regime stopped the migration in 1930 and started a campaign of ethnic cleansing against newcomers and Mongolians. During the Stalinist repressions in Mongolia, almost all adult Buryat men and 22,000–33,000 Mongols (3–5% of the total population; common citizens, monks, Pan-Mongolists, nationalists, patriots, hundreds of military officers, nobles, intellectuals and elite people) were shot dead under Soviet orders. Some authors also offer much higher estimates, up to 100,000 victims. Around the late 1930s the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic had an overall population of about 700,000 to 900,000 people. By 1939, Soviet said &quot;We repressed too many people, the population of Mongolia is only hundred thousands&quot;. The proportion of victims in relation to the population of the country is much higher than the corresponding figures of the Great Purge in the Soviet Union.
The Manchukuo (1932–1945), puppet state of the Empire of Japan (1868–1947) invaded Barga and some part of Inner Mongolia with Japanese help. The Mongolian army advanced to the Great Wall of China during the Soviet–Japanese War of 1945 (Mongolian name: &quot;Liberation War of 1945&quot;). Japan forced Inner Mongolian and Barga people to fight against Mongolians but they surrendered to Mongolians and started to fight against their Japanese and Manchu allies. Marshal Khorloogiin Choibalsan called Inner Mongolians and Xinjiang Oirats to migrate to Mongolia during the war but the Soviet Army blocked Inner Mongolian migrants&#x27; way. It was a part of a Pan-Mongolian plan and few Oirats and Inner Mongols (Huuchids, Bargas, Tümeds, about 800 Uzemchins) arrived. Inner Mongolian leaders carried out active policy to merge Inner Mongolia with Mongolia since 1911. They founded the Inner Mongolian Army in 1929 but the Inner Mongolian Army disbanded after ending World War II. The Japanese Empire supported Pan-Mongolism since the 1910s but there have never been active relations between Mongolia and Imperial Japan due to Russian resistance. The nominally independent Inner Mongolian Mengjiang state (1936–1945) was established with support of Japan in 1936; also, some Buryat and Inner Mongol nobles founded a Pan-Mongolist government with the support of Japan in 1919.

The Inner Mongols established the short-lived Republic of Inner Mongolia in 1945.

Another part of Choibalsan&#x27;s plan was to merge Inner Mongolia and Dzungaria with Mongolia. By 1945, Chinese communist leader Mao Zedong requested the Soviets to stop Pan-Mongolism because China lost its control over Inner Mongolia and without Inner Mongolian support the Communists were unable to defeat Japan and Kuomintang.

Mongolia and Soviets supported the Uyghur and Kazakh separatist movement during the 1930s and 1940s. By 1945, the Soviets refused to support them after its alliance with the Chinese Communist Party and Mongolia interrupted its relations with the separatists under pressure. Xinjiang Oirat militant groups operated together the Turkic peoples but the Oirats did not have the leading role due to their small population. Basmachis or Turkic and Tajik militants fought to liberate Soviet Central Asia until 1942.

On February 2, 1913, the Treaty of friendship and alliance between the Government of Mongolia and Tibet was signed. Mongolian agents and Bogd Khan disrupted Soviet secret operations in Tibet to change its regime in the 1920s.

On October 27, 1961, the United Nations recognized Mongolian independence and granted the nation full membership in the organization.

The powerful states of Russia and China have committed many abuses against Mongols in their homeland, including war crimes and crimes against humanity, sometimes characterized as cultural genocide, with targets among the Mongol language, culture, tradition, history, religion, and ethnic identity. Peter the Great said: &quot;The headwaters of the Yenisei River must be Russian land&quot;. The Russian Empire sent the Kalmyks and Buryats to war to reduce the populations (World War I and other wars). During the 20th century, Soviet scientists attempted to convince the Kalmyks and Buryats that they&#x27;re not Mongols during (demongolization policy). 35,000 Buryats were killed during a rebellion in 1927, and around one-third of the Buryat population in Russia died in the 1900s–1950s. 10,000 Buryats of the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic were massacred by Stalin&#x27;s order in the 1930s. In 1919 the Buryats established a small theocratic Balagad state in Kizhinginsky District of Russia and it fell in 1926. In 1958, the name &quot;Mongol&quot; was removed from the name of the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.

On 22 January 1922 Mongolia proposed to migrate the Kalmyks during the Kalmykian Famine but bolshevik Russia refused. 71,000–72,000 (93,000?; around half of the population) Kalmyks died during the Russian famine of 1921–22. The Kalmyks revolted against the Soviet Union in 1926, 1930 and 1942–1943. In 1913, Nicholas II, tsar of Russia, said: &quot;We need to prevent from Volg Tatars. But the Kalmyks are more dangerous than them because they are the Mongols so send them to war to reduce the population&quot;. On 23 April 1923 Joseph Stalin, communist leader of Russia, said: &quot;We are carrying out wrong policy on the Kalmyks who related to the Mongols. Our policy is too peaceful&quot;. In March 1927, Soviet deported 20,000 Kalmyks to Siberia, the tundra and Karelia.The Kalmyks founded the sovereign Republic of Oirat-Kalmyk on 22 March 1930. The Oirats&#x27; state had a small army and 200 Kalmyk soldiers defeated 1,700 Soviet soldiers in Durvud province of Kalmykia but the Oirats&#x27; state was destroyed by the Soviet Army in 1930. Kalmykian nationalists and Pan-Mongolists attempted to migrate Kalmyks to Mongolia in the 1920s. Mongolia suggested to migrate the Soviet Union&#x27;s Mongols to Mongolia in the 1920s but Russia refused the suggestion.

Stalin deported all Kalmyks to Siberia in 1943 and around half of the (97,000–98,000) Kalmyks deported to Siberia died before being allowed to return home in 1957. The government of the Soviet Union forbade teaching the Kalmyk language during the deportation. The Kalmyks&#x27; main purpose was to migrate to Mongolia and many Kalmyks joined the German Army. Marshal Khorloogiin Choibalsan attempted to migrate the deportees to Mongolia and he met with them in Siberia during his visit to Russia. Under the Law of the Russian Federation of April 26, 1991 &quot;On Rehabilitation of Exiled Peoples,&quot; repressions against Kalmyks and other peoples were qualified as acts of genocide.
On 3 October 2002 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that Taiwan recognizes Mongolia as an independent country, although no legislative actions were taken to address concerns over its constitutional claims to Mongolia. Offices established to support Taipei&#x27;s claims over Outer Mongolia, such as the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission, lie dormant.

Agin-Buryat Okrug and Ust-Orda Buryat Okrugs merged with Irkutsk Oblast and Chita Oblast in 2008 despite Buryats&#x27; resistance. Small scale protests occurred in Inner Mongolia in 2011. The Inner Mongolian People&#x27;s Party is a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization and its leaders are attemptin to establish a sovereign state or merge Inner Mongolia with Mongolia.

== Language ==
Mongolian is the official national language of Mongolia, where it is spoken by nearly 2.8 million people (2010 estimate), and the official provincial language of China&#x27;s Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, where there are at least 4.1 million ethnic Mongols. Across the whole of China, the language is spoken by roughly half of the country&#x27;s 5.8 million ethnic Mongols (2005 estimate) However, the exact number of Mongolian speakers in China is unknown, as there is no data available on the language proficiency of that country&#x27;s citizens. The use of Mongolian in China, specifically in Inner Mongolia, has witnessed periods of decline and revival over the last few hundred years. The language experienced a decline during the late Qing period, a revival between 1947 and 1965, a second decline between 1966 and 1976, a second revival between 1977 and 1992, and a third decline between 1995 and 2012. However, in spite of the decline of the Mongolian language in some of Inner Mongolia&#x27;s urban areas and educational spheres, the ethnic identity of the urbanized Chinese-speaking Mongols is most likely going to survive due to the presence of urban ethnic communities. The multilingual situation in Inner Mongolia does not appear to obstruct efforts by ethnic Mongols to preserve their language. Although an unknown number of Mongols in China, such as the Tumets, may have completely or partially lost the ability to speak their language, they are still registered as ethnic Mongols and continue to identify themselves as ethnic Mongols. The children of inter-ethnic Mongol-Chinese marriages also claim to be and are registered as ethnic Mongols.

The specific origin of the Mongolic languages and associated tribes is unclear. Linguists have traditionally proposed a link to the Tungusic and Turkic language families, included alongside Mongolic in the broader group of Altaic languages, though this remains controversial. Today the Mongolian peoples speak at least one of several Mongolic languages including Mongolian, Buryat, Oirat, Dongxiang, Tu and Bonan. Additionally, many Mongols speak either Russian or Mandarin Chinese as languages of inter-ethnic communication.

== Religion ==


The original religion of the Mongolic peoples was Mongolian shamanism. The Xianbei came in contact with Confucianism and Daoism but eventually adopted Buddhism. However, the Xianbeis and some other people in Mongolia and Rourans followed a form of shamanism. In the 5th century the Buddhist monk Dharmapriya was proclaimed &quot;State Teacher&quot; of the Rouran Khaganate and 3,000 families and some Rouran nobles became Buddhists. In 511 the Rouran Douluofubadoufa Khan sent Hong Xuan to the Tuoba court with a pearl-encrusted statue of the Buddha as a gift. The Tuoba Xianbei and Khitans were mostly Buddhists, although they still retained their original Shamanism. The Tuoba had a &quot;sacrificial castle&quot; to the west of their capital where ceremonies to spirits took place. Wooden statues of the spirits were erected on top of this sacrificial castle. One ritual involved seven princes with milk offerings who ascended the stairs with 20 female shamans and offered prayers, sprinkling the statues with the sacred milk. The Khitan had their holiest shrine on Mount Muye where portraits of their earliest ancestor Qishou Khagan, his wife Kedun and eight sons were kept in two temples. Mongolic peoples were also exposed to Zoroastrianism, Manicheism, Nestorianism, Eastern Orthodoxy and Islam from the west.

The Mongolic peoples, in particular the Borjigin, had their holiest shrine on Mount Burkhan Khaldun where their ancestor Börte Chono (Blue Wolf) and Goo Maral (Beautiful Doe) had given birth to them. Genghis Khan usually fasted, prayed and meditated on this mountain before his campaigns. As a young man he had thanked the mountain for saving his life and prayed at the foot of the mountain sprinkling offerings and bowing nine times to the east with his belt around his neck and his hat held at his chest. Genghis Khan kept a close watch on the Mongolic supreme shaman Kokochu Teb who sometimes conflicted with his authority. Later, Tengrism, the imperial cult of Genghis Khan centered on the eight white gers and nine white banners in Ordos grew into a highly organized indigenous religion with scriptures in the Mongolian script. Indigenous moral precepts of the Mongolic peoples were enshrined in oral wisdom sayings (now collected in several volumes), the anda (blood-brother) system and ancient texts such as the &quot;Chinggis-un Bilig&quot; (Wisdom of Genghis) and &quot;Oyun Tulkhuur&quot; (Key of Intelligence). These moral precepts were expressed in poetic form and mainly involved truthfulness, fidelity, help in hardship, unity, self-control, fortitude, veneration of nature, veneration of the state and veneration of parents.

Melig, the younger son of Ögedei, was the first of the Mongolian royal line to accept Islam.

In 1254 Möngke Khan organized a formal religious debate (in which William of Rubruck took part) between Christians, Muslims and Buddhists in Karakorum, a cosmopolitan city of many religions. The Mongolic Empire was known for its religious tolerance, but had a special leaning towards Buddhism and was sympathetic towards Christianity while still worshipping Tengri. The Mongolic leader Abaqa Khan sent a delegation of 13–16 to the Second Council of Lyon (1274), which created a great stir, particularly when their leader &#x27;Zaganus&#x27; underwent a public baptism. A joint crusade was announced in line with the Franco-Mongol alliance but did not materialize because Pope Gregory X died in 1276. Yahballaha III (1245–1317) and Rabban Bar Sauma (c. 1220–1294) were famous Mongolic Nestorian Christians. The Keraites in central Mongolia were Christian. In Istanbul the Church of Saint Mary of the Mongols stands as a reminder of the Byzantine-Mongol alliance.

The western Khanates, however, eventually adopted Islam (under Berke and Ghazan) and the Turkic languages (because of its commercial importance), although allegiance to the Great Khan and limited use of the Mongolic languages can be seen even in the 1330s. In 1521 the first Mughal emperor Babur took part in a military banner milk-sprinkling ceremony in the Chagatai Khanate where the Mongolian language was still used. Al-Adil Kitbugha (reigned 1294–1296), a Mongol Sultan of Egypt, and the half-Mongol An-Nasir Muhammad (reigned till 1341) built the Madrassa of Al-Nasir Muhammad in Cairo, Egypt. An-Nasir&#x27;s Mongol mother was Ashlun bint Shaktay. The Mongolic nobility during the Yuan dynasty studied Confucianism, built Confucian temples (including Beijing Confucius Temple) and translated Confucian works into Mongolic but mainly followed the Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism under Phags-pa Lama.

The general populace still practised Shamanism. Dongxiang and Bonan people adopted Islam, as did Moghol-speaking peoples in Afghanistan. In the 1576 the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism became the state religion of Mongolia. The Red Hat school of Tibetan Buddhism coexisted with the Gelug Yellow Hat school which was founded by the half-Mongol Je Tsongkhapa (1357–1419). Shamanism was absorbed into the state religion while being marginalized in its purer forms, later only surviving in far northern Mongolia. Monks were some of the leading intellectuals in Mongolia, responsible for much of the literature and art of the pre-modern period. Many Buddhist philosophical works lost in Tibet and elsewhere are preserved in older and purer form in Mongolian ancient texts (e.g. the Mongol Kanjur). Zanabazar (1635–1723), Zaya Pandita (1599–1662) and Danzanravjaa (1803–1856) are among the most famous Mongol holy men. The 4th Dalai Lama Yonten Gyatso (1589–1617), a Mongol himself, is recognized as the only non-Tibetan Dalai Lama although the current 14th Dalai Lama is of Mongolic Monguor extraction. The name is a combination of the Mongolian word dalai meaning &quot;ocean&quot; and the Tibetan word (bla-ma) meaning &quot;guru, teacher, mentor&quot;.[1] Many Buryats became Orthodox Christians due to the Russian expansion. During the socialist period religion was officially banned, although it was practiced in clandestine circles. Today, a sizable proportion of Mongolic peoples are atheist or agnostic. In the most recent census in Mongolia, almost forty percent of the population reported as being atheist, while the majority religion was Tibetan Buddhism, with 53%. Having survived suppression by the Communists, Buddhism among the Eastern, Northern, Southern and Western Mongols is today primarily of the Gelugpa school of Tibetan Buddhism. There is a strong shamanistic influence in the Gelugpa sect among the Mongols.

== Kinship and family life ==
The traditional Mongol family was patriarchal, patrilineal and patrilocal. Wives were brought for each of the sons, while daughters were married off to other clans. Wife-taking clans stood in a relation of inferiority to wife-giving clans. Thus wife-giving clans were considered &quot;elder&quot; or &quot;bigger&quot; in relation to wife-taking clans, who were considered &quot;younger&quot; or &quot;smaller&quot;. This distinction, symbolized in terms of &quot;elder&quot; and &quot;younger&quot; or &quot;bigger&quot; and &quot;smaller&quot;, was carried into the clan and family as well, and all members of a lineage were terminologically distinguished by generation and age, with senior superior to junior.

In the traditional Mongolian family, each son received a part of the family herd as he married, with the elder son receiving more than the younger son. The youngest son would remain in the parental tent caring for his parents, and after their death he would inherit the parental tent in addition to his own part of the herd. This inheritance system was mandated by law codes such as the Yassa, created by Genghis Khan. Likewise, each son inherited a part of the family&#x27;s camping lands and pastures, with the elder son receiving more than the younger son. The eldest son inherited the farthest camping lands and pastures, and each son in turn inherited camping lands and pastures closer to the family tent until the youngest son inherited the camping lands and pastures immediately surrounding the family tent. Family units would often remain near each other and in close cooperation, though extended families would inevitably break up after a few generations. It is probable that the Yasa simply put into written law the principles of customary law.

After the family, the next largest social units were the subclan and clan. These units were derived from groups claiming patrilineal descent from a common ancestor, ranked in order of seniority (the &quot;conical clan&quot;). By the Chingissid era this ranking was symbolically expressed at formal feasts, in which tribal chieftains were seated and received particular portions of the slaughtered animal according to their status. The lineage structure of Central Asia had three different modes. It was organized on the basis of genealogical distance, or the proximity of individuals to one another on a graph of kinship; generational distance, or the rank of generation in relation to a common ancestor, and birth order, the rank of brothers in relation to each another. The paternal descent lines were collaterally ranked according to the birth of their founders, and were thus considered senior and junior to each other. Of the various collateral patrilines, the senior in order of descent from the founding ancestor, the line of eldest sons, was the most noble. In the steppe, no one had his exact equal; everyone found his place in a system of collaterally ranked lines of descent from a common ancestor. It was according to this idiom of superiority and inferiority of lineages derived from birth order that legal claims to superior rank were couched.

The Mongol kinship is one of a particular patrilineal type classed as Omaha, in which relatives are grouped together under separate terms that crosscut generations, age, and even sexual difference. Thus, one uses different terms for a man&#x27;s father&#x27;s sister&#x27;s children, his sister&#x27;s children, and his daughter&#x27;s children. A further attribute is strict terminological differentiation of siblings according to seniority.

The anthropologist Herbert Harold Vreeland visited three Mongol communities in 1920 and published a highly detailed book with the results of his fieldwork, &quot;Mongol community and kinship structure&quot;.

== Royal family ==


The royal clan of the Mongols is the Borjigin clan descended from Bodonchar Munkhag (). This clan produced Khans and princes for Mongolia and surrounding regions until the early 20th century. All the Great Khans of the Mongol Empire, including its founder Genghis Khan, were of the Borjigin clan. The royal family of Mongolia was called the &quot;Altan Urag&quot; (Golden Lineage) and is synonymous with Genghisid. After the fall of the Northern Yuan dynasty in 1635 the Dayan Khanid aristocracy continued the Genghisid legacy in Mongolia until 1937 when most were killed during the Stalinist purges. The four hereditary Khans of the Khalkha (Tüsheet Khan, Setsen Khan, Zasagt Khan and Sain Noyan Khan) were all descended from Dayan Khan (1464–1543) through Abtai Sain Khan, Sholoi Khan, Laikhur Khan and Tumenkhen Sain Noyan respectively. Dayan Khan was himself raised to power by Queen Mandukhai () during the crisis of the late 15th century when the line of Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan, was on the verge of dying out.

The Khongirad was the main consort clan of the Borjigin and provided numerous Empresses and consorts. There were five minor non-Khonggirad inputs from the maternal side which passed on to the Dayan Khanid aristocracy of Mongolia and Inner Mongolia. The first was the Keraite lineage added through Kublai Khan&#x27;s mother Sorghaghtani Beki which linked the Borjigin to the Nestorian Christian tribe of Cyriacus Buyruk Khan. The second was the Turkic Karluk lineage added through Toghon Temur Khan&#x27;s mother Mailaiti which linked the Borjigin to Bilge Kul Qadir Khan (840–893) of the Kara-Khanid Khanate and ultimately to the Lion-Karluks as well as the Ashina tribe of the 6th century Göktürks. The third was the Korean lineage added through Biligtü Khan&#x27;s mother Empress Gi (1315–370) which linked the Borjigin to the Haengju Gi clan and ultimately to King Jun of Gojeoson (262–184 BC) and possibly even further to King Tang of Shang (1675–1646 BCE) through Jizi. The fourth was the Esen Taishi lineage added through Bayanmunkh Jonon&#x27;s mother Tsetseg Khatan which linked the Borjigin more firmly to the Oirats. The fifth was the Aisin-Gioro lineage added during the Qing dynasty. To the west, Genghisid Khans received daughters of the Byzantine emperor in marriage, such as when the Byzantine princess Maria Palaiologina married to Abaqa Khan (1234–1282), while there were also connections with European royalty through Russia, where, for example, Prince Gleb (1237–1278) married Feodora Sartaqovna the daughter of Sartaq Khan, a great-grandson of Genghis Khan.

The Dayan Khanid aristocracy still held power during the Bogd Khanate of Mongolia (1911–1919) and the Constitutional Monarchy period (1921–1924). They were accused of collaboration with the Japanese and executed in 1937 while their counterparts in Inner Mongolia were severely persecuted during the Cultural Revolution. Ancestral shrines of Genghis Khan were destroyed by the Red Guards during the 1960s and the Horse-Tail Banner of Genghis Khan disappeared.

== Historical population ==


== Geographic distribution ==
Today, the majority of Mongols live in the modern states of Mongolia, China (mainly Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang), Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Afghanistan.

The differentiation between tribes and peoples (ethnic groups) is handled differently depending on the country. The Tumed, Chahar, Ordos, Barga, Altai Uriankhai, Buryats, Dörböd (Dörvöd, Dörbed), Torguud, Dariganga, Üzemchin (or Üzümchin), Bayads, Khoton, Myangad (Mingad), Eljigin, Zakhchin, Darkhad, and Olots (or Öölds or Ölöts) are all considered as tribes of the Mongols.

=== Subgroups ===
The Eastern Mongols are mainly concentrated in Mongolia, including the Khalkha, Eljigin Khalkha, Darkhad, Sartuul Khalkha, and Dariganga (Khalkha).

The Southern or Inner Mongols mainly are concentrated in Inner Mongolia, China. They comprise the Abaga Mongols, Abaganar, Aohans, Arkhorchin, Asud, Baarins, Chahar, Darkhan (Shar Darkhad), Dörvön Khüükhed, Durved, Gorlos, Kharchin, Khishigten, Khorchin, Huuchid, Ikhmyangan, Jalaid, Jaruud, Muumyangan, Naiman (Southern Mongols), Onnigud, Ordos, Sunud, Tümed, Urad, and Uzemchin.

=== Sister groups ===
The Buryats are mainly concentrated in their homeland, the Buryat Republic, a federal subject of Russia. They are the major northern subgroup of the Mongols. The Barga Mongols are mainly concentrated in Inner Mongolia, China, along with the Buryats and Hamnigan. Some orientalists also include the Soyots in the Buryat sub-ethnic groups.

The Western Oirats are mainly concentrated in Western Mongolia:
*184,000 Kalmyks (2010) — Kalmykia, Russia
*205,000 Mongolian Oirats (2010)
*140,000 Oirats (2010) — Xinjiang region, China
*90,000 Upper Mongols (2010) — Qinghai region, China. The Khoshuts are the major subgroup of the Upper Mongols, along with the Choros, Khalkha and Torghuts.
*12,000 Sart Kalmyks (Zungharian descents) (2012) — Kyrgyzstan. Religion: Sunni Islam.

Altai Uriankhai, Baatud, Bayad, Chantuu, Choros, Durvud, Khoshut, Khoid, Khoton, Myangad, Olots, Sart Kalmyks (mainly Olots), Torghut, Zakhchin.
*Kalmyks — Baatud, Buzava, Choros, Durvud, Khoid, Olots, Torghut.
*Upper Mongolian Oirats — Choros, Khoshut, Torghut.

=== Mongolia ===

In modern-day Mongolia, Mongols make up approximately 95% of the population, with the largest ethnic group being Khalkha Mongols, followed by Buryats, both belonging to the Eastern Mongolian peoples. They are followed by Oirats, who belong to the Western Mongolian peoples.

Mongolian ethnic groups:
Baarin, Baatud, Barga, Bayad, Buryat,
Selenge Chahar, Chantuu, Darkhad, Dariganga
Dörbet Oirat, Eljigin, Khalkha, Hamnigan, Kharchin, Khoid, Khorchin, Hotogoid, Khoton, Huuchid, Myangad, Olots, Sartuul,
Torgut, Tümed, Üzemchin, Zakhchin.

=== China ===
The 2010 census of the People&#x27;s Republic of China counted more than 7 million people of various Mongolic groups. The 1992 census of China counted only 3.6 million ethnic Mongols. The 2010 census counted roughly 5.8 million ethnic Mongols, 621,500 Dongxiangs, 289,565 Mongours, 132,000 Daurs, 20,074 Baoans, and 14,370 Yugurs. Most of them live in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, followed by Liaoning. Small numbers can also be found in provinces near those two.

There were 669,972 Mongols in Liaoning in 2011, making up 11.52% of Mongols in China. The closest Mongol area to the sea is the Dabao Mongol Ethnic Township () in Fengcheng, Liaoning. With 8,460 Mongols (37.4% of the township population) it is located from the North Korean border and from Korea Bay of the Yellow Sea. Another contender for closest Mongol area to the sea would be Erdaowanzi Mongol Ethnic Township () in Jianchang County, Liaoning. With 5,011 Mongols (20.7% of the township population) it is located around from the Bohai Sea.

Other peoples speaking Mongolic languages are the Daur, Sogwo Arig, Monguor people, Dongxiangs, Bonans, Sichuan Mongols and eastern part of the Yugur people. Those do not officially count as part of the Mongol ethnicity, but are recognized as ethnic groups of their own. The Mongols lost their contact with the Mongours, Bonan, Dongxiangs, Yunnan Mongols since the fall of the Yuan dynasty. Mongolian scientists and journalists met with the Dongxiangs and Yunnan Mongols in the 2000s.

Inner Mongolia:
Southern Mongols, Barga, Buryat, Dörbet Oirat, Khalkha, Dzungar people, Eznee Torgut.

Xinjiang province:
Altai Uriankhai, Chahar, Khoshut, Olots, Torghut, Zakhchin.

Qinghai province: Upper Mongols: Choros, Khoshut

=== Russia ===
Two Mongolic ethnic groups are present in Russia; the 2010 census found 461,410 Buryats and 183,400 Kalmyks.

=== Elsewhere ===
Smaller numbers of Mongolic peoples exist in Western Europe and North America. Some of the more notable communities exist in South Korea, the United States, the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom.

== See also ==

* Altan Telgey
* American Center for Mongolian Studies
* Horse culture in Mongolia
* List of medieval Mongol tribes and clans
* List of modern Mongol clans
* List of Mongolians
* List of Mongol states
* Mongolian name
* Mongoloid
* Qara&#x27;unas
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Secondary sources ===
* 
* 
* 

=== Primary sources ===

== External links ==
* &quot;Evidence that a West-East admixed population lived in the Tarim Basin as early as the early Bronze Age &quot; Li et al. &quot;BMC Biology&quot; 2010, 8:15.
* Ethnic map of Mongolia 
* Map share of ethnic by county of China (archived 1 January 2016)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="4" end="11" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764649" start="19" end="29" title="East Asian people" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="30" end="42" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="53" end="61" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="63" end="68" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="70" end="84" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98" end="120" title="Mongols in China#Distribution" label="autonomous territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809" start="134" end="142" title="Buryatia" label="Buryatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953" start="147" end="155" title="Kalmykia" label="Kalmykia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="169" end="175" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588098" start="237" end="253" title="Mongolic peoples" label="Mongolic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="259" end="265" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="274" end="281" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="422" end="437" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="495" end="513" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875368" start="606" end="622" title="Mongol heartland" label="Mongol heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892172" start="712" end="725" title="Proto-Mongols" label="Proto-Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="818" end="833" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="836" end="843" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="845" end="851" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="857" end="864" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057909" start="916" end="929" title="Abaga Mongols" label="Abaga Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057911" start="931" end="939" title="Abaganar" label="Abaganar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829123" start="941" end="947" title="Aohans" label="Aohans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918040" start="961" end="965" title="Asud" label="Asud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20607721" start="967" end="974" title="Baarins" label="Baarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="976" end="983" title="Chahars" label="Chahars"/>
<link wikidata="Q123018490" start="994" end="1006" title="Shar Darkhad" label="Shar Darkhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320372" start="1026" end="1040" title="Eastern Dorbet" label="Eastern Dorbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17222976" start="1043" end="1057" title="Gorlos Mongols" label="Gorlos Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875078" start="1088" end="1097" title="Kharchin Mongols" label="Kharchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935345" start="1099" end="1109" title="Khishigten" label="Khishigten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="1111" end="1120" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q727307" start="1144" end="1151" title="Naimans" label="Naimans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336104" start="1162" end="1167" title="Ordos Mongols" label="Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402317" start="1176" end="1181" title="Tumed" label="Tumed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899548" start="1183" end="1187" title="Urad Mongols" label="Urad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025525" start="1192" end="1201" title="Üzemchin Mongols" label="Üzemchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1282" end="1292" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang China"/>
<link wikidata="Q836453" start="1316" end="1322" title="Shiwei people" label="Shiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="1374" end="1380" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="1387" end="1399" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875016" start="1441" end="1454" title="Khamag Mongol" label="Khamag Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="1486" end="1503" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="1534" end="1541" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="1548" end="1559" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317268" start="1568" end="1587" title="Tatar confederation" label="Tatar confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="1699" end="1716" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="1749" end="1761" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q524648" start="1857" end="1863" title="Language change" label="change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481517" start="1883" end="1889" title="tengri" label="tengri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="2027" end="2041" title="Middle Chinese" label="Middle Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031620" start="2078" end="2088" title="Mugulü" label="progenitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="2092" end="2108" title="Rouran Khaganate" label="Rouran Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="2204" end="2227" title="Ancient Northeast Asian" label="Ancient Northeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815171" start="2298" end="2320" title="Western Steppe Herders" label="Western Steppe Herders"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="2470" end="2479" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q629060" start="2485" end="2490" title="Gog and Magog" label="Magog"/>
<link wikidata="Q868179" start="2500" end="2516" title="Tungusic peoples" label="Tungusic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="2615" end="2621" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="2678" end="2687" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="2716" end="2723" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892172" start="2811" end="2824" title="proto-Mongols" label="proto-Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855217" start="2885" end="2898" title="Turkic tribes" label="Turkic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="2947" end="2951" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="3115" end="3122" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="3127" end="3133" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="3249" end="3255" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="3319" end="3328" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="3352" end="3366" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055713" start="3376" end="3379" title="Yan (state)" label="Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049025" start="3410" end="3418" title="Shanrong" label="Shanrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053975" start="3461" end="3472" title="Yi Zhou Shu" label="Yi Zhou Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q844278" start="3525" end="3554" title="Classic of Mountains and Seas" label="Classic of Mountains and Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="3610" end="3623" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3779" end="3781" title=":zh:方國" label="方國"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737959" start="4073" end="4090" title="The Great Summons" label="The Great Summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q874601" start="4117" end="4130" title="Chu Ci" label="Verses of Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q655876" start="4218" end="4242" title="Guoyu (book)" label="Discourses of the States"/>
<link wikidata="Q388766" start="4288" end="4306" title="King Cheng of Zhou" label="King Cheng of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201047" start="4418" end="4431" title="Qishan County" label="Qishan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="4509" end="4512" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4533" end="4540" title="Vassal state#Ancient China" label="vassals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275341" start="4549" end="4578" title="Fengjian" label="enfeoffment and establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28049" start="4675" end="4683" title="Xiong Yi (11th century BC)" label="Xiong Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545535" start="4727" end="4744" title="Zhukaigou culture" label="Zhukaigou culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670841" start="4768" end="4780" title="Ordos Desert" label="Ordos Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q217464" start="4827" end="4838" title="Daur people" label="Daur people"/>
<link wikidata="Q191730" start="4856" end="4862" title="Evenks" label="Evenks"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455" start="4899" end="4912" title="Ordos culture" label="Ordos culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="4944" end="4951" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49697" start="4989" end="5005" title="Liu Song dynasty" label="Liu Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5058" end="5077" title="Han dynasty#Eastern Han" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049025" start="5121" end="5129" title="Shanrong" label="Shanrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075080" start="5284" end="5308" title="Upper Xiajiadian culture" label="Upper Xiajiadian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="5417" end="5428" title="Modu Chanyu" label="Modu Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="5446" end="5452" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069307" start="5505" end="5510" title="Tadun" label="Tadun"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="5583" end="5590" title="Kumo Xi" label="Kumo Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q386073" start="5653" end="5669" title="New Book of Tang" label="New Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268" start="6049" end="6071" title="Emperor Guangwu of Han" label="Emperor Guangwu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="6184" end="6197" title="Xianbei state" label="Xianbei state"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="6247" end="6260" title="Xianbei state" label="Xianbei state"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="6303" end="6309" title="Rouran" label="Rouran"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="6337" end="6352" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Pannonian Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="6359" end="6372" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q836453" start="6381" end="6387" title="Shiwei people" label="Shiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305906" start="6555" end="6561" title="Murong" label="Murong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195649" start="6563" end="6567" title="Duan (tribe)" label="Duan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099766" start="6572" end="6577" title="Tuoba" label="Tuoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="6621" end="6630" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="6634" end="6642" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="6739" end="6757" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099766" start="6959" end="6964" title="Tuoba" label="Tuoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593890" start="7047" end="7061" title="Yujiulü Shelun" label="Yujiulü Shelun"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="7093" end="7099" title="khagan" label="khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="7281" end="7286" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146034" start="7411" end="7433" title="First Turkic Khaganate" label="First Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="7446" end="7462" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="7478" end="7493" title="Yenisei Kirghiz" label="Yenisei Kirghiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45115" start="7696" end="7703" title="Bayan I" label="Bayan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317268" start="7762" end="7781" title="Tatar confederation" label="Tatar confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q836453" start="7806" end="7812" title="Shiwei people" label="Shiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="7880" end="7887" title="Kumo Xi" label="Kumo Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="7892" end="7898" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989" start="7974" end="7980" title="Abaoji" label="Abaoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="8008" end="8020" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="8430" end="8445" title="Yenisei Kirghiz" label="Yenisei Kirghiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543" start="8468" end="8477" title="Khakassia" label="Khakassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989" start="8606" end="8612" title="Abaoji" label="Abaoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="8666" end="8678" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="8704" end="8706" title="Kumo Xi" label="Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q836453" start="8708" end="8714" title="Shiwei people" label="Shiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="8719" end="8726" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330091" start="8780" end="8790" title="Yelü Dashi" label="Yelü Dashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="8846" end="8853" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="8858" end="8869" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q862304" start="8886" end="8897" title="Qara Khitai" label="Qara Khitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="8993" end="9005" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404540" start="9111" end="9133" title="Qutlugh-Khanids" label="Qutlugh-Khanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209013" start="9162" end="9172" title="Dai Khitai (Hazara tribe)" label="Dai Khitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="9326" end="9338" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="9342" end="9351" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="9353" end="9357" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q208156" start="9367" end="9372" title="Mongol invasion of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="9376" end="9385" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907676" start="9414" end="9422" title="Padishah" label="Padishah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9427" end="9433" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="9435" end="9452" title="Emperors of China" label="Emperors of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q932129" start="9458" end="9469" title="Great Khans" label="Great Khans"/>
<link wikidata="Q558359" start="9495" end="9511" title="Al-Adil Kitbugha" label="Al-Adil Kitbugha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115925" start="9520" end="9535" title="Sultan of Egypt" label="Sultan of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="9565" end="9577" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="9687" end="9699" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="9725" end="9737" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="9921" end="9928" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="9930" end="9942" title="Azerbaijanis" label="Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="9944" end="9950" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q276315" start="9952" end="9963" title="Karakalpaks" label="Karakalpaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="9965" end="9971" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="9973" end="9981" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="9983" end="9991" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="9993" end="10000" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192616" start="10002" end="10008" title="Nogais" label="Nogais"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="10010" end="10017" title="Kyrgyzs" label="Kyrgyzs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="10019" end="10026" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q46295" start="10028" end="10044" title="People of Caucasus" label="Caucasus peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="10046" end="10061" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932164" start="10066" end="10073" title="Mughal (tribe)" label="Moghuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170273" start="10099" end="10113" title="Persianization" label="Persianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q486316" start="10197" end="10203" title="Yakuts" label="Yakuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34299" start="10263" end="10274" title="Yakut language" label="Yakut words"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="10589" end="10599" title="Dongxiangs" label="Dongxiangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q816691" start="10601" end="10607" title="Bonans" label="Bonans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34283" start="10609" end="10614" title="Yugur" label="Yugur"/>
<link wikidata="Q852205" start="10619" end="10633" title="Monguor people" label="Monguor people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="10654" end="10666" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8959" start="10767" end="10780" title="Northern Yuan" label="Northern Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="10838" end="10843" title="Oirad" label="Oirad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="10894" end="10902" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="10978" end="10994" title="Western Mongolia" label="Western Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="10996" end="11002" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="11026" end="11033" title="Khalkha" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="11035" end="11048" title="Inner Mongols" label="Inner Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="11050" end="11055" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="11057" end="11064" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582455" start="11116" end="11138" title="Middle Mongol language" label="Middle Mongol language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9250" start="11210" end="11221" title="Taisun Khan" label="Taisun Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247" start="11310" end="11319" title="Adai Khan" label="Adai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="11323" end="11331" title="Khorchin" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9263" start="11365" end="11375" title="Esen Taish" label="Esen Taish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196236" start="11720" end="11731" title="Tumu Crisis" label="Tumu Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="11838" end="11848" title="Great Khan" label="Great Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="11868" end="11878" title="Great Yuan" label="Great Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304" start="11921" end="11931" title="Dayan Khan" label="Dayan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q946868" start="11962" end="11967" title="Tumen (unit)" label="tumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q434393" start="12109" end="12119" title="Altan Khan" label="Altan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9335" start="12217" end="12234" title="Tümen Zasagt Khan" label="Tümen Zasagt Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="12390" end="12404" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="12416" end="12430" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="12481" end="12488" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341" start="12518" end="12524" title="Ligdan Khan" label="Ligdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="12583" end="12590" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="12851" end="12858" title="Chahars" label="Chahars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319218" start="13161" end="13168" title="Gelugpa" label="Gelugpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q471187" start="13265" end="13270" title="Kagyu" label="Kagyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="13294" end="13310" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="13346" end="13351" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="13411" end="13423" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q301102" start="13471" end="13476" title="noyan" label="noyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="13739" end="13754" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395045" start="13767" end="13782" title="Galdan Boshugtu Khan" label="Galdan Boshugtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q735871" start="13972" end="13981" title="Zanabazar" label="Zanabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395045" start="14311" end="14317" title="Galdan Boshugtu Khan" label="Galdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="14340" end="14348" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q483159" start="14357" end="14366" title="Syr Darya" label="Syr Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="14397" end="14404" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="14439" end="14453" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Black Khirgizs"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="14470" end="14484" title="Fergana Valley" label="Fergana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q486545" start="14580" end="14585" title="Taraz" label="Taraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q848638" start="14672" end="14689" title="Turkistan (city)" label="City of Turkistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498819" start="14715" end="14730" title="Abul Khair Khan" label="Abul Khair Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408526" start="14887" end="14896" title="Mongolia under Qing rule" label="Qing rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q735871" start="14908" end="14917" title="Zanabazar" label="Zanabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="15347" end="15361" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244788" start="15405" end="15422" title="Khövsgöl Province" label="Khövsgöl Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="15712" end="15720" title="Tibetans" label="Tibetans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10921952" start="15722" end="15735" title="Kumul Khanate" label="Kumul Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191125" start="15745" end="15756" title="Moghulistan" label="Moghulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398132" start="16109" end="16122" title="Tseveenravdan" label="Tseveenravdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q735349" start="16596" end="16604" title="Russian conquest of Siberia" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788308" start="16615" end="16620" title="Expansion of Russia 1500–1800" label="1620s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="16783" end="16794" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q696094" start="16837" end="16856" title="Treaty of Nerchinsk" label="Treaty of Nerchinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="16892" end="16901" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q644111" start="16951" end="16963" title="Trans-Baikal" label="Trans-Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26439" start="16994" end="17005" title="Argun River (Asia)" label="Argun River"/>
<link wikidata="Q715967" start="17029" end="17053" title="Treaty of Kyakhta (1727)" label="Treaty of Kyakhta (1727)"/>
<link wikidata="Q771362" start="17202" end="17224" title="Mongolia-Russia border" label="Mongolia-Russia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q288695" start="17226" end="17229" title="Oka River (Siberia)" label="Oka"/>
<link wikidata="Q10921634" start="17530" end="17545" title="Khoshut Khanate" label="Khoshut Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="17654" end="17669" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="17818" end="17825" title="Dzungar people" label="Dzungar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="18020" end="18028" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="18265" end="18276" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210248" start="18305" end="18319" title="Kalmyk Khanate" label="Kalmyk Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q362170" start="18360" end="18369" title="Kho Orluk" label="Kho Orluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="18419" end="18426" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="18706" end="18723" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="19150" end="19173" title="Russian Orthodox church" label="Russian Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="19409" end="19416" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkir"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="19421" end="19427" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q362375" start="19458" end="19464" title="Ubashi Khan" label="Ubashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="19563" end="19590" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–74)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1768–74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="19640" end="19659" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="19785" end="19792" title="Kyrgyzs" label="Kyrgyzs"/>
<link wikidata="Q134485" start="19812" end="19825" title="Balkhash Lake" label="Balkhash Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="19893" end="19904" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20519" end="20526" title="Georgia (country)#Within the Russian Empire" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="20626" end="20637" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497146" start="20692" end="20704" title="New Policies" label="New Policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="20877" end="20894" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q838303" start="20900" end="20940" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1911" label="Mongolian Revolution on 30 November 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q192942" start="21141" end="21144" title="Uvs Province" label="Uvs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="21146" end="21151" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="21157" end="21178" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="21194" end="21202" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898804" start="21251" end="21265" title="Upper Mongolia" label="Upper Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="21267" end="21272" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="21277" end="21291" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="21331" end="21348" title="Republic of China (1912–49)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475921" start="21375" end="21399" title="Mongolia (1911–24)" label="Bogd Khanate of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="21550" end="21561" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="21634" end="21648" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898804" start="22141" end="22154" title="Upper Mongols" label="Upper Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="22156" end="22169" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593895" start="22267" end="22290" title="Pan-Mongolism" label="Mongolian reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="22487" end="22492" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q960" start="22505" end="22509" title="Tuva" label="Tuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837109" start="22552" end="22574" title="Treaty of Kyakhta (1915)" label="1915 Treaty of Kyakhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="22716" end="22729" title="White movement" label="White Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q70542" start="22742" end="22754" title="Baron Ungern" label="Baron Ungern"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="22832" end="22840" title="cossacks" label="cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="22851" end="22862" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="22925" end="22937" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23374" end="23385" title="List of active separatist movements in Asia#China" label="irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23386" end="23395" title="List of active separatist movements in Europe#Russia" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502042" start="23427" end="23435" title="1932 armed uprising in Mongolia" label="revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="23641" end="23654" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115455" start="23787" end="23820" title="Stalinist repressions in Mongolia" label="Stalinist repressions in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="24174" end="24206" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="24510" end="24521" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="24547" end="24556" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="24590" end="24605" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="24626" end="24631" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="24719" end="24738" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="24750" end="24777" title="Soviet–Japanese War (1945)" label="Soviet–Japanese War of 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q311488" start="25012" end="25034" title="Khorloogiin Choibalsan" label="Khorloogiin Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="25125" end="25136" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="25253" end="25260" title="Huuchid" label="Huuchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402317" start="25271" end="25276" title="Tümed" label="Tümed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025525" start="25279" end="25298" title="Üzemchin Mongols" label="about 800 Uzemchins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25300" end="25307" title="Demographics of Mongolia#Ethnic groups of Mongolia" label="arrived"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314807" start="25426" end="25446" title="Inner Mongolian Army" label="Inner Mongolian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q697837" start="25729" end="25738" title="Mengjiang" label="Mengjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="26130" end="26140" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="26319" end="26329" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="26367" end="26373" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="26378" end="26384" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10988528" start="26385" end="26404" title="Second East Turkestan Republic" label="separatist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="26506" end="26529" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q255352" start="26750" end="26758" title="Basmachi movement" label="Basmachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="26774" end="26779" title="Tajiks" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="26809" end="26828" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152533" start="26867" end="26945" title="Treaty of friendship and alliance between the Government of Mongolia and Tibet" label="Treaty of friendship and alliance between the Government of Mongolia and Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444884" start="27027" end="27032" title="Tibet (1912-51)" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123011" start="27383" end="27400" title="cultural genocide" label="cultural genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="27502" end="27517" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="27552" end="27565" title="Yenisei River" label="Yenisei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="27676" end="27687" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="28158" end="28168" title="theocratic" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q548869" start="28186" end="28207" title="Kizhinginsky District" label="Kizhinginsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172846" start="28559" end="28584" title="Russian famine of 1921–22" label="Russian famine of 1921–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="28670" end="28681" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="28740" end="28746" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="28891" end="28904" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="29118" end="29124" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="29129" end="29136" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29171" end="29195" title="List of Mongol states#Modern states" label="Republic of Oirat-Kalmyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="29419" end="29431" title="nationalists" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158587" start="29636" end="29644" title="Kalmyk deportations of 1943" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="29660" end="29667" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33634" start="29849" end="29864" title="Kalmyk language" label="Kalmyk language"/>
<link wikidata="Q311488" start="29996" end="30018" title="Khorloogiin Choibalsan" label="Khorloogiin Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697158" start="30337" end="30364" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Republic of China)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30387" end="30397" title="Foreign relations of Taiwan#Mongolia" label="recognizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q707551" start="30626" end="30666" title="Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission" label="Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495739" start="30682" end="30699" title="Agin-Buryat Okrug" label="Agin-Buryat Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626661" start="30704" end="30725" title="Ust-Orda Buryat Okrug" label="Ust-Orda Buryat Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585" start="30739" end="30753" title="Irkutsk Oblast" label="Irkutsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q182902" start="30758" end="30770" title="Chita Oblast" label="Chita Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621514" start="30864" end="30868" title="2011 Inner Mongolia unrest" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318010" start="30874" end="30909" title="Inner Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Inner Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q215613" start="30929" end="30975" title="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization" label="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="31267" end="31299" title="Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region" label="Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q34230" start="32889" end="32897" title="Tungusic languages" label="Tungusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="32902" end="32908" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="32980" end="32996" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899730" start="33351" end="33370" title="Mongolian shamanism" label="Mongolian shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="33405" end="33417" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="33422" end="33428" title="Daoism" label="Daoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="33522" end="33528" title="Rouran" label="Rouran"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="33657" end="33673" title="Rouran Khaganate" label="Rouran Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q855885" start="33752" end="33772" title="Douluofubadoufa Khan" label="Douluofubadoufa Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="34533" end="34547" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="34549" end="34559" title="Manicheism" label="Manicheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="34561" end="34573" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="34575" end="34592" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="34597" end="34602" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010335" start="34697" end="34718" title="Burkhan Khaldun" label="Mount Burkhan Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="34819" end="34831" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837605" start="35253" end="35261" title="Tengrism" label="Tengrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301848" start="35313" end="35329" title="Mausoleum of Genghis Khan" label="eight white gers"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="35356" end="35361" title="Ordos Loop" label="Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055705" start="35434" end="35450" title="Mongolian script" label="Mongolian script"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35960" end="35965" title=":ja:メリク_(オゴデイ家)" label="Melig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519" start="35986" end="35992" title="Ögedei Khan" label="Ögedei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="36015" end="36030" title="Borjigin" label="Mongolian royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="36046" end="36051" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521" start="36062" end="36073" title="Möngke Khan" label="Möngke Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316083" start="36120" end="36138" title="William of Rubruck" label="William of Rubruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q62677" start="36195" end="36204" title="Karakorum" label="Karakorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481517" start="36412" end="36418" title="Tengri" label="Tengri"/>
<link wikidata="Q223239" start="36440" end="36450" title="Abaqa Khan" label="Abaqa Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="36485" end="36507" title="Second Council of Lyon" label="Second Council of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404621" start="36670" end="36692" title="Franco-Mongol alliance" label="Franco-Mongol alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627955" start="36754" end="36768" title="Yahballaha III" label="Yahballaha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q721469" start="36785" end="36801" title="Rabban Bar Sauma" label="Rabban Bar Sauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116691" start="36864" end="36872" title="Keraites" label="Keraites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950180" start="36925" end="36960" title="Church of Saint Mary of the Mongols" label="Church of Saint Mary of the Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110849" start="36989" end="37014" title="Byzantine-Mongol alliance" label="Byzantine-Mongol alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q314056" start="37080" end="37085" title="Berke" label="Berke"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="37090" end="37096" title="Ghazan" label="Ghazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q558359" start="37438" end="37454" title="Al-Adil Kitbugha" label="Al-Adil Kitbugha"/>
<link wikidata="Q293505" start="37522" end="37539" title="An-Nasir Muhammad" label="An-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277350" start="37570" end="37599" title="Madrassa of Al-Nasir Muhammad" label="Madrassa of Al-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064580" start="37775" end="37799" title="Beijing Confucius Temple" label="Beijing Confucius Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q650035" start="37870" end="37875" title="Sakya (Tibetan Buddhist school)" label="Sakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q163510" start="37909" end="37922" title="Drogön Chögyal Phagpa" label="Phags-pa Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="37962" end="37971" title="Shamanism" label="Shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="37973" end="37982" title="Dongxiang people" label="Dongxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q816691" start="37987" end="37999" title="Bonan people" label="Bonan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13336" start="38022" end="38028" title="Moghol language" label="Moghol"/>
<link wikidata="Q319218" start="38078" end="38083" title="Gelug" label="Gelug"/>
<link wikidata="Q323439" start="38269" end="38282" title="Je Tsongkhapa" label="Je Tsongkhapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000928" start="38328" end="38342" title="Buddhism in Mongolia" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q592980" start="38710" end="38716" title="Kangyur" label="Kanjur"/>
<link wikidata="Q735871" start="38719" end="38728" title="Zanabazar" label="Zanabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167813" start="38742" end="38754" title="Zaya Pandita" label="Zaya Pandita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264761" start="38771" end="38783" title="Danzanravjaa" label="Danzanravjaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25255" start="38858" end="38871" title="Yonten Gyatso" label="Yonten Gyatso"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="38941" end="38951" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q852205" start="39004" end="39011" title="Monguor people" label="Monguor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="39412" end="39419" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="39423" end="39431" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q319218" start="39738" end="39745" title="Gelugpa" label="Gelugpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="39756" end="39772" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051307" start="40985" end="40990" title="Yassa" label="Yassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231760" start="41887" end="41897" title="Chingissid" label="Chingissid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="42110" end="42122" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536040" start="43083" end="43088" title="Omaha kinship" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="43724" end="43732" title="Borjigin" label="Borjigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090003" start="43753" end="43770" title="Bodonchar Munkhag" label="Bodonchar Munkhag"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="43943" end="43955" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111462143" start="44330" end="44342" title="Tüsheet Khan" label="Tüsheet Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111462043" start="44344" end="44355" title="Sechen Khan" label="Setsen Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111462354" start="44357" end="44368" title="Zasagt Khan" label="Zasagt Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44373" end="44388" title="Sain Noyan Khan" label="Sain Noyan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304" start="44414" end="44424" title="Dayan Khan" label="Dayan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q299737" start="44569" end="44584" title="Mandukhai" label="Queen Mandukhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345184" start="44727" end="44736" title="Khongirad" label="Khongirad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116691" start="44990" end="44997" title="Keraite" label="Keraite"/>
<link wikidata="Q271016" start="45046" end="45063" title="Sorghaghtani Beki" label="Sorghaghtani Beki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55656492" start="45126" end="45146" title="Cyriacus Buyruk Khan" label="Cyriacus Buyruk Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="45174" end="45180" title="Karluks" label="Karluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673079" start="45273" end="45293" title="Bilge Kul Qadir Khan" label="Bilge Kul Qadir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="45311" end="45330" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanid Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q686722" start="45381" end="45393" title="Ashina tribe" label="Ashina tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="45413" end="45421" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürks"/>
<link wikidata="Q491079" start="45497" end="45507" title="Empress Gi" label="Empress Gi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159109" start="45552" end="45567" title="Haengju Gi clan" label="Haengju Gi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711336" start="45591" end="45606" title="Jun of Gojoseon" label="Jun of Gojeoson"/>
<link wikidata="Q471820" start="45649" end="45667" title="King Tang of Shang" label="King Tang of Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q496787" start="45692" end="45696" title="Jizi" label="Jizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9263" start="45717" end="45728" title="Esen Taishi" label="Esen Taishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="45842" end="45848" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q934262" start="45868" end="45879" title="House of Aisin-Gioro" label="Aisin-Gioro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469381" start="46041" end="46059" title="Maria Palaiologina" label="Maria Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19489" start="46254" end="46265" title="Sartaq Khan" label="Sartaq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475921" start="46359" end="46383" title="Bogd Khanate of Mongolia" label="Bogd Khanate of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="46944" end="46954" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402317" start="47089" end="47094" title="Tumed" label="Tumed"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="47096" end="47102" title="Chahar (Mongols)" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455" start="47104" end="47109" title="Ordos people" label="Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="47111" end="47116" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875021" start="47118" end="47133" title="Altai Uriankhai" label="Altai Uriankhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="47135" end="47142" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307360" start="47144" end="47150" title="Dörbed" label="Dörböd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="47169" end="47176" title="Torguud" label="Torguud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083825" start="47178" end="47187" title="Dariganga Mongols" label="Dariganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025525" start="47189" end="47197" title="Üzemchin" label="Üzemchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637569" start="47213" end="47219" title="Bayads" label="Bayads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875052" start="47221" end="47227" title="Khoton" label="Khoton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20611350" start="47229" end="47236" title="Myangad" label="Myangad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930768" start="47247" end="47254" title="Eljigin" label="Eljigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391550" start="47256" end="47264" title="Zakhchin" label="Zakhchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628371" start="47266" end="47273" title="Darkhad" label="Darkhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145787" start="47279" end="47284" title="Olots" label="Olots"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="47440" end="47447" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930768" start="47449" end="47464" title="Eljigin" label="Eljigin Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628371" start="47466" end="47473" title="Darkhad" label="Darkhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q198909" start="47475" end="47490" title="Sartuul" label="Sartuul Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083825" start="47496" end="47505" title="Dariganga Mongols" label="Dariganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="47575" end="47589" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057909" start="47616" end="47629" title="Abaga Mongols" label="Abaga Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057911" start="47631" end="47639" title="Abaganar" label="Abaganar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829123" start="47641" end="47647" title="Aohans" label="Aohans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918040" start="47661" end="47665" title="Asud" label="Asud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20607721" start="47667" end="47674" title="Baarins" label="Baarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="47676" end="47682" title="Chahars" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123018490" start="47693" end="47705" title="Shar Darkhad" label="Shar Darkhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320372" start="47725" end="47731" title="Durved" label="Durved"/>
<link wikidata="Q17222976" start="47733" end="47739" title="Gorlos" label="Gorlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875078" start="47741" end="47749" title="Kharchin" label="Kharchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935345" start="47751" end="47761" title="Khishigten" label="Khishigten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="47763" end="47771" title="Khorchin" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727307" start="47822" end="47847" title="Naiman (Southern Mongols)" label="Naiman (Southern Mongols)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="47849" end="47856" title="Onnigud" label="Onnigud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336104" start="47858" end="47863" title="Ordos Mongols" label="Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402317" start="47872" end="47877" title="Tümed" label="Tümed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899548" start="47879" end="47883" title="Urad Mongols" label="Urad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025525" start="47889" end="47897" title="Uzemchin" label="Uzemchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="47926" end="47933" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809" start="47981" end="47996" title="Buryat Republic" label="Buryat Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="48163" end="48170" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q209003" start="48175" end="48183" title="Hamnigan" label="Hamnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185225" start="48220" end="48226" title="Soyots" label="Soyots"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="48273" end="48279" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="48426" end="48434" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="48480" end="48487" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625429" start="48576" end="48582" title="Choros people" label="Choros"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="48584" end="48591" title="Khalkha" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="48596" end="48603" title="Torghut" label="Torghut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408787" start="48614" end="48626" title="Sart Kalmyks" label="Sart Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="48658" end="48668" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="48680" end="48691" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875021" start="48694" end="48709" title="Altai Uriankhai" label="Altai Uriankhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956759" start="48711" end="48717" title="Baatud" label="Baatud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637569" start="48719" end="48724" title="Bayads" label="Bayad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858959" start="48726" end="48733" title="Chantuu" label="Chantuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307360" start="48743" end="48749" title="Durvud" label="Durvud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740683" start="48751" end="48758" title="Khoshut" label="Khoshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498931" start="48760" end="48765" title="Khoid" label="Khoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875052" start="48767" end="48773" title="Khoton" label="Khoton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20611350" start="48775" end="48782" title="Myangad" label="Myangad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145787" start="48784" end="48789" title="Olots" label="Olots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408787" start="48791" end="48803" title="Sart Kalmyks" label="Sart Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="48820" end="48827" title="Torghut" label="Torghut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391550" start="48829" end="48837" title="Zakhchin" label="Zakhchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="48840" end="48847" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956759" start="48850" end="48856" title="Baatud" label="Baatud"/>
<link wikidata="Q21636524" start="48858" end="48864" title="Buzava" label="Buzava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307360" start="48874" end="48880" title="Durvud" label="Durvud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498931" start="48882" end="48887" title="Khoid" label="Khoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145787" start="48889" end="48894" title="Olots" label="Olots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="48896" end="48903" title="Torghut" label="Torghut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898804" start="48906" end="48928" title="Upper Mongols" label="Upper Mongolian Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740683" start="48939" end="48946" title="Khoshut" label="Khoshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="48948" end="48955" title="Torghut" label="Torghut"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="49089" end="49104" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q20607721" start="49276" end="49282" title="Baarins" label="Baarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956759" start="49284" end="49290" title="Baatud" label="Baatud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="49292" end="49297" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637569" start="49299" end="49304" title="Bayads" label="Bayad"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="49306" end="49312" title="Buryats" label="Buryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="49314" end="49328" title="Chahar Mongols" label="Selenge Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858959" start="49330" end="49337" title="Chantuu" label="Chantuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628371" start="49339" end="49346" title="Darkhad" label="Darkhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083825" start="49348" end="49357" title="Dariganga Mongols" label="Dariganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307360" start="49358" end="49370" title="Dörbet Oirat" label="Dörbet Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930768" start="49372" end="49379" title="Eljigin" label="Eljigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="49381" end="49388" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q209003" start="49390" end="49398" title="Hamnigan" label="Hamnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875078" start="49400" end="49408" title="Kharchin Mongols" label="Kharchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498931" start="49410" end="49415" title="Khoid" label="Khoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115469" start="49417" end="49425" title="Khorchin Mongols" label="Khorchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987276" start="49427" end="49435" title="Khotogoid" label="Hotogoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875052" start="49437" end="49443" title="Khotons" label="Khoton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="49445" end="49452" title="Huuchid" label="Huuchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q20611350" start="49454" end="49461" title="Myangad" label="Myangad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145787" start="49463" end="49468" title="Olots" label="Olots"/>
<link wikidata="Q198909" start="49470" end="49477" title="Sartuul" label="Sartuul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="49479" end="49485" title="Torgut" label="Torgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402317" start="49487" end="49492" title="Tümed" label="Tümed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025525" start="49494" end="49502" title="Üzemchin Mongols" label="Üzemchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391550" start="49504" end="49512" title="Zakhchin" label="Zakhchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="49931" end="49939" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362431" start="50166" end="50175" title="Fengcheng, Liaoning" label="Fengcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q52059" start="50293" end="50302" title="Korea Bay" label="Korea Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333488" start="50424" end="50440" title="Jianchang County" label="Jianchang County"/>
<link wikidata="Q181969" start="50536" end="50545" title="Bohai Sea" label="Bohai Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217464" start="50598" end="50602" title="Daur people" label="Daur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642386" start="50604" end="50614" title="Sogwo Arig" label="Sogwo Arig"/>
<link wikidata="Q852205" start="50616" end="50630" title="Monguor people" label="Monguor people"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="50632" end="50642" title="Dongxiangs" label="Dongxiangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q816691" start="50644" end="50650" title="Bonans" label="Bonans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507437" start="50652" end="50667" title="Sichuan Mongols" label="Sichuan Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q34283" start="50692" end="50704" title="Yugur people" label="Yugur people"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="51034" end="51048" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721972" start="51068" end="51073" title="Barga Mongols" label="Barga"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="51075" end="51081" title="Buryats" label="Buryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307360" start="51083" end="51095" title="Dörbet Oirat" label="Dörbet Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="51097" end="51104" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="51106" end="51120" title="Dzungar people" label="Dzungar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q992936" start="51122" end="51134" title="Ejin Banner" label="Eznee Torgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="51137" end="51145" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875021" start="51156" end="51171" title="Altai Uriankhai" label="Altai Uriankhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235" start="51173" end="51179" title="Chahars" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740683" start="51181" end="51188" title="Khoshut" label="Khoshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145787" start="51190" end="51195" title="Olots" label="Olots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330821" start="51197" end="51204" title="Torghut" label="Torghut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391550" start="51206" end="51214" title="Zakhchin" label="Zakhchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="51217" end="51224" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898804" start="51235" end="51248" title="Upper Mongols" label="Upper Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625429" start="51250" end="51256" title="Choros people" label="Choros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740683" start="51258" end="51265" title="Khoshut" label="Khoshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="51362" end="51369" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301642" start="51535" end="51546" title="Mongolians in South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899636" start="51552" end="51565" title="Mongolian American" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899741" start="51571" end="51585" title="Mongolians in the Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899743" start="51594" end="51608" title="Mongolians in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736150" start="51629" end="51641" title="Altan Telgey" label="Altan Telgey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743316" start="51644" end="51681" title="American Center for Mongolian Studies" label="American Center for Mongolian Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21511129" start="51684" end="51709" title="Horse culture in Mongolia" label="Horse culture in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627882" start="51712" end="51752" title="List of medieval Mongol tribes and clans" label="List of medieval Mongol tribes and clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000877" start="51755" end="51782" title="List of modern Mongol clans" label="List of modern Mongol clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590631" start="51785" end="51803" title="List of Mongolians" label="List of Mongolians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590626" start="51806" end="51827" title="List of Mongol states" label="List of Mongol states"/>
<link wikidata="Q558888" start="51830" end="51844" title="Mongolian name" label="Mongolian name"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="51847" end="51856" title="Mongoloid" label="Mongoloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395823" start="51859" end="51873" title="Qara&amp;#x27;unas" label="Qara&amp;#x27;unas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18985" wikidata="Q8274" url="?curid=18985" title="Manga">
<text>are comics or graphic novels originating from Japan. Most manga conform to a style developed in Japan in the late 19th century, and the form has a long history in earlier Japanese art. The term &quot;manga&quot; is used in Japan to refer to both comics and cartooning. Outside of Japan, the word is typically used to refer to comics originally published in Japan.

In Japan, people of all ages and walks of life read manga. The medium includes works in a broad range of genres: action, adventure, business and commerce, comedy, detective, drama, historical, horror, mystery, romance, science fiction and fantasy, erotica (&quot;hentai&quot; and &quot;ecchi&quot;), sports and games, and suspense, among others. Many manga are translated into other languages.

Since the 1950s, manga has become an increasingly major part of the Japanese publishing industry. By 1995, the manga market in Japan was valued at (), with annual sales of 1.9billion manga books and manga magazines (also known as manga anthologies) in Japan (equivalent to 15issues per person). In 2020 Japan&#x27;s manga market value hit a new record of ¥612.6 billion due to the fast growth of digital manga sales as well as increase of print sales. In 2022 Japan&#x27;s manga market hit yet another record value of ¥675.9 billion. Manga have also gained a significant worldwide readership. Beginning with the late 2010s manga started massively outselling American comics.

As of 2021, the top four comics publishers in the world are manga publishers Shueisha, Kodansha, Kadokawa, and Shogakukan. In 2020 the North American manga market was valued at almost $250 million. According to NPD BookScan manga made up 76% of overall comics and graphic novel sales in the US in 2021. The fast growth of the North American manga market is attributed to manga&#x27;s wide availability on digital reading apps, book retailer chains such as Barnes &amp; Noble and online retailers such as Amazon as well as the increased streaming of anime. Manga represented 38% of the French comics market in 2005. This is equivalent to approximately three times that of the United States and was valued at about ($million). In Europe and the Middle East, the market was valued at $250 million in 2012. 

Manga stories are typically printed in black-and-white—due to time constraints, artistic reasons (as coloring could lessen the impact of the artwork) and to keep printing costs low—although some full-color manga exist (e.g., &quot;Colorful&quot;). In Japan, manga are usually serialized in large manga magazines, often containing many stories, each presented in a single episode to be continued in the next issue. A single manga story is almost always longer than a single issue from a Western comic. Collected chapters are usually republished in volumes, frequently but not exclusively paperback books. A manga artist (&quot;mangaka&quot; in Japanese) typically works with a few assistants in a small studio and is associated with a creative editor from a commercial publishing company. If a manga series is popular enough, it may be animated after or during its run. Sometimes, manga are based on previous live-action or animated films.

Manga-influenced comics, among original works, exist in other parts of the world, particularly in those places that speak Chinese (&quot;manhua&quot;), Korean (&quot;manhwa&quot;), English (&quot;OEL manga&quot;), and French (&quot;manfra&quot;), as well as in the nation of Algeria (&quot;DZ-manga&quot;).

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;manga&quot; comes from the Japanese word (katakana: ; hiragana: ), composed of the two kanji (man) meaning &quot;whimsical or impromptu&quot; and (ga) meaning &quot;pictures&quot;. The same term is the root of the Korean word for comics, &quot;manhwa&quot;, and the Chinese word &quot;manhua&quot;.

The word first came into common usage in the late 18th century with the publication of such works as Santō Kyōden&#x27;s picturebook &quot;Shiji no yukikai&quot; (1798), and in the early 19th century with such works as Aikawa Minwa&#x27;s &quot;Manga hyakujo&quot; (1814) and the celebrated &quot;Hokusai Manga&quot; books (1814–1834) containing assorted drawings from the sketchbooks of the famous ukiyo-e artist Hokusai. Rakuten Kitazawa (1876–1955) first used the word &quot;manga&quot; in the modern sense.

In Japanese, &quot;manga&quot; refers to all kinds of cartooning, comics, and animation. Among English speakers, &quot;manga&quot; has the stricter meaning of &quot;Japanese comics&quot;, in parallel to the usage of &quot;anime&quot; in and outside Japan. The term &quot;ani-manga&quot; is used to describe comics produced from animation cels.

== History and characteristics ==


Manga originated from &quot;emakimono&quot; (scrolls), &quot;Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga&quot;, dating back to the 12th century. During the Edo period (1603–1867), a book of drawings titled &quot;Toba Ehon&quot; further developed what would later be called manga. The word itself first came into common usage in 1798, with the publication of works such as Santō Kyōden&#x27;s picturebook &quot;Shiji no yukikai&quot; (1798), and in the early 19th century with such works as Aikawa Minwa&#x27;s &quot;Manga hyakujo&quot; (1814) and the &quot;Hokusai Manga&quot; books (1814–1834). Adam L. Kern has suggested that &quot;kibyoshi&quot;, picture books from the late 18th century, may have been the world&#x27;s first comic books. These graphical narratives share with modern manga humorous, satirical, and romantic themes. Some works were mass-produced as serials using woodblock printing. However, Eastern comics are generally held separate from the evolution of Western comics; Western comic art probably originated in 17th century Italy.

Writers on manga history have described two broad and complementary processes shaping modern manga. One view represented by other writers such as Frederik L. Schodt, Kinko Ito, and Adam L. Kern, stress continuity of Japanese cultural and aesthetic traditions, including pre-war, Meiji, and pre-Meiji culture and art. The other view, emphasizes events occurring during and after the Allied occupation of Japan (1945–1952), and stresses U.S. cultural influences, including U.S. comics (brought to Japan by the GIs) and images and themes from U.S. television, film, and cartoons (especially Disney).

Regardless of its source, an explosion of artistic creativity occurred in the post-war period, involving manga artists such as Osamu Tezuka (&quot;Astro Boy&quot;) and Machiko Hasegawa (&quot;Sazae-san&quot;). &quot;Astro Boy&quot; quickly became (and remains) immensely popular in Japan and elsewhere, and the anime adaptation of &quot;Sazae-san&quot; drew more viewers than any other anime on Japanese television in 2011. Tezuka and Hasegawa both made stylistic innovations. In Tezuka&#x27;s &quot;cinematographic&quot; technique, the panels are like a motion picture that reveals details of action bordering on slow motion as well as rapid zooms from distance to close-up shots. This kind of visual dynamism was widely adopted by later manga artists. Hasegawa&#x27;s focus on daily life and women&#x27;s experience also came to characterize later &quot;shōjo manga&quot;. Between 1950 and 1969, an increasingly large readership for manga emerged in Japan with the solidification of its two main marketing genres, &quot;shōnen manga&quot; aimed at boys and &quot;shōjo manga&quot; aimed at girls.

In 1969, a group of female manga artists (later called the &quot;Year 24 Group&quot;, also known as &quot;Magnificent 24s&quot;) made their &quot;shōjo&quot; manga debut (&quot;year 24&quot; comes from the Japanese name for the year 1949, the birth-year of many of these artists). The group included Moto Hagio, Riyoko Ikeda, Yumiko Ōshima, Keiko Takemiya, and Ryoko Yamagishi. Thereafter, primarily female manga artists would draw &quot;shōjo&quot; for a readership of girls and young women. In the following decades (1975–present), &quot;shōjo&quot; manga continued to develop stylistically while simultaneously evolving different but overlapping subgenres. Major subgenres include romance, superheroines, and &quot;Ladies Comics&quot; (in Japanese, &quot;redisu&quot; , &quot;redikomi&quot; , and &quot;josei&quot; ).

Modern &quot;shōjo&quot; manga romance features love as a major theme set into emotionally intense narratives of self-realization. With the superheroines, &quot;shōjo&quot; manga saw releases such as Pink Hanamori&#x27;s &quot;Mermaid Melody Pichi Pichi Pitch&quot;, Reiko Yoshida&#x27;s &quot;Tokyo Mew Mew&quot;, and Naoko Takeuchi&#x27;s &quot;Pretty Soldier Sailor Moon&quot;, which became internationally popular in both manga and anime formats. Groups (or &quot;sentais&quot;) of girls working together have also been popular within this genre. Like Lucia, Hanon, and Rina singing together, and Sailor Moon, Sailor Mercury, Sailor Mars, Sailor Jupiter, and Sailor Venus working together.

Manga for male readers sub-divides according to the age of its intended readership: boys up to 18 years old (&quot;shōnen&quot; manga) and young men 18 to 30 years old (&quot;seinen&quot; manga); as well as by content, including action-adventure often involving male heroes, slapstick humor, themes of honor, and sometimes explicit sex. The Japanese use different kanji for two closely allied meanings of &quot;seinen&quot;— for &quot;youth, young man&quot; and for &quot;adult, majority&quot;—the second referring to pornographic manga aimed at grown men and also called &quot;seijin&quot; (&quot;adult&quot; ) manga. &quot;Shōnen&quot;, &quot;seinen&quot;, and &quot;seijin&quot; manga share a number of features in common.

Boys and young men became some of the earliest readers of manga after World War II. From the 1950s on, &quot;shōnen&quot; manga focused on topics thought to interest the archetypal boy, including subjects like robots, space-travel, and heroic action-adventure. Popular themes include science fiction, technology, sports, and supernatural settings. Manga with solitary costumed superheroes like Superman, Batman, and Spider-Man generally did not become as popular.

The role of girls and women in manga produced for male readers has evolved considerably over time to include those featuring single pretty girls (&quot;bishōjo&quot;) such as Belldandy from &quot;Oh My Goddess!&quot;, stories where such girls and women surround the hero, as in &quot;Negima&quot; and &quot;Hanaukyo Maid Team&quot;, or groups of heavily armed female warriors (&quot;sentō bishōjo&quot;)

By the turn of the 21st century, manga &quot;achieved worldwide popularity&quot;.

With the relaxation of censorship in Japan in the 1990s, an assortment of explicit sexual material appeared in manga intended for male readers, and correspondingly continued into the English translations. In 2010, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government considered a bill to restrict minors&#x27; access to such content.

The &quot;gekiga&quot; style of storytelling—thematically somber, adult-oriented, and sometimes deeply violent—focuses on the day-in, day-out grim realities of life, often drawn in a gritty and unvarnished fashion. &quot;Gekiga&quot; such as Sampei Shirato&#x27;s 1959–1962 &quot;Chronicles of a Ninja&#x27;s Military Accomplishments&quot; (&quot;Ninja Bugeichō&quot;) arose in the late 1950s and 1960s, partly from left-wing student and working-class political activism, and partly from the aesthetic dissatisfaction of young manga artists like Yoshihiro Tatsumi with existing manga.

== Publications and exhibition ==


In Japan, manga constituted an annual 40.6 billion yen (approximately US$395 million) publication-industry by 2007. In 2006 sales of manga books made up for about 27% of total book-sales, and sale of manga magazines, for 20% of total magazine-sales. The manga industry has expanded worldwide, where distribution companies license and reprint manga into their native languages.

Marketeers primarily classify manga by the age and gender of the target readership. In particular, books and magazines sold to boys (&quot;shōnen&quot;) and girls (&quot;shōjo&quot;) have distinctive cover-art, and most bookstores place them on different shelves. Due to cross-readership, consumer response is not limited by demographics. For example, male readers may subscribe to a series intended for female readers, and so on. Japan has manga cafés, or &quot;manga kissa&quot; (&quot;kissa&quot; is an abbreviation of &quot;kissaten&quot;). At a &quot;manga kissa&quot;, people drink coffee, read manga and sometimes stay overnight.

The Kyoto International Manga Museum maintains a very large website listing manga published in Japanese.

=== Magazines ===

&quot;E-shimbun Nippon-chi&quot; (1874), published by Kanagaki Robun and Kawanabe Kyosai, is credited as the first manga magazine ever made.

 usually have many series running concurrently with approximately 20–40 pages allocated to each series per issue. Other magazines such as the anime fandom magazine &quot;Newtype&quot; featured single chapters within their monthly periodicals. Other magazines like &quot;Nakayoshi&quot; feature many stories written by many different artists; these magazines, or &quot;anthology magazines&quot;, as they are also known (colloquially &quot;phone books&quot;), are usually printed on low-quality newsprint and can be anywhere from 200 to more than 850 pages thick. Manga magazines also contain one-shot comics and various four-panel &quot;yonkoma&quot; (equivalent to comic strips). Manga series can run for many years if they are successful. Popular shonen magazines include &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot;, &quot;Weekly Shōnen Magazine&quot; and &quot;Weekly Shōnen Sunday&quot; - Popular shoujo manga include &quot;Ciao&quot;, &quot;Nakayoshi&quot; and &quot;Ribon&quot;. Manga artists sometimes start out with a few &quot;one-shot&quot; manga projects just to try to get their name out. If these are successful and receive good reviews, they are continued. Magazines often have a short life.

=== Collected volumes ===

After a series has run for a while, publishers often collect the chapters and print them in dedicated book-sized volumes, called . These can be hardcover, or more usually softcover books, and are the equivalent of U.S. trade paperbacks or graphic novels. These volumes often use higher-quality paper, and are useful to those who want to &quot;catch up&quot; with a series so they can follow it in the magazines or if they find the cost of the weeklies or monthlies to be prohibitive. &quot;Deluxe&quot; versions have also been printed as readers have gotten older and the need for something special grew. Old manga have also been reprinted using somewhat lesser quality paper and sold for 100 yen (about $1 U.S. dollar) each to compete with the used book market.

==== History ====
Kanagaki Robun and Kawanabe Kyōsai created the first manga magazine in 1874: &quot;Eshinbun Nipponchi&quot;. The magazine was heavily influenced by &quot;Japan Punch&quot;, founded in 1862 by Charles Wirgman, a British cartoonist. &quot;Eshinbun Nipponchi&quot; had a very simple style of drawings and did not become popular with many people. &quot;Eshinbun Nipponchi&quot; ended after three issues. The magazine &quot;Kisho Shimbun&quot; in 1875 was inspired by &quot;Eshinbun Nipponchi&quot;, which was followed by &quot;Marumaru Chinbun&quot; in 1877, and then &quot;Garakuta Chinpo&quot; in 1879. &quot;Shōnen Sekai&quot; was the first &quot;shōnen&quot; magazine created in 1895 by Iwaya Sazanami, a famous writer of Japanese children&#x27;s literature back then. &quot;Shōnen Sekai&quot; had a strong focus on the First Sino-Japanese War.

In 1905, the manga-magazine publishing boom started with the Russo-Japanese War, &quot;Tokyo Pakku&quot; was created and became a huge hit. After &quot;Tokyo Pakku&quot; in 1905, a female version of &quot;Shōnen Sekai&quot; was created and named &quot;Shōjo Sekai&quot;, considered the first &quot;shōjo&quot; magazine. &quot;Shōnen Pakku&quot; was made and is considered the first children&#x27;s manga magazine. The children&#x27;s demographic was in an early stage of development in the Meiji period. &quot;Shōnen Pakku&quot; was influenced from foreign children&#x27;s magazines such as &quot;Puck&quot; which an employee of Jitsugyō no Nihon (publisher of the magazine) saw and decided to emulate. In 1924, &quot;Kodomo Pakku&quot; was launched as another children&#x27;s manga magazine after &quot;Shōnen Pakku&quot;. During the boom, &quot;Poten&quot; (derived from the French &quot;potin&quot;) was published in 1908. All the pages were in full color with influences from &quot;Tokyo Pakku&quot; and &quot;Osaka Puck&quot;. It is unknown if there were any more issues besides the first one. &quot;Kodomo Pakku&quot; was launched May 1924 by Tokyosha and featured high-quality art by many members of the manga artistry like Takei Takeo, Takehisa Yumeji and Aso Yutaka. Some of the manga featured speech balloons, where other manga from the previous eras did not use speech balloons and were silent.

Published from May 1935 to January 1941, &quot;Manga no Kuni&quot; coincided with the period of the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945). &quot;Manga no Kuni&quot; featured information on becoming a mangaka and on other comics industries around the world. &quot;Manga no Kuni&quot; handed its title to &quot;Sashie Manga Kenkyū&quot; in August 1940.

=== &quot;Dōjinshi&quot; ===
&quot;Dōjinshi&quot;, produced by small publishers outside of the mainstream commercial market, resemble in their publishing small-press independently published comic books in the United States. Comiket, the largest comic book convention in the world with around 500,000 visitors gathering over three days, is devoted to &quot;dōjinshi&quot;. While they most often contain original stories, many are parodies of or include characters from popular manga and anime series. Some &quot;dōjinshi&quot; continue with a series&#x27; story or write an entirely new one using its characters, much like fan fiction. In 2007, &quot;dōjinshi&quot; sales amounted to 27.73 billion yen (US$245 million). In 2006 they represented about a tenth of manga books and magazines sales.

== Digital manga ==
Thanks to the advent of the internet, there have been new ways for aspiring mangaka to upload and sell their manga online. Before, there were two main ways in which a mangaka&#x27;s work could be published: taking their manga drawn on paper to a publisher themselves, or submitting their work to competitions run by magazines.

=== Web manga ===
In recent years, there has been a rise in manga released digitally. Web manga, as it is known in Japan, has seen an increase thanks in part to image hosting websites where anyone can upload pages from their works for free. Although released digitally, almost all web manga sticks to the conventional black-and-white format despite some never getting physical publication. Pixiv is the most popular site where amateur and professional work gets published on the site. It has grown to be the most visited site for artwork in Japan. Twitter has also become a popular place for web manga with many artists releasing pages weekly on their accounts in the hope of their work getting picked up or published professionally. One of the best examples of an amateur work becoming professional is &quot;One-Punch Man&quot; which was released online and later received a professional remake released digitally and an anime adaptation soon thereafter.

Many of the big print publishers have also released digital only magazines and websites where web manga get published alongside their serialized magazines. Shogakukan for instance has two websites, Sunday Webry and Ura Sunday, that release weekly chapters for web manga and even offer contests for mangaka to submit their work. Both Sunday Webry and Ura Sunday have become one of the top web manga sites in Japan. Some have even released apps that teach how to draw professional manga and learn how to create them. &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot; released &quot;Jump Paint&quot;, an app that guides users on how to make their own manga from making storyboards to digitally inking lines. It also offers more than 120 types of pen tips and more than 1,000 screentones for artists to practice. Kodansha has also used the popularity of web manga to launch more series and also offer better distribution of their officially translated works under Kodansha Comics thanks in part to the titles being released digitally first before being published physically.

The rise web manga has also been credited to smartphones and computers as more and more readers read manga on their phones rather than from a print publication. While paper manga has seen a decrease over time, digital manga have been growing in sales each year. The Research Institute for Publications reports that sales of digital manga books excluding magazines jumped 27.1 percent to ¥146 billion in 2016 from the year before while sales of paper manga saw a record year-on-year decline of 7.4 percent to ¥194.7 billion. They have also said that if the digital and paper keep the same growth and drop rates, web manga would exceed their paper counterparts. In 2020 manga sales topped the ¥600 billion mark for the first time in history, beating the 1995 peak due to a fast growth of the digital manga market which rose by ¥82.7 billion from a previous year, surpassing print manga sales which have also increased.

=== Webtoons ===
While webtoons have caught on in popularity as a new medium for comics in Asia, Japan has been slow to adopt webtoons as the traditional format and print publication still dominate the way manga is created and consumed (although this is rapidly changing). Despite this, one of the biggest webtoon publishers in the world, Comico, has had success in the traditional Japanese manga market. Comico was launched by NHN Japan, the Japanese subsidiary of Korean company, NHN Entertainment. As of now, there are only two webtoon publishers that publish Japanese webtoons: Comico and Naver Webtoon (under the name XOY in Japan). Kakao has also had success by offering licensed manga and translated Korean webtoons with their service Piccoma. All three companies credit their success to the webtoon pay model where users can purchase each chapter individually instead of having to buy the whole book while also offering some chapters for free for a period of time allowing anyone to read a whole series for free if they wait long enough. The added benefit of having all of their titles in color and some with special animations and effects have also helped them succeed. Some popular Japanese webtoons have also gotten anime adaptations and print releases, the most notable being &quot;ReLIFE&quot; and &quot;Recovery of an MMO Junkie&quot;.

== International markets ==
By 2007, the influence of manga on international comics had grown considerably over the past two decades. &quot;Influence&quot; is used here to refer to effects on the comics markets outside Japan and to aesthetic effects on comics artists internationally.

Traditionally, manga stories flow from top to bottom and from right to left. Some publishers of translated manga keep to this original format. Other publishers mirror the pages horizontally before printing the translation, changing the reading direction to a more &quot;Western&quot; left to right, so as not to confuse foreign readers or traditional comics-consumers. This practice is known as &quot;flipping&quot;. For the most part, criticism suggests that flipping goes against the original intentions of the creator (for example, if a person wears a shirt that reads &quot;MAY&quot; on it, and gets flipped, then the word is altered to &quot;YAM&quot;), who may be ignorant of how awkward it is to read comics when the eyes must flow through the pages and text in opposite directions, resulting in an experience that&#x27;s quite distinct from reading something that flows homogeneously. If the translation is not adapted to the flipped artwork carefully enough it is also possible for the text to go against the picture, such as a person referring to something on their left in the text while pointing to their right in the graphic. Characters shown writing with their right hands, the majority of them, would become left-handed when a series is flipped. Flipping may also cause oddities with familiar asymmetrical objects or layouts, such as a car being depicted with the gas pedal on the left and the brake on the right, or a shirt with the buttons on the wrong side, however these issues are minor when compared to the unnatural reading flow, and some of them could be solved with an adaptation work that goes beyond just translation and blind flipping.

In April 2023, the Japan Business Federation laid out a proposal aiming to spur the economic growth of Japan by further promoting the contents industry abroad, primarily anime, manga and video games, for measures to invite industry experts from abroad to come to Japan to work, and to link with the tourism sector to help foreign fans of manga and anime visit sites across the country associated with particular manga stories. The federation seeks to quadruple the sales of Japanese content in overseas markets within the upcoming 10 years.

=== Asia ===
Manga has highly influenced the art styles of manhwa and manhua. Manga in Indonesia is published by Elex Media Komputindo, Level Comic, M&amp;C and Gramedia. Manga has influenced Indonesia&#x27;s original comic industry. Manga in the Philippines were imported from the US and were sold only in specialty stores and in limited copies. The first manga in Filipino language is Doraemon which was published by J-Line Comics and was then followed by Case Closed. In 2015, Boys&#x27; Love manga became popular through the introduction of BL manga by printing company BLACKink. Among the first BL titles to be printed were Poster Boy, Tagila, and Sprinters, all were written in Filipino. BL manga have become bestsellers in the top three bookstore companies in the Philippines since their introduction in 2015. During the same year, Boys&#x27; Love manga have become a popular mainstream with Thai consumers, leading to television series adapted from BL manga stories since 2016. Manga piracy is an increasing problem in Asia which effects many publishers. This has led to the Japanese government taking legal action against multiple operators of pirate websites. Manga has become increasingly popular in Southeast Asia being one the main assets of Japan&#x27;s soft power in the region.

=== Europe ===

Manga has influenced European cartooning in a way that is somewhat different from in the U.S. Broadcast anime in France and Italy opened the European market to manga during the 1970s. French art has borrowed from Japan since the 19th century (Japonism) and has its own highly developed tradition of bande dessinée cartooning. Manga was introduced to France in the late 1990s, where Japanese pop culture became massively popular: in 2021, 55% of comics sold in the country were manga and France is the biggest manga importer.

By mid-2021, 75 percent of the €300 value of accounts given to French 18 year-olds was spent on manga. According to the Japan External Trade Organization, sales of manga reached $212.6 million within France and Germany alone in 2006. France represents about 50% of the European market and is the second worldwide market, behind Japan. In 2013, there were 41 publishers of manga in France and, together with other Asian comics, manga represented around 40% of new comics releases in the country, surpassing Franco-Belgian comics for the first time. European publishers marketing manga translated into French include Asuka, Casterman, Glénat, Kana, and Pika Édition, among others. European publishers also translate manga into Dutch, German, Italian, and other languages. In 2007, about 70% of all comics sold in Germany were manga. Since 2010 the country celebrates Manga Day on every 27 August. In 2021 manga sales in Germany rose by 75% from its original record of 70 million in 2005. As of 2022 Germany is the third largest manga market in Europe after Italy and France.

In 2021, the Spanish manga market hit a record of 1033 new title publications. In 2022 the 28th edition of the Barcelona Manga Festival opened its doors to more than 163,000 fans, compared to a pre-pandemic 120,000 in 2019.

Manga publishers based in the United Kingdom include Gollancz and Titan Books. Manga publishers from the United States have a strong marketing presence in the United Kingdom: for example, the Tanoshimi line from Random House. In 2019 The British Museum held a mass exhibition dedicated to manga.

The Europe manga market size was estimated at USD 676.1 million in 2023 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 19.6% from 2024 to 2030.

=== United States ===

Manga made their way only gradually into U.S. markets, first in association with anime and then independently. Some U.S. fans became aware of manga in the 1970s and early 1980s. However, anime was initially more accessible than manga to U.S. fans, many of whom were college-age young people who found it easier to obtain, subtitle, and exhibit video tapes of anime than translate, reproduce, and distribute -style manga books. One of the first manga translated into English and marketed in the U.S. was Keiji Nakazawa&#x27;s &quot;Barefoot Gen&quot;, an autobiographical story of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima issued by Leonard Rifas and Educomics (1980–1982). More manga were translated between the mid-1980s and 1990s, including &quot;Golgo 13&quot; in 1986, &quot;Lone Wolf and Cub&quot; from First Comics in 1987, and &quot;Kamui&quot;, &quot;Area 88&quot;, and &quot;Mai the Psychic Girl&quot;, also in 1987 and all from Viz Media-Eclipse Comics. Others soon followed, including &quot;Akira&quot; from Marvel Comics&#x27; Epic Comics imprint, &quot;Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind&quot; from Viz Media, and &quot;Appleseed&quot; from Eclipse Comics in 1988, and later &quot;Iczer-1&quot; (Antarctic Press, 1994) and Ippongi Bang&#x27;s &quot;F-111 Bandit&quot; (Antarctic Press, 1995).

During the 1980s and 1990s, Japanese animation, such as &quot;Akira&quot;, &quot;Dragon Ball&quot;, &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot;, and &quot;Pokémon&quot;, made a larger impact on the fan experience and in the market than manga. Matters changed when translator-entrepreneur Toren Smith founded Studio Proteus in 1986. Smith and Studio Proteus acted as an agent and translator of many Japanese manga, including Masamune Shirow&#x27;s &quot;Appleseed&quot; and Kōsuke Fujishima&#x27;s &quot;Oh My Goddess!&quot;, for Dark Horse and Eros Comix, eliminating the need for these publishers to seek their own contacts in Japan.
Simultaneously, the Japanese publisher Shogakukan opened a U.S. market initiative with their U.S. subsidiary Viz, enabling Viz to draw directly on Shogakukan&#x27;s catalogue and translation skills.

Japanese publishers began pursuing a U.S. market in the mid-1990s, due to a stagnation in the domestic market for manga. The U.S. manga market took an upturn with mid-1990s anime and manga versions of Masamune Shirow&#x27;s &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; (translated by Frederik L. Schodt and Toren Smith) becoming very popular among fans. An extremely successful manga and anime translated and dubbed in English in the mid-1990s was &quot;Sailor Moon&quot;. By 1995–1998, the &quot;Sailor Moon&quot; manga had been exported to over 23 countries, including China, Brazil, Mexico, Australia, North America and most of Europe. In 1997, Mixx Entertainment began publishing &quot;Sailor Moon&quot;, along with CLAMP&#x27;s &quot;Magic Knight Rayearth&quot;, Hitoshi Iwaaki&#x27;s &quot;Parasyte&quot; and Tsutomu Takahashi&#x27;s &quot;Ice Blade&quot; in the monthly manga magazine &quot;MixxZine&quot;. Mixx Entertainment, later renamed Tokyopop, also published manga in trade paperbacks and, like Viz, began aggressive marketing of manga to both young male and young female demographics.

During this period, Dark Horse Manga was a major publisher of translated manga. In addition to &quot;Oh My Goddess!&quot;, the company published &quot;Akira&quot;, &quot;Astro Boy&quot;, &quot;Berserk&quot;, &quot;Blade of the Immortal&quot;, &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, &quot;Lone Wolf and Cub&quot;, Yasuhiro Nightow&#x27;s &quot;Trigun&quot; and &quot;Blood Blockade Battlefront&quot;, &quot;Gantz&quot;, Kouta Hirano&#x27;s &quot;Hellsing&quot; and &quot;Drifters&quot;, &quot;Blood+&quot;, &quot;Multiple Personality Detective Psycho&quot;, &quot;FLCL&quot;, &quot;Mob Psycho 100&quot;, and &quot;Oreimo&quot;. The company received 13 Eisner Award nominations for its manga titles, and three of the four manga creators admitted to The Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame — Osamu Tezuka, Kazuo Koike, and Goseki Kojima — were published in Dark Horse translations.

In the following years, manga became increasingly popular, and new publishers entered the field while the established publishers greatly expanded their catalogues. The &quot;Pokémon&quot; manga &quot;Electric Tale of Pikachu&quot; issue #1 sold over 1million copies in the United States, making it the best-selling single comic book in the United States since 1993. By 2008, the U.S. and Canadian manga market generated $175 million in annual sales. Simultaneously, mainstream U.S. media began to discuss manga, with articles in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;Time&quot; magazine, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, and &quot;Wired&quot; magazine. As of 2017, manga distributor Viz Media is the largest publisher of graphic novels and comic books in the United States, with a 23% share of the market. BookScan sales show that manga is one of the fastest-growing areas of the comic book and narrative fiction markets. From January 2019 to May 2019, the manga market grew 16%, compared to the overall comic book market&#x27;s 5% growth. The NPD Group noted that, compared to other comic book readers, manga readers are younger (76% under 30) and more diverse, including a higher female readership (16% higher than other comic books).
As of January 2020, manga is the second largest category in the US comic book and graphic novel market, accounting for 27% of the entire market share. During the COVID-19 pandemic some stores of the American bookseller Barnes &amp; Noble saw up to a 500% increase in sales from graphic novel and manga sales due to the younger generations showing a high interest in the medium. Sales of print manga titles in the U.S. increased by 3.6 million units in the first quarter of 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. In 2021, 24.4 million units of manga were sold in the United States. This is an increase of about 15 million (160%) more sales than in 2020. In 2022, most of the top-selling comic creators in the United States were mangaka. The same year manga sales saw an increase of 9%. In 2023 manga sales amounted a value of $381.16 million USD with 57% of all titles sold coming from Viz Media.

== Localized manga ==
A number of artists in the United States have drawn comics and cartoons influenced by manga. As an early example, Vernon Grant drew manga-influenced comics while living in Japan in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Others include Frank Miller&#x27;s mid-1980s &quot;Ronin&quot;, Adam Warren and Toren Smith&#x27;s 1988 &quot;The Dirty Pair&quot;, Ben Dunn&#x27;s 1987 &quot;Ninja High School&quot; and &quot;Manga Shi 2000&quot; from Crusade Comics (1997).

By the beginning of the 21st century, several U.S. manga publishers had begun to produce work by U.S. artists under the broad marketing-label of manga. In 2002, I.C. Entertainment, formerly Studio Ironcat and now out of business, launched a series of manga by U.S. artists called &quot;Amerimanga&quot;. In 2004, eigoMANGA launched the &quot;Rumble Pak&quot; and &quot;Sakura Pakk&quot; anthology series. Seven Seas Entertainment followed suit with &quot;World Manga&quot;. Simultaneously, TokyoPop introduced original English-language manga (OEL manga) later renamed &quot;Global Manga&quot;.

Francophone artists have also developed their own versions of manga (&quot;manfra&quot;), like Frédéric Boilet&#x27;s &quot;la nouvelle manga&quot;. Boilet has worked in France and in Japan, sometimes collaborating with Japanese artists.

== Awards ==
The Japanese manga industry grants a large number of awards, mostly sponsored by publishers, with the winning prize usually including publication of the winning stories in magazines released by the sponsoring publisher. Examples of these awards include:
* The Akatsuka Award for humorous manga
* The Dengeki Comic Grand Prix for one-shot manga
* The Japan Cartoonists Association Award various categories
* The Kodansha Manga Award (multiple genre awards)
* The Seiun Award for best science fiction comic of the year
* The Shogakukan Manga Award (multiple genres)
* The Tezuka Award for best new serial manga
* The Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize (multiple genres)

The Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has awarded the International Manga Award annually since May 2007.

In 2024, LeftField Media (creators of the annual event Anime NYC) in cooperation with Japan Society created an awards program to honor manga creators with work available in English. 
* The American Manga Awards (multiple genres)

== University education ==
Kyoto Seika University in Japan has offered a highly competitive course in manga since 2000. Then, several established universities and vocational schools (専門学校: &quot;Semmon gakkou&quot;) established a .

Shuho Sato, who wrote &quot;Umizaru&quot; and &quot;Say Hello to Black Jack&quot;, has created some controversy on Twitter. Sato says, &quot;Manga school is meaningless because those schools have very low success rates. Then, I could teach novices required skills on the job in three months. Meanwhile, those school students spend several million yen, and four years, yet they are good for nothing.&quot; and that, &quot;For instance, Keiko Takemiya, the then professor of Seika Univ., remarked in the Government Council that &#x27;A complete novice will be able to understand where is &quot;Tachikiri&quot; (i.e., margin section) during four years.&#x27; On the other hand, I would imagine that, It takes about thirty minutes to completely understand that at work.&quot;

== See also ==
* ACG (subculture)
* Alternative manga
* Anime
* Anime and manga fandom
* Cinema of Japan
* Cool Japan
* Culture of Japan
* Emakimono
* E-toki (horizontal, illustrated narrative form)
* Japanese language
* Soft power § Japan
* Japanese popular culture
* Kamishibai
* Light novel
* List of best-selling manga
* List of films based on manga
* List of licensed manga in English
* List of manga distributors
* List of manga magazines
* List of Japanese manga magazines by circulation
* Manga iconography
* Manga outside Japan
* Truyện tranh
* Q-version (cartoonification)
* Ukiyo-e
* Visual novel
* Video games in Japan
* &quot;Weekly Shōnen Jump&quot;
== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
=== Inline citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* Marcella Zaccagnino and Sebastiano Contrari. &quot;Manga: il Giappone alla conquista del mondo&quot; (Archive) . &quot;Limes, rivista italiana di geopolitica&quot;. 31 October 2007. 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="4" end="10" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="14" end="27" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="46" end="51" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q603399" start="171" end="183" title="Japanese art" label="Japanese art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="257" end="267" title="cartooning" label="cartooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="470" end="475" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="478" end="484" title="Action fiction" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q21802675" start="486" end="495" title="Adventure fiction" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="520" end="526" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="528" end="537" title="Detective fiction" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="539" end="544" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="546" end="556" title="Historical fiction" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="558" end="564" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="566" end="573" title="Mystery fiction" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="575" end="582" title="Romance novel" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="584" end="599" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="604" end="611" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747483" start="613" end="620" title="Erotic literature" label="erotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q172067" start="628" end="634" title="hentai" label="hentai"/>
<link wikidata="Q219559" start="651" end="656" title="ecchi" label="ecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579932" start="665" end="671" title="Sports novel" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q457524" start="959" end="974" title="manga magazines" label="manga magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q844822" start="1513" end="1521" title="Shueisha" label="Shueisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="1523" end="1531" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031115" start="1533" end="1541" title="Kadokawa Future Publishing" label="Kadokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q785697" start="1547" end="1557" title="Shogakukan" label="Shogakukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1571" end="1585" title="North American" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031605" start="1647" end="1659" title="NPD BookScan" label="NPD BookScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1727" end="1729" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="1892" end="1910" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="1940" end="1946" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="1985" end="1990" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="2280" end="2295" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984425" start="2472" end="2480" title="Colorful (manga)" label="Colorful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="2735" end="2740" title="Comic book" label="comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="2828" end="2843" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="paperback books"/>
<link wikidata="Q191633" start="2847" end="2859" title="manga artist" label="manga artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="3076" end="3084" title="Anime" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="3149" end="3160" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q754669" start="3318" end="3324" title="manhua" label="manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="3347" end="3353" title="manhwa" label="manhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q470137" start="3377" end="3386" title="OEL manga" label="OEL manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285662" start="3413" end="3419" title="manfra" label="manfra"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="3562" end="3570" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="3574" end="3582" title="hiragana" label="hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="3607" end="3612" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="3764" end="3770" title="manhwa" label="manhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q754669" start="3805" end="3811" title="manhua" label="manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q938347" start="3921" end="3933" title="Santō Kyōden" label="Santō Kyōden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489747" start="4117" end="4130" title="Hokusai Manga" label="Hokusai Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="4219" end="4226" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586" start="4234" end="4241" title="Hokusai" label="Hokusai"/>
<link wikidata="Q325196" start="4243" end="4259" title="Rakuten Kitazawa" label="Rakuten Kitazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="4554" end="4559" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359975" start="4603" end="4612" title="ani-manga" label="ani-manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190781" start="4741" end="4750" title="emakimono" label="emakimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q736832" start="4774" end="4793" title="Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga" label="Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="4845" end="4855" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q938347" start="5061" end="5073" title="Santō Kyōden" label="Santō Kyōden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489747" start="5246" end="5259" title="Hokusai Manga" label="Hokusai Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196335" start="5323" end="5331" title="kibyoshi" label="kibyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="5418" end="5428" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="5571" end="5589" title="woodblock printing" label="woodblock printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525911" start="5889" end="5907" title="Frederik L. Schodt" label="Frederik L. Schodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="6022" end="6027" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="6033" end="6042" title="Meiji Restoration" label="pre-Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="6043" end="6050" title="Culture of Japan" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q603399" start="6055" end="6058" title="Japanese art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="6125" end="6151" title="Occupied Japan" label="Allied occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485700" start="6251" end="6254" title="G.I. (military)" label="GIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="6331" end="6337" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="6468" end="6480" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q673036" start="6488" end="6497" title="Astro Boy" label="Astro Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265148" start="6509" end="6525" title="Machiko Hasegawa" label="Machiko Hasegawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140442" start="6533" end="6542" title="Sazae-san" label="Sazae-san"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="6652" end="6657" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q242492" start="7197" end="7208" title="shōjo manga" label="shōjo manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q231302" start="7363" end="7375" title="shōnen manga" label="shōnen manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141868" start="7506" end="7519" title="Year 24 Group" label="Year 24 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q265061" start="7741" end="7751" title="Moto Hagio" label="Moto Hagio"/>
<link wikidata="Q256425" start="7753" end="7765" title="Riyoko Ikeda" label="Riyoko Ikeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q445875" start="7767" end="7780" title="Yumiko Ōshima" label="Yumiko Ōshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q268789" start="7782" end="7796" title="Keiko Takemiya" label="Keiko Takemiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q445827" start="7802" end="7817" title="Ryoko Yamagishi" label="Ryoko Yamagishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874480" start="8376" end="8392" title="self-realization" label="self-realization"/>
<link wikidata="Q271250" start="8463" end="8476" title="Pink Hanamori" label="Pink Hanamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q275953" start="8490" end="8522" title="Mermaid Melody Pichi Pichi Pitch" label="Mermaid Melody Pichi Pichi Pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q605013" start="8530" end="8543" title="Reiko Yoshida" label="Reiko Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="Q392125" start="8557" end="8570" title="Tokyo Mew Mew" label="Tokyo Mew Mew"/>
<link wikidata="Q229724" start="8582" end="8596" title="Naoko Takeuchi" label="Naoko Takeuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643098" start="8610" end="8636" title="Sailor Moon" label="Pretty Soldier Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143902" start="8731" end="8737" title="sentai" label="sentai"/>
<link wikidata="Q237338" start="9133" end="9139" title="seinen" label="seinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="9969" end="9984" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="10079" end="10087" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="10089" end="10095" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="10101" end="10111" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q240614" start="10302" end="10309" title="bishōjo" label="bishōjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570983" start="10325" end="10334" title="Belldandy" label="Belldandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467681" start="10346" end="10360" title="Oh My Goddess! (manga)" label="Oh My Goddess!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10434" end="10440" title="Negima!: Magister Negi Magi" label="Negima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191955" start="10457" end="10475" title="Hanaukyo Maid Team" label="Hanaukyo Maid Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074185" start="10856" end="10885" title="Tokyo Metropolitan Government" label="Tokyo Metropolitan Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499199" start="10964" end="10970" title="gekiga" label="gekiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358489" start="11196" end="11210" title="Sampei Shirato" label="Sampei Shirato"/>
<link wikidata="Q672903" start="11500" end="11517" title="Yoshihiro Tatsumi" label="Yoshihiro Tatsumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349529" start="12395" end="12405" title="manga café" label="manga café"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045860" start="12482" end="12490" title="kissaten" label="kissaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="12542" end="12548" title="Coffee (drink)" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q783923" start="12596" end="12628" title="Kyoto International Manga Museum" label="Kyoto International Manga Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723541" start="12771" end="12785" title="Kanagaki Robun" label="Kanagaki Robun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838030" start="12790" end="12805" title="Kawanabe Kyosai" label="Kawanabe Kyosai"/>
<link wikidata="Q482793" start="13029" end="13036" title="Newtype" label="Newtype"/>
<link wikidata="Q749250" start="13129" end="13138" title="Nakayoshi" label="Nakayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="13450" end="13465" title="One-shot (comics)" label="one-shot comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q865484" start="13495" end="13502" title="yonkoma" label="yonkoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="13524" end="13535" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="13638" end="13656" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q508948" start="13670" end="13692" title="Weekly Shōnen Magazine" label="Weekly Shōnen Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q875066" start="13709" end="13729" title="Weekly Shōnen Sunday" label="Weekly Shōnen Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191939" start="13773" end="13777" title="Ciao (magazine)" label="Ciao"/>
<link wikidata="Q749250" start="13791" end="13800" title="Nakayoshi" label="Nakayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189613" start="13817" end="13822" title="Ribon" label="Ribon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="14298" end="14314" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="14318" end="14331" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q944359" start="14824" end="14833" title="used book" label="used book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723541" start="14861" end="14875" title="Kanagaki Robun" label="Kanagaki Robun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838030" start="14880" end="14895" title="Kawanabe Kyōsai" label="Kawanabe Kyōsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069606" start="15015" end="15026" title="Japan Punch" label="Japan Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066490" start="15053" end="15068" title="Charles Wirgman" label="Charles Wirgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506198" start="15468" end="15480" title="Shōnen Sekai" label="Shōnen Sekai"/>
<link wikidata="Q231302" start="15507" end="15513" title="shōnen" label="shōnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="15681" end="15704" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="15768" end="15786" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530536" start="15794" end="15805" title="Tokyo Puck" label="Tokyo Pakku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049408" start="15959" end="15970" title="Shōjo Sekai" label="Shōjo Sekai"/>
<link wikidata="Q242492" start="16005" end="16010" title="shōjo" label="shōjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q478804" start="16089" end="16110" title="children&amp;#x27;s manga" label="children&amp;#x27;s manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="16197" end="16209" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11439983" start="16721" end="16731" title="Osaka Puck" label="Osaka Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q827198" start="17010" end="17025" title="speech balloons" label="speech balloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="17214" end="17238" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191633" start="17313" end="17320" title="mangaka" label="mangaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661080" start="17619" end="17630" title="Small press" label="small-press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="17655" end="17665" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046742" start="17689" end="17696" title="Comiket" label="Comiket"/>
<link wikidata="Q625994" start="17721" end="17731" title="Convention (meeting)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="17917" end="17927" title="Character (arts)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="18087" end="18098" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q306956" start="18998" end="19003" title="Pixiv" label="Pixiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="19156" end="19163" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102879" start="19417" end="19430" title="One-Punch Man" label="One-Punch Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q785697" start="19721" end="19731" title="Shogakukan" label="Shogakukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="20086" end="20104" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="20355" end="20363" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10851321" start="20506" end="20521" title="Kodansha Comics" label="Kodansha Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978994" start="21559" end="21567" title="webtoons" label="webtoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17991433" start="21875" end="21881" title="Comico (NHN Japan)" label="Comico"/>
<link wikidata="Q493528" start="21964" end="21973" title="NHN Japan" label="NHN Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171459" start="22018" end="22035" title="NHN Entertainment" label="NHN Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q24836950" start="22129" end="22142" title="Naver Webtoon" label="Naver Webtoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17684312" start="22174" end="22179" title="Kakao" label="Kakao"/>
<link wikidata="Q38276977" start="22278" end="22285" title="Piccoma" label="Piccoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17231373" start="22830" end="22836" title="ReLIFE" label="ReLIFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q22130898" start="22853" end="22878" title="Recovery of an MMO Junkie" label="Recovery of an MMO Junkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="23119" end="23128" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q889482" start="23235" end="23248" title="Horizontal and vertical writing in East Asian scripts" label="right to left"/>
<link wikidata="Q967832" start="24856" end="24881" title="Japan Business Federation" label="Japan Business Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319831" start="24940" end="24945" title="Economy of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="25024" end="25035" title="Video games in Japan" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060220" start="25136" end="25150" title="Tourism in Japan" label="tourism sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="25438" end="25444" title="manhwa" label="manhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q754669" start="25449" end="25455" title="manhua" label="manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364677" start="25492" end="25513" title="Elex Media Komputindo" label="Elex Media Komputindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535026" start="25515" end="25526" title="Level Comic" label="Level Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711807" start="25528" end="25535" title="M&amp;amp;C (publisher)" label="M&amp;amp;C"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646130" start="25540" end="25548" title="Gramedia" label="Gramedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235311" start="25766" end="25774" title="Doraemon" label="Doraemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853685" start="25837" end="25848" title="Case Closed" label="Case Closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q242488" start="25859" end="25874" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Love" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q242488" start="26218" end="26233" title="Yaoi" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="26647" end="26657" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q751880" start="26933" end="26941" title="Japonism" label="Japonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431020" start="26989" end="27003" title="bande dessinée" label="bande dessinée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431020" start="27722" end="27743" title="Franco-Belgian comics" label="Franco-Belgian comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q568077" start="27838" end="27847" title="Casterman" label="Casterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454296" start="27849" end="27855" title="Glénat (publisher)" label="Glénat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339813" start="27857" end="27861" title="Kana (publisher)" label="Kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q349566" start="27867" end="27879" title="Pika Édition" label="Pika Édition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894182" start="28401" end="28425" title="Manga Barcelona" label="Barcelona Manga Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="28568" end="28576" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683733" start="28707" end="28716" title="Tanoshimi" label="Tanoshimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="28727" end="28739" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="28749" end="28767" title="The British Museum" label="The British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28775" end="28809" title="The Citi Exhibition: Manga" label="mass exhibition dedicated to manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422850" start="28913" end="28917" title="CAGR" label="CAGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q193432" start="29091" end="29095" title="Fan (person)" label="fans"/>
<link wikidata="Q959193" start="29473" end="29487" title="Keiji Nakazawa" label="Keiji Nakazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347" start="29501" end="29513" title="Barefoot Gen" label="Barefoot Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q115647184" start="29592" end="29605" title="Leonard Rifas" label="Leonard Rifas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122254" start="29709" end="29717" title="Golgo 13" label="Golgo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q640785" start="29739" end="29756" title="Lone Wolf and Cub" label="Lone Wolf and Cub"/>
<link wikidata="Q362844" start="29768" end="29780" title="First Comics" label="First Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276142" start="29800" end="29805" title="Kamui (1964 manga)" label="Kamui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374090" start="29819" end="29826" title="Area 88" label="Area 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296700" start="29844" end="29864" title="Mai the Psychic Girl" label="Mai the Psychic Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="29898" end="29907" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281957" start="29908" end="29922" title="Eclipse Comics" label="Eclipse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q91486" start="29962" end="29967" title="Akira (manga)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="29979" end="29992" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465548" start="29999" end="30010" title="Epic Comics" label="Epic Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q95047" start="30026" end="30060" title="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (manga)" label="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q91499" start="30093" end="30102" title="Appleseed (manga)" label="Appleseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q571134" start="30169" end="30184" title="Antarctic Press" label="Antarctic Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352771" start="30196" end="30208" title="Ippongi Bang" label="Ippongi Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="30329" end="30334" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020" start="30348" end="30359" title="Dragon Ball" label="Dragon Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q662" start="30373" end="30396" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion" label="Neon Genesis Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q239937" start="30414" end="30421" title="Pokémon (anime)" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825669" start="30547" end="30558" title="Toren Smith" label="Toren Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050285" start="30567" end="30581" title="Studio Proteus" label="Studio Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q442602" start="30683" end="30698" title="Masamune Shirow" label="Masamune Shirow"/>
<link wikidata="Q551551" start="30732" end="30748" title="Kōsuke Fujishima" label="Kōsuke Fujishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q467681" start="30762" end="30776" title="Oh My Goddess! (manga)" label="Oh My Goddess!"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="30788" end="30798" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395850" start="30803" end="30813" title="Eros Comix" label="Eros Comix"/>
<link wikidata="Q785697" start="30933" end="30943" title="Shogakukan" label="Shogakukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q92582" start="31324" end="31342" title="Ghost in the Shell (manga)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525911" start="31364" end="31382" title="Frederik L. Schodt" label="Frederik L. Schodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825669" start="31387" end="31398" title="Toren Smith" label="Toren Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643098" start="31534" end="31545" title="Sailor Moon" label="Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643098" start="31571" end="31600" title="Sailor Moon (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Sailor Moon&amp;quot; manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q334471" start="31800" end="31805" title="Clamp (manga artists)" label="CLAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q696236" start="31819" end="31840" title="Magic Knight Rayearth" label="Magic Knight Rayearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191638" start="31848" end="31862" title="Hitoshi Iwaaki" label="Hitoshi Iwaaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q945730" start="31876" end="31884" title="Parasyte" label="Parasyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051001" start="31895" end="31912" title="Tsutomu Takahashi" label="Tsutomu Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526791" start="31926" end="31935" title="Ice Blade" label="Ice Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814052" start="31978" end="31986" title="MixxZine" label="MixxZine"/>
<link wikidata="Q315736" start="32028" end="32036" title="Tokyopop" label="Tokyopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="32062" end="32078" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="32201" end="32217" title="Dark Horse Manga" label="Dark Horse Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q467681" start="32282" end="32296" title="Oh My Goddess! (manga)" label="Oh My Goddess!"/>
<link wikidata="Q91486" start="32332" end="32337" title="Akira (manga)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q673036" start="32351" end="32360" title="Astro Boy" label="Astro Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18558978" start="32374" end="32381" title="Berserk (manga)" label="Berserk"/>
<link wikidata="Q881041" start="32395" end="32416" title="Blade of the Immortal" label="Blade of the Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q92582" start="32430" end="32448" title="Ghost in the Shell (manga)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q640785" start="32462" end="32479" title="Lone Wolf and Cub" label="Lone Wolf and Cub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335515" start="32487" end="32503" title="Yasuhiro Nightow" label="Yasuhiro Nightow"/>
<link wikidata="Q128301" start="32517" end="32523" title="Trigun" label="Trigun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11625960" start="32540" end="32566" title="Blood Blockade Battlefront" label="Blood Blockade Battlefront"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057617" start="32580" end="32585" title="Gantz" label="Gantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q445903" start="32593" end="32605" title="Kouta Hirano" label="Kouta Hirano"/>
<link wikidata="Q223155" start="32619" end="32627" title="Hellsing" label="Hellsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702432" start="32644" end="32652" title="Drifters (manga)" label="Drifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q615245" start="32666" end="32672" title="Blood+" label="Blood+"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058859" start="32686" end="32723" title="Multiple Personality Detective Psycho" label="Multiple Personality Detective Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q92572" start="32737" end="32741" title="FLCL" label="FLCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344543" start="32755" end="32769" title="Mob Psycho 100" label="Mob Psycho 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q483535" start="32787" end="32793" title="Oreimo" label="Oreimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="32825" end="32837" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11041074" start="32921" end="32955" title="The Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame" label="The Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="32958" end="32970" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q967455" start="32972" end="32983" title="Kazuo Koike" label="Kazuo Koike"/>
<link wikidata="Q614514" start="32989" end="33002" title="Goseki Kojima" label="Goseki Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384724" start="33217" end="33242" title="List of Pokémon manga" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon&amp;quot; manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907159" start="33249" end="33273" title="Electric Tale of Pikachu" label="Electric Tale of Pikachu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="33371" end="33381" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="33584" end="33602" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="33610" end="33635" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="33643" end="33666" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="33684" end="33689" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="33736" end="33745" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="33774" end="33787" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031605" start="33859" end="33867" title="BookScan" label="BookScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807739" start="34093" end="34106" title="The NPD Group" label="The NPD Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="34452" end="34469" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="34509" end="34527" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="34568" end="34581" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922125" start="35326" end="35338" title="Vernon Grant" label="Vernon Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207676" start="35440" end="35452" title="Frank Miller" label="Frank Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q603842" start="35476" end="35481" title="Ronin (DC Comics)" label="Ronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824023" start="35489" end="35500" title="Adam Warren (comics)" label="Adam Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520630" start="35535" end="35549" title="The Dirty Pair" label="The Dirty Pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971758" start="35557" end="35565" title="Ben Dunn" label="Ben Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971819" start="35584" end="35601" title="Ninja High School" label="Ninja High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019547" start="35644" end="35658" title="Crusade Comics" label="Crusade Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249513" start="35858" end="35872" title="Studio Ironcat" label="Studio Ironcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q470137" start="35954" end="35964" title="Amerimanga" label="Amerimanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349176" start="35981" end="35990" title="eigoMANGA" label="eigoMANGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379172" start="36010" end="36020" title="Rumble Pak (comics)" label="Rumble Pak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403167" start="36037" end="36048" title="Sakura Pakk" label="Sakura Pakk"/>
<link wikidata="Q867242" start="36055" end="36071" title="comics anthology" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073284" start="36073" end="36097" title="Seven Seas Entertainment" label="Seven Seas Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q470137" start="36123" end="36134" title="Original English-language manga" label="World Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q470137" start="36178" end="36209" title="original English-language manga" label="original English-language manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285662" start="36338" end="36344" title="manfra" label="manfra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374895" start="36358" end="36373" title="Frédéric Boilet" label="Frédéric Boilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083207" start="36387" end="36404" title="la nouvelle manga" label="la nouvelle manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q254870" start="36775" end="36789" title="Akatsuka Award" label="Akatsuka Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256940" start="36815" end="36839" title="Dengeki Comic Grand Prix" label="Dengeki Comic Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156545" start="36865" end="36900" title="Japan Cartoonists Association Award" label="Japan Cartoonists Association Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q39174" start="36926" end="36946" title="Kodansha Manga Award" label="Kodansha Manga Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q145234" start="36977" end="36988" title="Seiun Award" label="Seiun Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q836736" start="37038" end="37060" title="Shogakukan Manga Award" label="Shogakukan Manga Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621589" start="37085" end="37097" title="Tezuka Award" label="Tezuka Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336528" start="37130" end="37157" title="Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize" label="Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q222241" start="37181" end="37217" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan)" label="Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598629" start="37234" end="37259" title="International Manga Award" label="International Manga Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37475" end="37496" title="American Manga Awards" label="American Manga Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q858343" start="37543" end="37565" title="Kyoto Seika University" label="Kyoto Seika University"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="37679" end="37696" title="vocational school" label="vocational school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506271" start="37749" end="37759" title="Shūhō Satō" label="Shuho Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q551631" start="37777" end="37784" title="Umizaru" label="Umizaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="37864" end="37871" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q268789" start="38184" end="38198" title="Keiko Takemiya" label="Keiko Takemiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q858343" start="38222" end="38233" title="Kyoto Seika University" label="Seika Univ."/>
<link wikidata="Q1145724" start="38364" end="38378" title="Margin (typography)" label="margin section"/>
<link wikidata="Q3860190" start="38539" end="38555" title="ACG (subculture)" label="ACG (subculture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q438533" start="38558" end="38575" title="Alternative manga" label="Alternative manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="38578" end="38583" title="Anime" label="Anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765168" start="38586" end="38608" title="Anime and manga fandom" label="Anime and manga fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q850204" start="38611" end="38626" title="Cinema of Japan" label="Cinema of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129667" start="38629" end="38639" title="Cool Japan" label="Cool Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="38642" end="38658" title="Culture of Japan" label="Culture of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190781" start="38661" end="38670" title="Emakimono" label="Emakimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606878" start="38673" end="38679" title="E-toki" label="E-toki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="38723" end="38740" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38743" end="38761" title="Soft power#Japan" label="Soft power § Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="38764" end="38788" title="Japanese popular culture" label="Japanese popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423940" start="38791" end="38801" title="Kamishibai" label="Kamishibai"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="38804" end="38815" title="Light novel" label="Light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16074293" start="38818" end="38844" title="List of best-selling manga" label="List of best-selling manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619979" start="38847" end="38875" title="List of films based on manga" label="List of films based on manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q20386683" start="38878" end="38911" title="List of licensed manga in English" label="List of licensed manga in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627152" start="38914" end="38940" title="List of manga distributors" label="List of manga distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q457524" start="38943" end="38966" title="List of manga magazines" label="List of manga magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716092" start="38969" end="39016" title="List of Japanese manga magazines by circulation" label="List of Japanese manga magazines by circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q492090" start="39019" end="39036" title="Manga iconography" label="Manga iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748603" start="39039" end="39058" title="Manga outside Japan" label="Manga outside Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10828487" start="39061" end="39073" title="Truyện tranh" label="Truyện tranh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146647" start="39076" end="39085" title="Q-version" label="Q-version"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="39107" end="39114" title="Ukiyo-e" label="Ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q689445" start="39117" end="39129" title="Visual novel" label="Visual novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="39132" end="39152" title="Video games in Japan" label="Video games in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="39161" end="39179" title="Weekly Shōnen Jump" label="Weekly Shōnen Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832488" start="39544" end="39582" title="Limes, rivista italiana di geopolitica" label="Limes, rivista italiana di geopolitica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18987" wikidata="Q1489" url="?curid=18987" title="Mexico City">
<text>Mexico City is the capital and largest city of Mexico, and is also North America&#x27;s most populous city. It is one of the most important cultural and financial centers in the world. Mexico City is located in the Valley of Mexico within the high Mexican central plateau, at an altitude of . The city has 16 boroughs or , which are in turn divided into neighborhoods or . 

The 2020 population for the city proper was 9,209,944, with a land area of . According to the most recent definition agreed upon by the federal and state governments, the population of Greater Mexico City is 21,804,515, which makes it the sixth-largest metropolitan area in the world, the second-largest urban agglomeration in the Western Hemisphere (behind São Paulo, Brazil), and the largest Spanish-speaking city (city proper) in the world. Greater Mexico City has a GDP of $411 billion in 2011, which makes it one of the most productive urban areas in the world. The city was responsible for generating 15.8% of Mexico&#x27;s GDP, and the metropolitan area accounted for about 22% of the country&#x27;s GDP. If it were an independent country in 2013, Mexico City would be the fifth-largest economy in Latin America.

Mexico City is the oldest capital city in the Americas and one of two founded by Indigenous people. The city was originally built on a group of islands in Lake Texcoco by the Mexica around 1325, under the name [[Tenochtitlan]]. It was almost completely destroyed in the 1521 siege of Tenochtitlan and subsequently redesigned and rebuilt in accordance with the Spanish urban standards. In 1524, the municipality of Mexico City was established, known as , and as of 1585, it was officially known as (Mexico City). Mexico City played a major role in the Spanish colonial empire as a political, administrative, and financial center. Following independence from Spain, the federal district was established in 1824.

After years of demanding greater political autonomy, residents were finally given the right to elect both a head of government and the representatives of the unicameral Legislative Assembly by election in 1997. Ever since, left-wing parties (first the Party of the Democratic Revolution and later the National Regeneration Movement) have controlled both of them. The city has several progressive policies, such as elective abortions, a limited form of euthanasia, no-fault divorce, same-sex marriage, and legal gender change. On 29 January 2016, it ceased to be the &quot;Federal District&quot; ( or ) and is now officially known as (or ), with a greater degree of autonomy. A clause in the Constitution of Mexico, however, prevents it from becoming a state within the Mexican federation, as long it remains the capital of the country.

== Nicknames and mottos ==
Mexico City was traditionally known as &quot;La Ciudad de los Palacios&quot; (&quot;the City of the Palaces&quot;), a nickname attributed to Baron Alexander von Humboldt when visiting the city in the 19th century, who, sending a letter back to Germany, said Mexico City could rival any major city in Europe. But it was English politician Charles Latrobe who really penned the following: &quot;... look at their works: the moles, aqueducts, churches, roads—and the luxurious &quot;City of Palaces&quot; which has risen from the clay-built ruins of Tenochtitlan...&quot;, on page 84 of the Letter V of &quot;The Rambler in Mexico&quot;.

During the colonial period, the city&#x27;s motto was &quot;Muy Noble e Insigne, Muy Leal e Imperial&quot; (Very Noble and Distinguished, Very Loyal and Imperial). During Andrés Manuel López Obrador&#x27;s administration a political slogan was introduced: &quot;la Ciudad de la Esperanza&quot; (). This motto was quickly adopted as a city nickname but has faded since the new motto, &quot;Capital en Movimiento&quot; (&quot;Capital in Movement&quot;), was adopted by the administration headed by Marcelo Ebrard, though the latter is not treated as often as a nickname in media. 
Up until 2013, it was common to refer to the city by the initialism 
&quot;DF&quot; from &quot;Distrito Federal de México&quot;. Since 2013, the abbreviation &quot;CDMX&quot; (Ciudad de México) has been more common, particularly in relation to government campaigns.

The city is colloquially known as &quot;Chilangolandia&quot; after the locals&#x27; nickname &quot;chilangos&quot;. Chilango is used pejoratively by people living outside Mexico City to &quot;connote a loud, arrogant, ill-mannered, loutish person&quot;. For their part those living in Mexico City designate insultingly those who live elsewhere as living in &quot;la provincia&quot; (&#x27;the provinces&#x27;, &#x27;the periphery&#x27;) and many proudly embrace the term chilango. Residents of Mexico City are more recently called &quot;defeños&quot; (deriving from the postal abbreviation of the Federal District in Spanish: D.F., which is read &quot;De-Efe&quot;). They are formally called &quot;capitalinos&quot; (in reference to the city being the capital of the country), but &quot;[p]erhaps because capitalino is the more polite, specific, and correct word, it is almost never utilized&quot;.

== History ==
The oldest signs of human occupation in the area of Mexico City are those of the &quot;Peñón woman&quot; and others found in San Bartolo Atepehuacan (Gustavo A. Madero). They were believed to correspond to the lower Cenolithic period (9500–7000 BC). However, a 2003 study placed the age of the Peñon woman at 12,700 years old (calendar age), one of the oldest human remains discovered in the Americas. Studies of her mitochondrial DNA suggest she was either of Asian or European or Aboriginal Australian origin.

The area was the destination of the migrations of the Teochichimecas during the 8th and 13th centuries, people that would give rise to the Toltec, and Mexica (Aztecs) cultures. The latter arrived around the 14th century to settle first on the shores of the lake.

=== Aztec period ===

The city of Mexico-Tenochtitlan was founded by the Mexica people in 1325 or 1327. The old Mexica city that is now referred to as Tenochtitlan was built on an island in the center of the inland lake system of the Valley of Mexico, which is shared with a smaller city-state called Tlatelolco. According to legend, the Mexicas&#x27; principal god, Huitzilopochtli, indicated the site where they were to build their home by presenting a golden eagle perched on a prickly pear devouring a rattlesnake.

Between 1325 and 1521, Tenochtitlan grew in size and strength, eventually dominating the other city-states around Lake Texcoco and in the Valley of Mexico. When the Spaniards arrived, the Aztec Empire had reached much of Mesoamerica, touching both the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific Ocean.

=== Spanish conquest ===

After landing in Veracruz, Spanish explorer Hernán Cortés advanced upon Tenochtitlan with the aid of many of the other native peoples,
arriving there on 8 November 1519. Cortés and his men marched along the causeway leading into the city from Iztapalapa (Ixtapalapa), and the city&#x27;s ruler, Moctezuma II, greeted the Spaniards; they exchanged gifts, but the camaraderie did not last long. Cortés put Moctezuma under house arrest, hoping to rule through him.

Tensions increased until, on the night of 30 June 1520 – during a struggle known as &quot;La Noche Triste&quot; – the Aztecs rose up against the Spanish intrusion and managed to capture or drive out the Europeans and their Tlaxcalan allies. Cortés regrouped at Tlaxcala. The Aztecs thought the Spaniards were permanently gone, and they elected a new king, Cuitláhuac, but he soon died; the next king was Cuauhtémoc. Cortés began a siege of Tenochtitlan in May 1521. For three months, the city suffered from the lack of food and water as well as the spread of smallpox brought by the Europeans. Cortés and his allies landed their forces in the south of the island and slowly fought their way through the city. Cuauhtémoc surrendered in August 1521. The Spaniards practically razed Tenochtitlan during the final siege of the conquest.

Cortés first settled in Coyoacán, but decided to rebuild the Aztec site to erase all traces of the old order. He did not establish a territory under his own personal rule, but remained loyal to the Spanish crown. The first Spanish viceroy arrived in Mexico City fourteen years later. By that time, the city had again become a city-state, having power that extended far beyond its borders. Although the Spanish preserved Tenochtitlan&#x27;s basic layout, they built Catholic churches over the old Aztec temples and claimed the imperial palaces for themselves. Tenochtitlan was renamed &quot;Mexico&quot; because the Spanish found the word easier to pronounce.

=== Growth of colonial Mexico City ===
The city had been the capital of the Aztec Empire and in the colonial era, Mexico City became the capital of New Spain. The viceroy of Mexico or vice-king lived in the viceregal palace on the main square or Zócalo. The Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, the seat of the Archbishopric of New Spain, was constructed on another side of the Zócalo, as was the archbishop&#x27;s palace, and across from it the building housing the city council or &quot;ayuntamiento&quot; of the city. A late seventeenth-century painting of the Zócalo by Cristóbal de Villalpando depicts the main square, which had been the old Aztec ceremonial center. The existing central plaza of the Aztecs was effectively and permanently transformed to the ceremonial center and seat of power during the colonial period, and remains to this day in modern Mexico, the central plaza of the nation. The rebuilding of the city after the siege of Tenochtitlan was accomplished by the abundant indigenous labor in the surrounding area. Franciscan friar Toribio de Benavente Motolinia, one of the Twelve Apostles of Mexico who arrived in New Spain in 1524, described the rebuilding of the city as one of the afflictions or plagues of the early period:

The seventh plague was the construction of the great City of Mexico, which, during the early years used more people than in the construction of Jerusalem. The crowds of laborers were so numerous that one could hardly move in the streets and causeways, although they are very wide. Many died from being crushed by beams, or falling from high places, or in tearing down old buildings for new ones. 
Preconquest Tenochtitlan was built in the center of the inland lake system, with the city reachable by canoe and by wide causeways to the mainland. The causeways were rebuilt under Spanish rule with indigenous labor. Colonial Spanish cities were constructed on a grid pattern, if no geographical obstacle prevented it. In Mexico City, the Zócalo (main square) was the central place from which the grid was then built outward. The Spanish lived in the area closest to the main square in what was known as the &quot;traza&quot;, in orderly, well laid-out streets. Indigenous residences were outside that exclusive zone and houses were haphazardly located. Spaniards sought to keep indigenous people separate but since the Zócalo was a center of commerce for Amerindians, they were a constant presence in the central area, so strict segregation was never enforced. At intervals Zócalo was where major celebrations took place as well as executions. It was also the site of two major riots in the seventeenth century, one in 1624, the other in 1692.

The city grew as the population did, coming up against the lake&#x27;s waters. As the depth of the lake water fluctuated, Mexico City was subject to periodic flooding. A major labor draft, the desagüe, compelled thousands of indigenous over the colonial period to work on infrastructure to prevent flooding. Floods were not only an inconvenience but also a health hazard, since during flood periods human waste polluted the city&#x27;s streets. By draining the area, the mosquito population dropped as did the frequency of the diseases they spread. However, draining the wetlands also changed the habitat for fish and birds and the areas accessible for indigenous cultivation close to the capital. The 16th century saw a proliferation of churches, many of which can still be seen today in the historic center.
Economically, Mexico City prospered as a result of trade. Unlike Brazil or Peru, Mexico had easy contact with both the Atlantic and Pacific worlds. Although the Spanish crown tried to completely regulate all commerce in the city, it had only partial success.
The concept of nobility flourished in New Spain in a way not seen in other parts of the Americas. Spaniards encountered a society in which the concept of nobility mirrored that of their own. Spaniards respected the indigenous order of nobility and added to it. In the ensuing centuries, possession of a noble title in Mexico did not mean one exercised great political power, for one&#x27;s power was limited even if the accumulation of wealth was not. The concept of nobility in Mexico was not political but rather a very conservative Spanish social one, based on proving the worthiness of the family. Most of these families proved their worth by making fortunes in New Spain outside of the city itself, then spending the revenues in the capital, building churches, supporting charities and building extravagant palatial homes. The craze to build the most opulent residence possible reached its height in the last half of the 18th century. Many of these palaces can still be seen today, leading to Mexico City&#x27;s nickname of &quot;The city of palaces&quot; given by Alexander Von Humboldt.

The Grito de Dolores (&quot;Cry of Dolores&quot;), also known as El Grito de la Independencia (&quot;Cry of Independence&quot;), marked the beginning of the Mexican War of Independence. The Battle of Guanajuato, the first major engagement of the insurgency, occurred four days later. After a decade of war, Mexico&#x27;s independence from Spain was effectively declared in the Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire on 27 September 1821. Agustín de Iturbide is proclaimed Emperor of the First Mexican Empire by Congress, crowned in the Cathedral of Mexico. 

The Mexican Federal District was established by the new government and by the signing of their new constitution, where the concept of a federal district was adapted from the United States Constitution. Before this designation, Mexico City had served as the seat of government for both the State of Mexico and the nation as a whole. Texcoco de Mora and then Toluca became the capital of the State of Mexico.

=== Battle of Mexico City in the U.S.–Mexican War of 1847 ===

During the 19th century, Mexico City was the center stage of all the political disputes of the country. It was the imperial capital on two occasions (1821–1823 and 1864–1867), and of two federalist states and two centralist states that followed innumerable coups d&#x27;états in the space of half a century before the triumph of the Liberals after the Reform War. It was also the objective of one of the two French invasions to Mexico (1861–1867), and occupied for a year by American troops in the framework of the Mexican–American War (1847–1848).

The Battle for Mexico City was the series of engagements from 8 to 15 September 1847, in the general vicinity of Mexico City during the U.S. Mexican War. Included are major actions at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec, culminating with the fall of Mexico City. The U.S. Army under Winfield Scott scored a major success that ended the war. The American invasion into the Federal District was first resisted during the Battle of Churubusco on 8 August, where the Saint Patrick&#x27;s Battalion, which was composed primarily of Catholic Irish and German immigrants but also Canadians, English, French, Italians, Poles, Scots, Spaniards, Swiss, and Mexicans, fought for the Mexican cause, repelling the American attacks. After defeating the Saint Patrick&#x27;s Battalion, the Mexican–American War came to a close after the United States deployed combat units deep into Mexico resulting in the capture of Mexico City and Veracruz by the U.S. Army&#x27;s 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Divisions. The invasion culminated with the storming of Chapultepec Castle in the city itself.

During this battle, on 13 September, the 4th Division, under John A. Quitman, spearheaded the attack against Chapultepec and carried the castle. Future Confederate generals George E. Pickett and James Longstreet participated in the attack. Serving in the Mexican defense were the cadets later immortalized as &quot;Los Niños Héroes&quot; (the &quot;Boy Heroes&quot;). The Mexican forces fell back from Chapultepec and retreated within the city. Attacks on the Belén and San Cosme Gates came afterwards. The treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed in what is now the far north of the city.

=== Mexican Revolution (1910–1920) ===
The capital escaped the worst of the violence of the ten-year conflict of the Mexican Revolution. The most significant episode of this period for the city was the Decena Trágica (&quot;Ten Tragic Days&quot;) of February 1913, when forces counter to the elected government of Francisco I. Madero staged a successful coup. The center of the city was subjected to artillery attacks from the army stronghold of the &quot;ciudadela&quot; or citadel, with significant civilian casualties and the undermining of confidence in the Madero government. Victoriano Huerta, chief general of the Federal Army, saw a chance to take power, forcing Madero and Pino Suarez to sign resignations. The two were murdered later while on their way to Lecumberri prison. Huerta&#x27;s ouster in July 1914 saw the entry of the armies of Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata, but the city did not experience violence. Huerta had abandoned the capital and the conquering armies marched in. Venustiano Carranza&#x27;s Constitutionalist faction ultimately prevailed in the revolutionary civil war and Carranza took up residence in the presidential palace.

=== 20th century to present ===

In the 20th century the phenomenal growth of the city and its environmental and political consequences dominate. In 1900, the population of Mexico City was about 500,000. The city began to grow rapidly westward in the early part of the 20th century and then began to grow upwards in the 1950s, with the Torre Latinoamericana becoming the city&#x27;s first skyscraper.

The rapid development of Mexico City as a center for modernist architecture was most fully manifested in the mid-1950s construction of the Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City, the main campus of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. Designed by the most prestigious architects of the era, including Mario Pani, Eugenio Peschard, and Enrique del Moral, the buildings feature murals by artists Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, and José Chávez Morado. It has since been recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The 1968 Olympic Games brought about the construction of large sporting facilities. In 1969, the Mexico City Metro was inaugurated. Explosive growth in the population of the city started in the 1960s, with the population overflowing the boundaries of the Federal District into the neighboring State of Mexico, especially to the north, northwest, and northeast. Between 1960 and 1980 the city&#x27;s population more than doubled to nearly 9 million.

In 1980, half of all the industrial jobs in Mexico were located in Mexico City. Under relentless growth, the Mexico City government could barely keep up with services. Villagers from the countryside who continued to pour into the city to escape poverty only compounded the city&#x27;s problems. With no housing available, they took over lands surrounding the city, creating huge shanty towns.

The inhabitants of Mexico City faced serious air pollution and water pollution problems, as well as groundwater-related subsidence. Air and water pollution has been contained and improved in several areas due to government programs, the renovation of vehicles and the modernization of public transportation.
The autocratic government that ruled Mexico City since the Revolution was tolerated, mostly because of the continued economic expansion since World War II. This was the case even though this government could not handle the population and pollution problems adequately. Nevertheless, discontent and protests began in the 1960s leading to the massacre of an unknown number of protesting students in Tlatelolco.

Three years later, a demonstration in the Maestros avenue, organized by former members of the 1968 student movement, was violently repressed by a paramilitary group called &quot;Los Halcones&quot;, composed of gang members and teenagers from many sports clubs who received training in the US.
On 19 September 1985, at 7:19am CST, the area was struck by the 1985 Mexico City earthquake. The earthquake proved to be a disaster politically for the one-party state government. The Mexican government was paralyzed by its own bureaucracy and corruption, forcing ordinary citizens to create and direct their own rescue efforts and to reconstruct much of the housing that was lost as well.

In 1987, the Historic center of Mexico City, a central neighborhood of Mexico City was enlisted as UNESCO World Heritage Site for its large collection of ancient Aztec and colonial architecture.

However, the last straw may have been the controversial elections of 1988. That year, the presidency was set between the P.R.I.&#x27;s candidate, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, and a coalition of left-wing parties led by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, son of the former president Lázaro Cárdenas. The counting system &quot;fell&quot; because coincidentally the power went out and suddenly, when it returned, the winning candidate was Salinas, even though Cárdenas had the upper hand.

As a result of the fraudulent election, Cárdenas became a member of the Party of the Democratic Revolution. Discontent over the election eventually led Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas to become the first elected mayor of Mexico City in 1997. Cárdenas promised a more democratic government, and his party claimed some victories against crime, pollution, and other major problems. He resigned in 1999 to run for the presidency.

== Geography ==
Mexico City is located in the Valley of Mexico, sometimes called the Basin of Mexico. This valley is located in the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt in the high plateaus of south-central Mexico.

It has a minimum altitude of above sea level and is surrounded by mountains and volcanoes that reach elevations of over . This valley has no natural drainage outlet for the waters that flow from the mountainsides, making the city vulnerable to flooding. Drainage was engineered through the use of canals and tunnels starting in the 17th century.

Mexico City primarily rests on what was Lake Texcoco. Seismic activity is frequent there. Lake Texcoco was drained starting from the 17th century. Although none of the lake waters remain, the city rests on the lake bed&#x27;s heavily saturated clay. This soft base is collapsing due to the over-extraction of groundwater, called &quot;groundwater-related subsidence&quot;.

Since the beginning of the 20th century the city has sunk as much as in some areas. On average Mexico City sinks every year. This sinking is causing problems with runoff and wastewater management, leading to flooding problems, especially during the summer. The entire lake bed is now paved over and most of the city&#x27;s remaining forested areas lie in the southern boroughs of Milpa Alta, Tlalpan and Xochimilco.

=== Environment ===

Originally much of the valley lay beneath the waters of Lake Texcoco, a system of interconnected salt and freshwater lakes. The Aztecs built dikes to separate the fresh water used to raise crops in &quot;chinampas&quot; and to prevent recurrent floods. These dikes were destroyed during the siege of Tenochtitlan, and during colonial times the Spanish regularly drained the lake to prevent floods. Only a small section of the original lake remains, located outside Mexico City, in the municipality of Atenco, State of Mexico.

Architects Teodoro González de León and Alberto Kalach along with a group of Mexican urbanists, engineers and biologists have developed the project plan for &quot;Recovering the City of Lakes&quot;. If approved by the government the project will contribute to the supply of water from natural sources to the Valley of Mexico, the creation of new natural spaces, a great improvement in air quality, and greater population establishment planning.

=== Pollution ===


By the 1990s Mexico City had become infamous as one of the world&#x27;s most polluted cities; however, the city has since become a model for drastically lowering pollution levels. By 2014 carbon monoxide pollution had dropped drastically, while sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide were at levels about a third of those in 1992. The levels of signature pollutants in Mexico City are similar to those of Los Angeles. Despite the cleanup, the metropolitan area is still the most ozone-polluted part of the country, with ozone levels 2.5 times beyond WHO-defined safe limits.

To clean up pollution, the federal and local governments implemented numerous plans including the constant monitoring and reporting of environmental conditions, such as ozone and nitrogen oxides. When the levels of these two pollutants reached critical levels, contingency actions were implemented which included closing factories, changing school hours, and extending the &quot;A day without a car&quot; program to two days of the week. The government also instituted industrial technology improvements, a strict biannual vehicle emission inspection and the reformulation of gasoline and diesel fuels. The introduction of Metrobús bus rapid transit and the Ecobici bike-sharing were among efforts to encourage alternate, greener forms of transportation.

=== Parks and recreation ===
Chapultepec, the city&#x27;s most iconic public park, has history back to the Aztec emperors who used the area as a retreat. It is south of Polanco district, and houses the Chapultepec Zoo the main city&#x27;s zoo, several ponds and seven museums, including the National Museum of Anthropology. Other iconic city parks include the Alameda Central, it is recognized as the oldest public park in the Americas. Parque México and Parque España in the hip Condesa district; Parque Hundido and &quot;Parque de los Venados&quot; in Colonia del Valle, and Parque Lincoln in Polanco. There are many smaller parks throughout the city. Most are small &quot;squares&quot; occupying two or three square blocks amid residential or commercial districts. Several other larger parks such as the and Viveros de Coyoacán, and in the east , offer many recreational activities. Northwest of the city is a large ecological reserve, the . In the southeast is the Xochimilco Ecological Park and Plant Market, a World Heritage Site. West of Santa Fe district are the pine forests of the Desierto de los Leones National Park. Amusement parks include Six Flags México, in Ajusco neighborhood which is the largest in Latin America. There are numerous seasonal fairs present in the city.

Mexico City has three zoos. Chapultepec Zoo, the and Los Coyotes Zoo. Chapultepec Zoo is located in the first section of Chapultepec Park in the Miguel Hidalgo. It was opened in 1924. Visitors can see about 243 specimens of different species including kangaroos, giant panda, gorillas, caracal, hyena, hippos, jaguar, giraffe, lemur, lion, among others. Zoo San Juan de Aragon is near the San Juan de Aragon Park in the Gustavo A. Madero. In this zoo, opened in 1964, there are species that are in danger of extinction such as the jaguar and the Mexican wolf. Other guests are the golden eagle, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, caracara, zebras, African elephant, macaw, hippo, among others. Zoo Los Coyotes is a 27.68-acre (11.2 ha) zoo located south of Mexico City in the Coyoacan. It was inaugurated on 2 February 1999. It has more than 301 specimens of 51 species of wild native or endemic fauna from the area, featuring eagles, ajolotes, coyotes, macaws, bobcats, Mexican wolves, raccoons, mountain lions, teporingos, foxes, white-tailed deer.

=== Climate ===
Mexico City has a subtropical highland climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cwb&quot;), due to its tropical location but high elevation. The lower region of the valley receives less rainfall than the upper regions of the south; the lower boroughs of Iztapalapa, Iztacalco, Venustiano Carranza and the east portion of Gustavo A. Madero are usually drier and warmer than the upper southern boroughs of Tlalpan and Milpa Alta, a mountainous region of pine and oak trees known as the range of Ajusco. The average annual temperature varies from , depending on the altitude of the borough. The temperature is rarely below or above . At the Tacubaya observatory, the lowest temperature ever registered was on 13 February 1960, and the highest temperature on record was on 25 May 2024. Overall precipitation is heavily concentrated in the summer months, and includes dense hail.

Snow falls in the city scarcely, although somewhat more often on nearby mountaintops. Throughout its history, the Central Valley of Mexico was accustomed to having several snowfalls per decade (including a period between 1878 and 1895 in which every single year—except 1880—recorded snowfalls), mostly lake-effect snow. The effects of the draining of Lake Texcoco and global warming have greatly reduced snowfalls after the snow flurries of 12 February 1907. Since 1908, snow has only fallen thrice: snow on 14 February 1920; snow flurries on 14 March 1940; and on 12 January 1967, when of snow fell on the city, the most on record. The 1967 snowstorm coincided with the operation of &quot;Deep Drainage System&quot; that resulted in the total draining of what was left of Lake Texcoco. After the disappearance of Lake Texcoco, snow has never fallen again over Mexico City. The region of the Valley of Mexico receives anti-cyclonic systems. The weak winds of these systems do not allow for the dispersion, outside the basin, of the air pollutants which are produced by the 50,000 industries and 4 million vehicles operating in and around the metropolitan area.

The area receives about of annual rainfall, which is concentrated from May through October with little or no precipitation for the remainder of the year. The area has two main seasons. The wet humid summer runs from May to October when winds bring in tropical moisture from the sea, the wettest month being July. The cool sunny winter runs from November to April, when the air is relatively drier, the driest month being December. This season is subdivided into a cold winter period and a warm spring period. The cold period spans from November to February, when polar air masses push down from the north and keep the air fairly dry. The warm period extends from March to May when subtropical winds again dominate but do not yet carry enough moisture for rain to form.

== Demographics ==
Historically, and since Pre-Columbian times, the Valley of Anahuac has been one of the most densely populated areas in Mexico. When the Federal District was created in 1824, the urban area of Mexico City extended approximately to the area of today&#x27;s Cuauhtémoc borough. At the beginning of the 20th century, began migrating to the south and west and soon the small towns of Mixcoac and San Ángel were incorporated by the growing conurbation. According to the 1921 census, 54.78% of the city&#x27;s population was considered Mestizo (Indigenous mixed with European), 22.79% considered European, and 18.74% considered Indigenous.

Up to the 1990s, the Federal District was the most populous federal entity in Mexico, but since then, its population has remained stable at around 8.7 million. The growth of the city has extended beyond the limits of the city proper to 59 municipalities of the State of Mexico and 1 in the state of Hidalgo. With a population of approximately 19.8 million inhabitants (2008), it is one of the most populous conurbations in the world. Nonetheless, the annual rate of growth of the Metropolitan Area of Mexico City is much lower than that of other large urban agglomerations in Mexico, a phenomenon most likely attributable to the environmental policy of decentralization. The net migration rate of Mexico City from 1995 to 2000 was negative.

=== Metropolitan area ===

The metropolitan area, Greater Mexico City (&#x27;Zona Metropolitana del Valle de México&#x27; or &#x27;ZMVM&#x27; in Spanish) consists of Mexico City itself plus 60 municipalities in the State of Mexico and one in Hidalgo state. With a population of 21,804,515 (2020 census), Greater Mexico City is both the biggest and the densest metropolitan area in the country. Of the ca. 21.8 million, 9.2 million live in Mexico City proper and 12.4 million in the State of Mexico (ca. 75% of the state&#x27;s population), including the municipalities of:
* Ecatepec de Morelos ( 1,645,352)
* Nezahualcóyotl ( 1,077,208)
* Naucalpan ( 834,434)
* Chimalhuacán ( 705,193)
* Tlalnepantla de Baz ( 672,202)

====Megalopolis====

Greater Mexico City, in turn, forms part of an even larger megalopolis officially known as the &quot;Corona regional del centro de México&quot; (Mexico City megalopolis), with a population of 33.4 million, more than one quarter of the country&#x27;s population according to the 2020 census. The megalopolis as defined by the Environmental Commission of the Megalopolis (&quot;CAMe&quot;) covers Mexico City and the states of Mexico, Hidalgo, Puebla, Tlaxcala, Morelos, and since 2019, Querétaro, thus encompassing the metropolitan areas of Mexico City, Puebla, Querétaro, Toluca, Cuernavaca, Pachuca, and others.

====Growth====
Greater Mexico City was the fastest growing metropolitan area in the country until the late 1980s. Since then, government policies have supported decentralization with the aim of reducing pollution in Greater Mexico City. While still growing, the annual rate of growth has decreased and is lower than that of Greater Guadalajara and Greater Monterrey.

The net migration rate of Mexico City proper from 1995 to 2000 was negative, which implies that residents are moving to the suburbs of the metropolitan area, or to other states of Mexico. In addition, some inner suburbs are losing population to outer suburbs, indicating the continuing expansion of Greater Mexico City.
=== Religion ===

The majority (82%) of the residents in Mexico City are Catholic, slightly lower than the 2010 census national percentage of 87%, making it the largest Christian denomination, though it has been decreasing over the last decades. Many other religions and philosophies are also practiced in the city: many different types of Protestant groups, different types of Jewish communities, Buddhist, Islamic and other spiritual and philosophical groups. There are also growing numbers of irreligious people, whether agnostic or atheist.
The patron saint of Mexico City is Saint Philip of Jesus, a Mexican Catholic missionary who became one of the Twenty-six Martyrs of Japan.

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mexico is the largest archdiocese in the world. There are two Catholic cathedrals in the city, the Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral and the Iztapalapa Cathedral, and three former Catholic churches who are now the cathedrals of other rites, the San José de Gracia Cathedral (Anglican church), the Porta Coeli Cathedral (Melkite Greek Catholic church) and the Valvanera Cathedral (Maronite church).

=== Ethnic groups ===

Representing around 18.74% of the city&#x27;s population, indigenous peoples from different areas of Mexico have migrated to the capital in search of better economic opportunities. Nahuatl, Otomi, Mixtec, Zapotec and Mazahua are the indigenous languages with the greatest number of speakers in Mexico City. According to the 2020 Census, 2.03% of Mexico City&#x27;s population identified as Black, Afro-Mexican, or of African descent.

Additionally, Mexico City is home to large communities of expatriates and immigrants from the rest of North America (U.S. and Canada), from South America (mainly from Argentina and Colombia, but also from Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela), from Central America and the Caribbean (mainly from Cuba, Guatemala, El Salvador, Haiti and Honduras); from Europe (mainly from Spain, Germany and Switzerland, but also from Czech Republic, Hungary, France, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands, Poland and Romania), and from the Arab world (mostly from Lebanon, and other countries like Syria and Egypt).

Mexico City is home to the largest population of Americans living outside the United States. Estimates are as high as 700,000 Americans living in Mexico City, while in 1999 the U.S. Bureau of Consular Affairs estimated over 440,000 Americans lived in the Mexico City Metropolitan Area.

=== Health ===

Mexico City is home to some of the best private hospitals in the country, including Hospital Ángeles, Hospital ABC and Médica Sur. The national public healthcare institution for private-sector employees, IMSS, has its largest facilities in Mexico City—including the National Medical Center and the La Raza Medical Center—and has an annual budget of over 6 billion pesos. The IMSS and other public health institutions, including the ISSSTE (Public Sector Employees&#x27; Social Security Institute) and the National Health Ministry (SSA) maintain large specialty facilities in the city. These include the National Institutes of Cardiology, Nutrition, Psychiatry, Oncology, Pediatrics, Rehabilitation, among others.

=== Education ===
Among its many public and private schools (K–13), the city offers multi-cultural, multi-lingual and international schools attended by Mexican and foreign students. Best known are the Colegio Alemán (German school with three main campuses), the Liceo Mexicano Japonés (Japanese), the Centro Cultural Coreano en México (Korean), the Lycée Franco-Mexicain (French), the American School, The Westhill Institute (American School), the Edron Academy and the Greengates School (British). Mexico City joined the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities in 2015.

In the Plaza de las Tres Culturas is the Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco that is recognized for being the first and oldest European school of higher learning in the Americas and the first major school of interpreters and translators in the New World. Other, the now-defunct Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico is considered the father of the UNAM, and it was located in the city and was the third oldest university in the Americas.
The National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), located in Mexico City, is the largest university on the continent, with more than 300,000 students from all backgrounds. Three Nobel laureates, several Mexican entrepreneurs and most of Mexico&#x27;s modern-day presidents are among its former students. UNAM conducts 50% of Mexico&#x27;s scientific research and has presence all across the country with satellite campuses, observatories and research centers. UNAM ranked 74th in the Top 200 World University Ranking published by Times Higher Education (then called Times Higher Education Supplement) in 2006, making it the highest ranked Spanish-speaking university in the world. The sprawling main campus of the university, known as Ciudad Universitaria, was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2007.

The second largest higher-education institution is the National Polytechnic Institute (IPN), which includes among many other relevant centers the Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados (Cinvestav), where varied high-level scientific and technological research is done. Other major higher-education institutions in the city include the Metropolitan Autonomous University (UAM), the National School of Anthropology and History (ENAH), the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México (ITAM), the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education (3 campuses), the Universidad Panamericana (UP), the Universidad La Salle, the Universidad Intercontinental (UIC), the Universidad del Valle de México (UVM), the Universidad Anáhuac, Simón Bolívar University (USB), the Universidad Intercontinental (UIC), the Alliant International University, the Universidad Iberoamericana, El Colegio de México (Colmex), Escuela Libre de Derecho and the Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económica, (CIDE).
In addition, the prestigious University of California maintains a campus known as &quot;Casa de California&quot; in the city. The Universidad Tecnológica de México is also in Mexico City.

== Politics ==
=== Political structure ===


The Acta Constitutiva de la Federación of 31 January 1824, and the Federal Constitution of 4 October 1824, fixed the political and administrative organization of the United Mexican States after the Mexican War of Independence. In addition, Section XXVIII of Article 50 gave the new Congress the right to choose where the federal government would be located. This location would then be appropriated as federal land, with the federal government acting as the local authority. The two main candidates to become the capital were Mexico City and Querétaro.

Due in large part to the persuasion of representative Servando Teresa de Mier, Mexico City was chosen because it was the center of the country&#x27;s population and history, even though Queretaro was closer to the center geographically. The choice was official on 18 November 1824, and Congress delineated a surface area of two leagues square (8,800 acres) centered on the Zocalo. This area was then separated from the State of Mexico, forcing that state&#x27;s government to move from the Palace of the Inquisition (now Museum of Mexican Medicine) in the city to Texcoco. This area did not include the population centers of the towns of Coyoacán, Xochimilco, Mexicaltzingo and Tlalpan, all of which remained as part of the State of Mexico.

In 1854 president Antonio López de Santa Anna enlarged the area of Mexico City almost eightfold from the original , annexing the rural and mountainous areas to secure the strategic mountain passes to the south and southwest to protect the city in event of a foreign invasion. (The Mexican–American War had just been fought.) The last changes to the limits of Mexico City were made between 1898 and 1902, reducing the area to the current by adjusting the southern border with the state of Morelos. By that time, the total number of municipalities within Mexico City was twenty-two. In 1941, the General Anaya borough was merged with the Central Department, which was then renamed &quot;Mexico City&quot; (thus reviving the name but not the autonomous municipality). From 1941 to 1970, the Federal District comprised twelve &quot;delegaciones&quot; and Mexico City. In 1970, Mexico City was split into four different &quot;delegaciones&quot;: Cuauhtémoc, Miguel Hidalgo, Venustiano Carranza and Benito Juárez, increasing the number of &quot;delegaciones&quot; to 16. Since then, the whole Federal District, whose &quot;delegaciones&quot; had by then almost formed a single urban area, began to be considered &quot;de facto&quot; a synonym of Mexico City.

The lack of a &quot;de jure&quot; stipulation left a legal vacuum that led to a number of sterile discussions about whether one concept had engulfed the other or if the latter had ceased to exist altogether. In 1993, the situation was solved by an amendment to the 44th article of the Constitution of Mexico; Mexico City and the Federal District were stated to be the same entity. The amendment was later introduced into the second article of the Statute of Government of the Federal District.

On 29 January 2016, Mexico City ceased to be the &quot;Federal District&quot; (Spanish: &quot;Distrito Federal&quot; or D.F.), and was officially renamed &quot;Ciudad de México&quot; (or &quot;CDMX&quot;). On that date, Mexico City began a transition to becoming the country&#x27;s 32nd federal entity, giving it a level of autonomy comparable to that of a state. It will have its own constitution and its legislature, and its &quot;delegaciones&quot; will now be headed by mayors. Because of a clause in the Mexican Constitution, however, as it is the seat of the powers of the federation, it can never become a state, or the capital of the country has to be relocated elsewhere.

In response to the demands, Mexico City received a greater degree of autonomy, with the 1987 elaboration the first Statute of Government (&quot;Estatuto de Gobierno&quot;) and the creation of an assembly of representatives. The city has a Statute of Government, and as of its ratification on 31 January 2017, a constitution, similar to the states of the Union. As part of the recent changes in autonomy, the budget is administered locally; it is proposed by the head of government and approved by the Legislative Assembly. Nonetheless, it is the Congress of the Union that sets the ceiling to internal and external public debt issued by the city government.

The politics pursued by the administrations of heads of government in Mexico City at the end of the 20th century have usually been more liberal than those of the rest of the country, whether with the support of the federal government, as was the case with the approval of several comprehensive environmental laws in the 1980s, or by laws that were since approved by the Legislative Assembly. The Legislative Assembly expanded provisions on abortions, becoming the first federal entity to expand abortion in Mexico beyond cases of rape and economic reasons, to permit it at the choice of the mother before the 12th week of pregnancy. In December 2009, the then Federal District became the first city in Latin America and one of very few in the world to legalize same-sex marriage.

=== Boroughs and neighborhoods ===


After the political reforms in 2016, the city is divided for administrative purposes into 16 boroughs (, colloquially &quot;alcaldías&quot;), formerly called &quot;delegaciones&quot;. While they are not fully equivalent to municipalities, the boroughs have gained significant autonomy. Formerly appointed by the Federal District&#x27;s head of government, local authorities were first elected directly by plurality in 2000. From 2016, each borough is headed by a mayor, expanding their local government powers.

The boroughs of Mexico City with their 2020 populations are:

The Human Development Index report of 2005 shows that there were three boroughs with a very high Human Development Index, 12 with a high HDI value (9 above .85), and one with a medium HDI value (almost high). Benito Juárez borough had the highest HDI of the country (0.9510) followed by Miguel Hidalgo, which came up fourth nationally with an HDI of (0.9189), and Coyoacán was fifth nationally, with an HDI of (0.9169). Cuajimalpa (15th), Cuauhtémoc (23rd), and Azcapotzalco (25th) also had very high values of 0.8994, 0.8922, and 0.8915, respectively.

In contrast, the boroughs of Xochimilco (172nd), Tláhuac (177th), and Iztapalapa (183rd) presented the lowest HDI values of Mexico City, with values of 0.8481, 0.8473, and 0.8464, respectively, which are still in the global high-HDI range. The only borough that did not have a high HDI was that of rural Milpa Alta, which had a &quot;medium&quot; HDI of 0.7984, far below those of all the other boroughs (627th nationally, the rest being in the top 200). Mexico City&#x27;s HDI for the 2005 report was 0.9012 (very high), and its 2010 value of 0.9225 (very high), or (by newer methodology) 0.8307, was Mexico&#x27;s highest.

=== Law enforcement ===


The Secretariat of Public Security of Mexico City (Secretaría de Seguridad Pública de la Ciudad de México – SSP) manages a combined force of over 90,000 officers in Mexico City. The SSP is charged with maintaining public order and safety in the heart of Mexico City. The historic district is also roamed by tourist police, aiming to orient and serve tourists. These horse-mounted agents dress in traditional uniforms. The investigative Judicial Police of Mexico City (Policía Judicial de la Ciudad de México – PJCDMX) is organized under the Office of the Attorney General of Mexico City (the Procuraduría General de Justicia de la Ciudad de México). The PGJCDMX maintains 16 precincts (delegaciones) with an estimated 3,500 judicial police, 1,100 investigating agents for prosecuting attorneys (agentes del ministerio público), and nearly 1,000 criminology experts or specialists (peritos).

Between 2000 and 2004 an average of 478 crimes were reported each day in Mexico City; however, the actual crime rate is thought to be much higher &quot;since most people are reluctant to report crime&quot;. Under policies enacted by Mayor Marcelo Ebrard between 2009 and 2011, Mexico City underwent a major security upgrade with violent and petty crime rates both falling significantly despite the rise in violent crime in other parts of the country. Some of the policies enacted included the installation of 11,000 security cameras around the city and a very large expansion of the police force. Mexico City has one of the world&#x27;s highest police officer-to-resident ratios, with one uniformed officer per 100 citizens. Since 1997 the prison population has increased by more than 500%. Political scientist Markus-Michael Müller argues that mostly informal street vendors are hit by these measures. He sees punishment &quot;related to the growing politicization of security and crime issues and the resulting criminalization of the people living at the margins of urban society, in particular those who work in the city&#x27;s informal economy&quot;.

In 2016, the incidence of femicides was 3.2 per 100 000 inhabitants, the national average being 4.2. A 2015 city government report found that two of three women over the age of 15 in the capital suffered some form of violence. In addition to street harassment, one of the places where women in Mexico City are subjected to violence is on and around public transport. Annually the Metro of Mexico City receives 300 complaints of sexual harassment.

===International relations===
Mexico City is twinned with:

* Cusco, Peru, 1987
* Berlin, Germany, 1993
* Havana, Cuba, 1997
* Quito, Ecuador, 1999
* Tegucigalpa, Honduras, 1999
* San Antonio de los Baños, Cuba, 1999
* Cerro (Havana), Cuba, 1999
* San José, Costa Rica, 2000
* Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2006
* Nagoya, Japan, 2007
* Los Angeles, United States, 2007
* Cádiz, Spain, 2009
* Beijing, China, 2009
* Istanbul, Turkey, 2010
* Kuwait City, Kuwait, 2011
* Chicago, United States
== Economy ==
Mexico City is one of the most important economic hubs in Latin America. The city proper produces 15.8% of the country&#x27;s gross domestic product. In 2002, Mexico City had a Human Development Index score of 0.915, identical to that of South Korea. In 2007, residents in the top twelve percent of GDP per capita holders in the city had a mean disposable income of . The high spending power of Mexico City inhabitants makes the city attractive for companies offering prestige and luxury goods. According to a 2009 study conducted by PwC, Mexico City had a GDP of $390 billion, ranking it as the eighth richest city in the world and the richest in Latin America. In 2009, Mexico City alone would rank as the 30th largest economy in the world.

Mexico City is the greatest contributor to the country&#x27;s industrial GDP (15.8%) and also the greatest contributor to the country&#x27;s GDP in the service sector (25.3%). Due to the limited non-urbanized space at the south—most of which is protected through environmental laws—the contribution of Mexico City in agriculture is the smallest of all federal entities in the country. The economic reforms of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had a tremendous effect on the city, as a number of businesses, including banks and airlines, were privatized. He also signed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). This led to decentralization and a shift in Mexico City&#x27;s economic base, from manufacturing to services, as most factories moved away to either the State of Mexico, or more commonly to the northern border. By contrast, corporate office buildings set their base in the city.
Mexico City offers an immense and varied consumer retail market, ranging from basic foods to ultra high-end luxury goods. Consumers may buy in fixed indoor markets, in mobile markets (&quot;tianguis&quot;), from street vendors, from downtown shops in a street dedicated to a certain type of good, in convenience stores and traditional neighborhood stores, in modern supermarkets, in warehouse and membership stores and the shopping centers that they anchor, in department stores, in big-box stores, and in modern shopping malls. In addition, &quot;tianguis&quot; or mobile markets set up shop on streets in many neighborhoods, depending on day of week. Sundays see the largest number of these markets.

The city&#x27;s main source of fresh produce is the Central de Abasto. This in itself is a self-contained mini-city in Iztapalapa borough covering an area equivalent to several dozen city blocks. The wholesale market supplies most of the city&#x27;s &quot;mercados&quot;, supermarkets and restaurants, as well as people who come to buy the produce for themselves. Tons of fresh produce are trucked in from all over Mexico every day. The principal fish market is known as La Nueva Viga, in the same complex as the Central de Abastos. The world-renowned market of Tepito occupies 25 blocks, and sells a variety of products. A staple for consumers in the city is the omnipresent &quot;mercado&quot;. Every major neighborhood in the city has its own borough-regulated market, often more than one. These are large well-established facilities offering most basic products, such as fresh produce and meat/poultry, dry goods, tortillerías, and many other services such as locksmiths, herbal medicine, hardware goods, sewing implements; and a multitude of stands offering freshly made, home-style cooking and drinks in the tradition of aguas frescas and atole.

Street vendors ply their trade from stalls in the &quot;tianguis&quot; as well as at non-officially controlled concentrations around metro stations and hospitals; at &quot;plazas comerciales&quot;, where vendors of a certain &quot;theme&quot; (e.g. stationery) are housed; originally these were organized to accommodate vendors formerly selling on the street; or simply from improvised stalls on a city sidewalk. In addition, food and goods are sold from people walking with baskets, pushing carts, from bicycles or the backs of trucks, or simply from a tarp or cloth laid on the ground. In the center of the city informal street vendors are increasingly targeted by laws and prosecution. The weekly San Felipe de Jesús Tianguis is reported to be the largest in Latin America.

The Historic Center of Mexico City is widely known for specialized, often low-cost retailers. Certain blocks or streets are dedicated to shops selling a certain type of merchandise, with areas dedicated to over 40 categories such as home appliances, lamps and electricals, closets and bathrooms, housewares, wedding dresses, jukeboxes, printing, office furniture and safes, books, photography, jewelry, and opticians.
===Tourism===

Mexico City is a destination for many foreign tourists. The Historic center of Mexico City (&quot;Centro Histórico&quot;) and the &quot;floating gardens&quot; of Xochimilco in the southern borough have been declared World Heritage Sites by UNESCO. Landmarks in the Historic Center include the Plaza de la Constitución (Zócalo), the main central square with its epoch-contrasting Spanish-era Metropolitan Cathedral and National Palace, ancient Aztec temple ruins Templo Mayor (&quot;Major Temple&quot;) and modern structures, all within a few steps of one another. (The Templo Mayor was discovered in 1978 while workers were digging to place underground electric cables).

The most recognizable icon of Mexico City is the golden Angel of Independence on the wide, elegant avenue Paseo de la Reforma, modeled by the order of the Emperor Maximilian of Mexico after the Champs-Élysées in Paris. This avenue was designed over the Americas&#x27; oldest known major roadway in the 19th century to connect the National Palace (seat of government) with the Castle of Chapultepec, the imperial residence. Today, this avenue is an important financial district in which the Mexican Stock Exchange and several corporate headquarters are located. Another important avenue is the Avenida de los Insurgentes, which extends and is one of the longest single avenues in the world.

Chapultepec Park houses the Chapultepec Castle, now a museum on a hill that overlooks the park and its numerous museums, monuments and the national zoo and the National Museum of Anthropology (which houses the Aztec Calendar Stone). 
Another piece of architecture is the Palacio de Bellas Artes, a white marble theater/museum whose weight is such that it has gradually been sinking into the soft ground below. Its construction began during the presidency of Porfirio Díaz and ended in 1934, after being interrupted by the Mexican Revolution in the 1920s.

The Plaza de las Tres Culturas, in this square are located the College of Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco, that is the first and oldest European school of higher learning in the Americas, and the archeological site of the city-state of Tlatelolco, and the shrine and Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe are also important sites. There is a double-decker bus, known as the &quot;Turibus&quot;, that circles most of these sites, and has timed audio describing the sites in multiple languages as they are passed.

In addition, according to the Secretariat of Tourism, the city has about 170 museums—is among the top ten of cities in the world with highest number of museums—over 100 art galleries, and some 30 concert halls, all of which maintain a constant cultural activity during the whole year. Many areas (e.g. Palacio Nacional and the National Institute of Cardiology) have murals painted by Diego Rivera. He and his wife Frida Kahlo lived in Coyoacán, where several of their homes, studios, and art collections are open to the public. The house where Leon Trotsky was initially granted asylum and finally murdered in 1940 is also in Coyoacán. In addition, there are several &quot;haciendas&quot; that are now restaurants, such as the San Ángel Inn, the Hacienda de Tlalpan, Hacienda de Cortés and the Hacienda de los Morales.

== Transportation ==
=== Airports ===

Mexico City International Airport is Mexico City&#x27;s primary airport (IATA Airport Code: MEX), and serves as the hub of Aeroméxico (Skyteam). Felipe Ángeles International Airport (IATA Airport Code: NLU) is Mexico City&#x27;s secondary airport, and was opened in 2022, rebuilt from the former Santa Lucía Air Force Base. It is located in Zumpango, State of Mexico, north-northeast of the historic center of Mexico City by car.

=== Sistema de Movilidad Integrada ===
In 2019, the graphic designer Lance Wyman was engaged to create an integrated map of the multimodal public transportation system; he presented a new logo for the Sistema de Movilidad Integrada, describing eight distinct modes of transportation. The head of the government, Claudia Sheinbaum, said the branding would be used for a new single payment card to streamline public transportation fare collection.

=== Metro ===
Mexico City is served by the Mexico City Metro, a metro system, which is the largest in Latin America. The first portions were opened in 1969 and it has expanded to 12 lines with 195 stations, transporting 4.4 million people every day.

=== Tren Suburbano ===

A suburban rail system, the Tren Suburbano serves the metropolitan area, beyond the reach of the metro, with one line serving to municipalities such as Tlalnepantla and Cuautitlán Izcalli, but with future lines planned to serve e.g. Chalco and La Paz.

Electric transport other than the metro also exists, in the form of several Mexico City trolleybus routes and the Xochimilco Light Rail line, both of which are operated by Servicio de Transportes Eléctricos. The central area&#x27;s last streetcar line (tramway, or &quot;tranvía&quot;) closed in 1979.

=== Bus ===
Mexico City has an extensive bus network, consisting of public buses, bus rapid transit, and trolleybuses.

=== Roads ===
Mexico City has a large road network, and relatively high private car usage, estimated at more than 4.5 million in 2016. There is an environmental program, called Hoy No Circula (&quot;Today Does Not Run&quot;, or &quot;One Day without a Car&quot;), whereby vehicles that have not passed emissions testing are restricted from circulating on certain days according to the ending digit of their license plates, in an attempt to cut down on pollution and traffic congestion.

=== Cycling ===

The Mexico City local government oversees the administration of Ecobici, North America&#x27;s second-largest bicycle sharing system. Established to promote sustainable urban transportation, Ecobici facilitates convenient access to bicycles for residents and visitors alike. As of September 2013, the system comprised 276 stations strategically positioned across an expansive area extending from the Historic center to Polanco, a prominent district in the city. Within this network, approximately 4,000 bicycles are available for public use, enabling individuals to navigate the metropolitan landscape efficiently and reduce reliance on traditional motorized modes of transportation. Ecobici serves as a model for environmentally conscious urban mobility initiatives, reflecting Mexico City&#x27;s commitment to fostering sustainable development and enhancing the quality of life for its populace.

== Culture ==

=== Art ===

Secular works of art of this period include the equestrian sculpture of Charles IV of Spain, locally known as &quot;El Caballito&quot; (&quot;The little horse&quot;). This piece, in bronze, was the work of Manuel Tolsá and it has been placed at the Plaza Tolsá, in front of the Palacio de Mineria (Mining Palace). Directly in front of this building is the Museo Nacional de Arte (Munal) (the National Museum of Art).
During the 19th century, an important producer of art was the Academia de San Carlos (San Carlos Art Academy), founded during colonial times, and which later became the Escuela Nacional de Artes Plásticas (the National School of Arts) including painting, sculpture and graphic design, one of UNAM&#x27;s art schools. Many of the works produced by the students and faculty of that time are now displayed in the Museo Nacional de San Carlos (National Museum of San Carlos). One of the students, José María Velasco, is considered one of the greatest Mexican landscape painters of the 19th century. Porfirio Díaz&#x27;s regime sponsored arts, especially those that followed the French school. Popular arts in the form of cartoons and illustrations flourished, e.g. those of José Guadalupe Posada and Manuel Manilla. The permanent collection of the San Carlos Museum also includes paintings by European masters such as Rembrandt, Velázquez, Murillo, and Rubens.

After the Mexican Revolution, an avant-garde artistic movement originated in Mexico City: muralism. Many of the works of muralists José Clemente Orozco, David Alfaro Siqueiros and Diego Rivera are displayed in numerous buildings in the city, most notably at the National Palace and the Palacio de Bellas Artes. Frida Kahlo, wife of Rivera, with a strong nationalist expression, was also one of the most renowned of Mexican painters. Her house has become a museum that displays many of her works.

The former home of Rivera muse Dolores Olmedo houses the namesake museum. The facility is in Xochimilco borough in southern Mexico City and includes several buildings surrounded by sprawling manicured lawns. It houses a large collection of Rivera and Kahlo paintings and drawings, as well as living &quot;Xoloizcuintles&quot; (Mexican Hairless Dog). It also regularly hosts small but important temporary exhibits of classical and modern art (e.g. Venetian Masters and Contemporary New York artists).

During the 20th century, many artists immigrated to Mexico City from different regions of Mexico, such as Leopoldo Méndez, an engraver from Veracruz, who supported the creation of the socialist Taller de la Gráfica Popular (Popular Graphics Workshop), designed to help blue-collar workers find a venue to express their art. Other painters came from abroad, such as Catalan painter Remedios Varo and other Spanish and Jewish exiles. It was in the second half of the 20th century that the artistic movement began to drift apart from the Revolutionary theme. José Luis Cuevas opted for a modernist style in contrast to the muralist movement associated with social politics.

=== Museums ===

Mexico City has numerous museums dedicated to art, including Mexican colonial, modern and contemporary art, and international art. The Museo Tamayo was opened in the mid-1980s to house the collection of international contemporary art donated by Mexican painter Rufino Tamayo. The collection includes pieces by Picasso, Klee, Kandinsky, Warhol and many others, though most of the collection is stored while visiting exhibits are shown. The Museo de Arte Moderno is a repository of Mexican artists from the 20th century, including Rivera, Orozco, Siqueiros, Kahlo, Gerzso, Carrington, Tamayo, and also regularly hosts temporary exhibits of international modern art. In southern Mexico City, the Carrillo Gil Museum showcases avant-garde artists, as does the Museo Universitario Arte Contemporáneo, designed by Mexican architect Teodoro González de León, inaugurated in late 2008.

The Museo Soumaya, named after the wife of Mexican magnate Carlos Slim, has the largest private collection of original Rodin sculptures outside of France. It also has a large collection of Dalí sculptures, and recently began showing pieces in its masters collection including El Greco, Velázquez, Picasso and Canaletto. The museum inaugurated a new futuristic-design facility in 2011 just north of Polanco, while maintaining a smaller facility in Plaza Loreto in southern Mexico City. The Colección Júmex is a contemporary art museum located on the sprawling grounds of the Jumex juice company in the northern industrial suburb of Ecatepec. It has the largest private contemporary art collection in Latin America and hosts pieces from its permanent collection as well as traveling exhibits. The Museo de San Ildefonso, housed in the Antiguo Colegio de San Ildefonso in Mexico City&#x27;s historic downtown district is a 17th-century colonnaded palace housing an art museum that regularly hosts world-class exhibits of Mexican and international art. The Museo Nacional de Arte is also located in a former palace in the historic center. It houses a large collection of pieces by all major Mexican artists of the last 400 years and also hosts visiting exhibits.

Jack Kerouac, the noted American author, spent extended periods of time in the city, and wrote his 1959 masterpiece volume of poetry &quot;Mexico City Blues&quot; here. Another American author, William S. Burroughs, also lived in Colonia Roma where he accidentally shot his wife. Most of Mexico City&#x27;s museums can be visited from Tuesday to Sunday from 10am to 5pm, although some of them have extended schedules, such as the Museum of Anthropology and History, which is open to 7pm. In addition to this, entrance to most museums are free on Sunday. In some cases a modest fee may be charged.

The Memory and Tolerance Museum, inaugurated in 2011, showcases historical events of discrimination and genocide. Permanent exhibits include those on the Holocaust and other large-scale atrocities. It also houses temporary exhibits; one on Tibet was inaugurated by the Dalai Lama in September 2011.

=== Music, theater and entertainment ===

Mexico City is home to a number of orchestras offering season programs. These include the Mexico City Philharmonic, which performs at the Sala Ollin Yoliztli; the National Symphony Orchestra, whose home base is the Palacio de Bellas Artes (Palace of the Fine Arts), a masterpiece of art nouveau and art decó styles; the Philharmonic Orchestra of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (OFUNAM), and the Minería Symphony Orchestra, both of which perform at the Sala Nezahualcóyotl, which was the first wrap-around concert hall in the Western Hemisphere when inaugurated in 1976. There are also many smaller ensembles that enrich the city&#x27;s musical scene, including the Carlos Chávez Youth Symphony, the Cuarteto Latinoamericano, the New World Orchestra (Orquesta del Nuevo Mundo), the National Polytechnical Symphony and the Bellas Artes Chamber Orchestra (Orquesta de Cámara de Bellas Artes).

The city is also a leading center of popular culture and music. There are a multitude of venues hosting Spanish and foreign-language performers. These include the 10,000-seat National Auditorium that regularly schedules the Spanish and English-language pop and rock artists, as well as many of the world&#x27;s leading performing arts ensembles, the auditorium also broadcasts grand opera performances from New York&#x27;s Metropolitan Opera on giant, high definition screens. In 2007 National Auditorium was selected world&#x27;s best venue by multiple genre media. Other sites for pop-artist performances include the 3,000-seat Teatro Metropolitan, the 15,000-seat Palacio de los Deportes, and the larger 50,000-seat Foro Sol Stadium, where popular international artists perform on a regular basis. The Cirque du Soleil has held several seasons at the Carpa Santa Fe, in the Santa Fe district in the western part of the city. There are numerous venues for smaller musical ensembles and solo performers. These include the Hard Rock Live, Bataclán, Foro Scotiabank, Lunario, Circo Volador and Voilá Acoustique. Recent additions include the 20,000-seat Arena Ciudad de México, the 3,000-seat Pepsi Center World Trade Center, and the 2,500-seat Auditorio Blackberry.

The Centro Nacional de las Artes (National Center for the Arts) has several venues for music, theater, dance. UNAM&#x27;s main campus, also in the southern part of the city, is home to the Centro Cultural Universitario (the University Culture Center) (CCU). The CCU also houses the National Library, the interactive Universum, Museo de las Ciencias, the Sala Nezahualcóyotl concert hall, several theaters and cinemas, and the new University Museum of Contemporary Art (MUAC). A branch of the National University&#x27;s CCU cultural center was inaugurated in 2007 in the facilities of the former Ministry of Foreign Affairs, known as Tlatelolco, in north-central Mexico City.

The José Vasconcelos Library, a national library, is located on the grounds of the former Buenavista railroad station in the northern part of the city. The Papalote Museo del Niño (Kite Children&#x27;s Museum), which houses the world&#x27;s largest dome screen, is located in the wooded park of Chapultepec, near the Museo Tecnológico, and Aztlán Parque Urbano, an amusement park. The theme park Six Flags México (the largest amusement park in Latin America) is located in the Ajusco neighborhood, in Tlalpan borough, southern Mexico City. During the winter, the main square of the Zócalo is transformed into a gigantic ice skating rink, which is said to be the largest in the world behind that of Moscow&#x27;s Red Square.

The (Mexican Film Library), near the Coyoacán suburb, shows a variety of films, and stages many film festivals, including the annual International Showcase, and many smaller ones ranging from Scandinavian and Uruguayan cinema, to Jewish and LGBT-themed films. Cinépolis and Cinemex, the two biggest film business chains, also have several film festivals throughout the year, with both national and international movies. Mexico City has a number of IMAX theaters, providing residents and visitors access to films ranging from documentaries to blockbusters on these large screens.

=== Cuisine ===

Once considered plebeian fare, by the 19th century tacos had become a standard of Mexico City&#x27;s cuisine. Furthermore, as authorities struggled to tax local taquerias, imposing licensing requirements and penalties, they recorded some details of the types of foods being served by these establishments. The most frequent reference was for &quot;tacos de barbacoa&quot;. Also mentioned are enchiladas, &quot;tacos de minero&quot; and &quot;gorditas&quot;, along with oyster shops and fried fish stands. There is evidence of some regional specialties being made available for recent migrants; at least two shops were known to serve &quot;pozole&quot;, a type of stew similar to hominy that is a staple of Guadalajara, Jalisco. Mexico City is known for having some of the freshest fish and seafood in Mexico&#x27;s interior. La Nueva Viga Market is the second largest seafood market in the world after the Tsukiji fish market in Japan.

Mexico City offers a variety of cuisines: restaurants specializing in the regional cuisines of Mexico&#x27;s 31 states are available in the city, and the city also has several branches of internationally recognized restaurants. These include Paris&#x27; Au Pied de Cochon and Brasserie Lipp, Philippe (by Philippe Chow); Nobu, Quintonil, Morimoto; Pámpano, owned by Mexican-raised opera singer Plácido Domingo. There are branches of Japanese restaurant Suntory, Italian restaurant Alfredo, as well as New York steakhouses Morton&#x27;s and The Palm, and Monte Carlo&#x27;s BeefBar. Three of Lima&#x27;s Haute restaurants, serving Peruvian cuisine, have locations in Mexico City: La Mar, Segundo Muelle and Astrid y Gastón.

For the 2023 list of World&#x27;s 50 Best Restaurants as named by the British magazine &quot;Restaurant&quot;, Mexico City ranked 13th best with the Mexican avant-garde restaurant Pujol (owned by Mexican chef Enrique Olvera). Also notable is the Basque-Mexican fusion restaurant Biko (run and co-owned by Bruno Oteiza and Mikel Alonso), which placed outside the list at 59th, but in previous years has ranked within the top 50. Other that has been placed on the list in 2019 is the restaurant Sud 777 at 58th place. In 2024, seven restaurants in the city received Michelin stars. At the other end of the scale are working class pulque bars known as &quot;pulquerías&quot;, a challenge for tourists to locate and experience.

=== Media ===
Mexico City is Mexico&#x27;s most important hub for the printed media and book publishing industries. Dozens of daily newspapers are published, including &quot;El Universal&quot;, &quot;Excélsior&quot;, &quot;Reforma&quot; and &quot;La Jornada&quot;. Other major papers include &quot;Milenio&quot;, &quot;Crónica&quot;, &quot;El Economista&quot; and . Leading magazines include , &quot;Proceso&quot;, &quot;Poder&quot;, as well as dozens of entertainment publications such as &quot;Vanidades&quot;, &quot;Quién&quot;, &quot;Chilango&quot;, &quot;TV Notas&quot;, and local editions of &quot;Vogue&quot;, &quot;GQ&quot;, and &quot;Architectural Digest&quot;.

It is also a leading center of the advertising industry. Most international ad firms have offices in the city, including Grey, JWT, Leo Burnett, Euro RSCG, BBDO, Ogilvy, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, and McCann Erickson. Many local firms also compete in the sector, including Alazraki, Olabuenaga/Chemistri, Terán, Augusto Elías, and Clemente Cámara, among others. There are 60 radio stations operating in the city and many local community radio transmission networks.

The two largest media companies in the Spanish-speaking world, Televisa and TV Azteca, are headquartered in Mexico City. Televisa often presents itself as the largest producer of Spanish-language content. Other local television channels include:

XHDF 1 (Azteca Uno),
XEW 2 (Televisa W),
XHCTMX 3,
XHTV 4,
XHGC 5,
XHTDMX 6,
XHIMT 7,
XEQ 9,
XEIPN 11,
XHUNAM 20,
XHCDM 21,
XEIMT 22,
XHTRES 28,
XHTVM 40 and
XHHCU 45.

=== Sports ===
Association football is the country&#x27;s most popular and most televised franchised sport. Its important venues in Mexico City include the Azteca Stadium, home to the Mexico national football team and giants América and Cruz Azul, which can seat 91,653 fans, making it the biggest stadium in Latin America. The Olympic Stadium in Ciudad Universitaria is home to the football club giants Universidad Nacional, with a seating capacity of over 52,000. The Sports City Stadium, which seats 33,042 fans, is near the World Trade Center Mexico City in the Nochebuena neighborhood, and is home to the historical Atlante. América, Cruz Azul and Universidad Nacional are based in Mexico City and play in the First Division; they are also part, with Guadalajara-based giants Club Deportivo Guadalajara, of Mexico&#x27;s traditional &quot;Big Four&quot;. The city&#x27;s three derbies are the &quot;Clásico Joven&quot;, played between América and Cruz Azul, the capital&#x27;s two most popular and successful teams; the &quot;Clásico Capitalino&quot;, between América and Universidad Nacional, and the &quot;Clásico Metropolitano&quot;, between Cruz Azul and Universidad Nacional.

The country hosted the FIFA World Cup in 1970 and 1986, and Azteca Stadium is the first stadium in World Cup history to host the final twice. The city will be one of the host cities for the 2026 FIFA World Cup. Mexico City is the first Latin American city to host the Olympic Games, having held the Summer Olympics in 1968, winning bids against Buenos Aires, Lyon and Detroit. The city hosted the 1955 and 1975 Pan American Games, the latter after Santiago and São Paulo withdrew. The ICF Flatwater Racing World Championships were hosted here in 1974 and 1994. Lucha libre is a Mexican style of wrestling, and is one of the more popular sports throughout the country. The main venues in the city are Arena México and Arena Coliseo.

The Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez is the main venue for motorsport, and hosts the Formula 1 Mexican Grand Prix since its return to the sport in 2015, the event being held in the past from 1962 to 1970, and again from 1986 to 1992. Since 2016, it also hosts the Formula E Mexico City ePrix. From 1980 to 1981 and again from 2002 to 2007, the circuit hosted the Champ Car World Series Gran Premio de México. Beginning in 2005, the NASCAR Nationwide Series ran the Telcel-Motorola México 200. 2005 also marked the first running of the Mexico City 250 by the Grand-Am Rolex Sports Car Series. Both races were removed from their series&#x27; schedules for 2009.

Baseball is another sport played professionally in the city. Mexico City is home of the Mexico City Red Devils of the Mexican League, which is considered a Triple-A league by Major League Baseball. The Devils play their home games at Estadio Alfredo Harp Helú designed by international Mexican-American architect FGP Atelier Founder Francisco Gonzalez Pulido in collaboration with local architect Taller ADG. Mexico City has some 10 Little Leagues for young baseball players. In 2005, Mexico City became the first city to host an NFL regular season game outside of the United States, at the Azteca Stadium. The crowd of 103,467 people attending this game was the largest ever for a regular season game in NFL history until 2009.

The city has also hosted several NBA pre-season games and has hosted international basketball&#x27;s FIBA Americas Championship, along with north-of-the-border Major League Baseball exhibition games at Foro Sol. In 2017, NBA commissioner Adam Silver expressed interest in placing an NBA G League expansion team in Mexico City as early as 2018. This came to fruition on 12 December 2019 when commissioner Silver announced at a press conference in Mexico City Arena that LNBP team, Capitanes de Ciudad de México will be joining the G League in the 2020–21 season on a five-year agreement.

Other sports facilities in Mexico City are the Palacio de los Deportes indoor arena, Francisco Márquez Olympic Swimming Pool, the Hipódromo de Las Américas, the Agustin Melgar Olympic Velodrome, and venues for equestrianism and horse racing, ice hockey, rugby, American-style football, baseball, and basketball. Bullfighting takes place every Sunday during bullfighting season at the 50,000-seat Plaza México, the world&#x27;s largest bullring. Mexico City&#x27;s golf courses have hosted Women&#x27;s LPGA action, and two Men&#x27;s Golf World Cups. Courses throughout the city are available as private as well as public venues.
== See also ==

* Cuisine of Mexico City
* Gentrification of Mexico City
* Barrios Mágicos of Mexico City
* Large Cities Climate Leadership Group
* Largest cities in the Americas
* Metropolitan areas of Mexico
* Outline of Mexico

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===

== External links ==
* Mexico City Government </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="0" end="11" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="19" end="26" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544" start="31" end="43" title="List of cities in Mexico" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="47" end="53" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="67" end="80" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644088" start="88" end="106" title="List of North American cities by population" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="215" end="231" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="264" end="271" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734310" start="309" end="317" title="Boroughs of Mexico City" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630336" start="354" end="367" title="List of neighborhoods in Mexico City" label="neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124027" start="403" end="414" title="city proper" label="city proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q665894" start="560" end="579" title="Greater Mexico City" label="Greater Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="614" end="645" title="list of largest cities#List" label="sixth-largest metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="679" end="698" title="urban area" label="urban agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="706" end="724" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="733" end="742" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="769" end="785" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q665894" start="819" end="838" title="Greater Mexico City" label="Greater Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="845" end="848" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079848" start="900" end="940" title="list of cities by GDP" label="most productive urban areas in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1180" end="1193" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1215" end="1250" title="List of oldest continuously inhabited cities#Americas" label="oldest capital city in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="1277" end="1294" title="Indigenous peoples of Mexico" label="Indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="1351" end="1363" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="1371" end="1377" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1406" end="1422" title="Mexico City" label="[[Tenochtitlan]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q593267" start="1471" end="1492" title="Fall of Tenochtitlan" label="siege of Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1556" end="1579" title="Spanish architecture#Spanish Colonial architecture" label="Spanish urban standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952852" start="1594" end="1606" title="municipalities of Mexico" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1747" end="1770" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="1835" end="1858" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="independence from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="1864" end="1880" title="federal district" label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="1950" end="1958" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="2002" end="2007" title="election" label="elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056909" start="2015" end="2033" title="List of mayors of Mexico City" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="2065" end="2075" title="unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867085" start="2076" end="2096" title="Legislative Assembly of Mexico City" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q767010" start="2159" end="2193" title="Party of the Democratic Revolution" label="Party of the Democratic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15717618" start="2208" end="2238" title="National Regeneration Movement" label="National Regeneration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668478" start="2330" end="2339" title="abortion in Mexico" label="abortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005788" start="2359" end="2369" title="euthanasia in Mexico" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2371" end="2387" title="No-fault divorce#Mexico" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17473" start="2389" end="2406" title="same-sex marriage in Mexico City" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458079" start="2412" end="2431" title="LGBT rights in Mexico City" label="legal gender change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="2598" end="2620" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="Constitution of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="2889" end="2897" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="2918" end="2940" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065260" start="3109" end="3124" title="Charles La Trobe" label="Charles Latrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="3451" end="3456" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q318508" start="3578" end="3605" title="Andrés Manuel López Obrador" label="Andrés Manuel López Obrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396586" start="3903" end="3917" title="Marcelo Ebrard" label="Marcelo Ebrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072693" start="4352" end="4360" title="chilango" label="chilango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988410" start="5254" end="5265" title="Peñon woman" label="Peñón woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027082" start="5317" end="5334" title="Gustavo A. Madero, Mexico City" label="Gustavo A. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072137" start="5734" end="5748" title="Chichimeca" label="Teochichimecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="5819" end="5825" title="Toltec" label="Toltec"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="5831" end="5837" title="Aztecs" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="5978" end="5997" title="Mexico-Tenochtitlan" label="Mexico-Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="6017" end="6023" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="6095" end="6107" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="6178" end="6194" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q796925" start="6245" end="6255" title="Tlatelolco (altepetl)" label="Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q219412" start="6311" end="6326" title="Huītzilōpōchtli" label="Huitzilopochtli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="6399" end="6411" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="6425" end="6437" title="Opuntia" label="prickly pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282840" start="6450" end="6461" title="rattlesnake" label="rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="6578" end="6590" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="6652" end="6657" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="6685" end="6696" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="6798" end="6806" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="6825" end="6838" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q741771" start="7024" end="7034" title="Iztapalapa" label="Iztapalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="7076" end="7088" title="Moctezuma II" label="Moctezuma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="7201" end="7213" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308854" start="7334" end="7349" title="La Noche Triste" label="La Noche Triste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471210" start="7467" end="7476" title="Tlaxcaltec" label="Tlaxcalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315628" start="7600" end="7610" title="Cuitláhuac" label="Cuitláhuac"/>
<link wikidata="Q297050" start="7648" end="7658" title="Cuauhtémoc" label="Cuauhtémoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q593267" start="7675" end="7696" title="siege of Tenochtitlan" label="siege of Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="7803" end="7811" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="8102" end="8110" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="8235" end="8248" title="Sovereignty" label="personal rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="8309" end="8316" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="8404" end="8414" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8543" end="8560" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="8814" end="8826" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="8886" end="8895" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q556876" start="8901" end="8918" title="viceroy of Mexico" label="viceroy of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="8984" end="8990" title="Zócalo" label="Zócalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q610961" start="8996" end="9030" title="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q674866" start="9311" end="9335" title="Cristóbal de Villalpando" label="Cristóbal de Villalpando"/>
<link wikidata="Q532539" start="9791" end="9821" title="Toribio de Benavente Motolinia" label="Toribio de Benavente Motolinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857582" start="9834" end="9859" title="Twelve Apostles of Mexico" label="Twelve Apostles of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="10490" end="10495" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884583" start="11626" end="11633" title="desagüe" label="desagüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="12226" end="12241" title="Historic center of Mexico City" label="historic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="12318" end="12322" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="12517" end="12525" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877609" start="12805" end="12826" title="Mexican nobility" label="noble title in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="13572" end="13594" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander Von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145411" start="13601" end="13617" title="Grito de Dolores" label="Grito de Dolores"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="13754" end="13781" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="14046" end="14065" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="14095" end="14115" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q610961" start="14144" end="14163" title="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Cathedral of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="14303" end="14319" title="federal district" label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="14341" end="14367" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901835" start="14424" end="14442" title="seat of government" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="14456" end="14471" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141799" start="14499" end="14514" title="Texcoco de Mora, State of Mexico" label="Texcoco de Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q209034" start="14524" end="14530" title="Toluca" label="Toluca"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="14825" end="14835" title="Federalism" label="federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="14851" end="14861" title="Unitary state" label="centralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="14990" end="15000" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="15074" end="15083" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="1861–1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="15153" end="15173" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546566" start="15192" end="15214" title="Battle for Mexico City" label="Battle for Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="15324" end="15340" title="Mexican–American War" label="U.S. Mexican War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689975" start="15387" end="15401" title="Battle of Molino del Rey" label="Molino del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536618" start="15406" end="15417" title="Battle of Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333407" start="15617" end="15637" title="Battle of Churubusco" label="Battle of Churubusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546864" start="15661" end="15691" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546864" start="15937" end="15967" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456245" start="16034" end="16042" title="Deployments of the United States Military" label="deployed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="16043" end="16055" title="Military organization" label="combat units"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="16066" end="16072" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="16117" end="16125" title="Veracruz, Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="16133" end="16142" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="16172" end="16181" title="Division (military)" label="Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="16228" end="16246" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Chapultepec Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q441838" start="16329" end="16344" title="John A. Quitman" label="John A. Quitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="16420" end="16431" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q454069" start="16441" end="16458" title="George E. Pickett" label="George E. Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="16463" end="16479" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q367972" start="16583" end="16599" title="Niños Héroes" label="Los Niños Héroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="16775" end="16802" title="treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="16974" end="16992" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187198" start="17059" end="17073" title="Decena trágica" label="Decena Trágica"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="17171" end="17190" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="17438" end="17455" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="17478" end="17490" title="Huerta&amp;#x27;s Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321891" start="17623" end="17640" title="Palacio de Lecumberri" label="Lecumberri prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="17707" end="17719" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="17724" end="17739" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="17854" end="17873" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="17881" end="17898" title="Constitutionalist" label="Constitutionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q947870" start="18355" end="18376" title="Torre Latinoamericana" label="Torre Latinoamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="18474" end="18496" title="modernist architecture" label="modernist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q130025" start="18560" end="18593" title="Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City" label="Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="18618" end="18658" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q671960" start="18726" end="18736" title="Mario Pani" label="Mario Pani"/>
<link wikidata="Q81322712" start="18738" end="18754" title="Eugenio Peschard" label="Eugenio Peschard"/>
<link wikidata="Q254662" start="18760" end="18777" title="Enrique del Moral" label="Enrique del Moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="18819" end="18831" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="18833" end="18855" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709105" start="18861" end="18879" title="José Chávez Morado" label="José Chávez Morado"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="18915" end="18941" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="18948" end="18966" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q735042" start="19041" end="19058" title="Mexico City Metro" label="Mexico City Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294703" start="19773" end="19784" title="shanty town" label="shanty town"/>
<link wikidata="Q20076902" start="19833" end="19846" title="air pollution in Mexico City" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="19851" end="19866" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550770" start="19888" end="19918" title="groundwater-related subsidence" label="groundwater-related subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q909737" start="20437" end="20489" title="Tlatelolco massacre" label="massacre of an unknown number of protesting students"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623011" start="20493" end="20503" title="Tlatelolco (Mexico City)" label="Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304343" start="20684" end="20696" title="Los Halcones" label="Los Halcones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="20831" end="20834" title="Central Standard Time" label="CST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798567" start="20863" end="20890" title="1985 Mexico City earthquake" label="1985 Mexico City earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="20951" end="20966" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="21203" end="21233" title="Historic center of Mexico City" label="Historic center of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="21289" end="21315" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="21507" end="21513" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="P.R.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="21603" end="21622" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="21652" end="21667" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q767010" start="21929" end="21963" title="Party of the Democratic Revolution" label="Party of the Democratic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="22009" end="22028" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="22049" end="22062" title="mayor" label="elected mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="22112" end="22133" title="democracy" label="democratic government"/>
<link wikidata="Q278070" start="22404" end="22431" title="Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt" label="Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="22508" end="22523" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="22866" end="22878" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550770" start="23161" end="23191" title="groundwater-related subsidence" label="groundwater-related subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q936087" start="23580" end="23590" title="Milpa Alta" label="Milpa Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q408187" start="23592" end="23599" title="Tlalpan" label="Tlalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q643026" start="23604" end="23614" title="Xochimilco" label="Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="23694" end="23706" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="23766" end="23771" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="23801" end="23812" title="Freshwater" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q750176" start="23842" end="23850" title="chinampa" label="chinampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835597" start="24139" end="24145" title="San Salvador Atenco" label="Atenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="24147" end="24162" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q723981" start="24176" end="24200" title="Teodoro González de León" label="Teodoro González de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682502" start="24205" end="24219" title="Alberto Kalach" label="Alberto Kalach"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="24473" end="24489" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="24819" end="24834" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="24876" end="24890" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="24895" end="24911" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="25033" end="25044" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="25107" end="25112" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="25178" end="25181" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="25383" end="25397" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506547" start="25583" end="25602" title="Hoy No Circula" label="A day without a car"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="25793" end="25804" title="diesel fuel" label="diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471604" start="25827" end="25835" title="Mexico City Metrobús" label="Metrobús"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="25836" end="25853" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5817067" start="25862" end="25869" title="EcoBici (Mexico City)" label="Ecobici"/>
<link wikidata="Q523194" start="25989" end="26000" title="Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q785318" start="26129" end="26136" title="Polanco (Mexico)" label="Polanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375717" start="26162" end="26177" title="Chapultepec Zoo" label="Chapultepec Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q524249" start="26251" end="26282" title="Museo Nacional de Antropología" label="National Museum of Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355305" start="26320" end="26335" title="Alameda Central" label="Alameda Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="26368" end="26379" title="public park" label="public park"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="26387" end="26395" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376971" start="26397" end="26410" title="Parque México" label="Parque México"/>
<link wikidata="Q580662" start="26415" end="26428" title="Parque España (Mexico City)" label="Parque España"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020125" start="26440" end="26447" title="Condesa" label="Condesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438112" start="26458" end="26472" title="Parque Hundido" label="Parque Hundido"/>
<link wikidata="Q984797" start="26514" end="26531" title="Colonia del Valle" label="Colonia del Valle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370874" start="26537" end="26551" title="Parque Lincoln" label="Parque Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q785318" start="26555" end="26562" title="Polanco, Mexico City" label="Polanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751011" start="26771" end="26790" title="Viveros de Coyoacán" label="Viveros de Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044884" start="26929" end="26972" title="Xochimilco Ecological Park and Plant Market" label="Xochimilco Ecological Park and Plant Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="26976" end="26995" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812900" start="27005" end="27013" title="Santa Fe, Mexico City" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q850454" start="27051" end="27087" title="Desierto de los Leones National Park" label="Desierto de los Leones National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562111" start="27113" end="27129" title="Six Flags México" label="Six Flags México"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375717" start="27277" end="27292" title="Chapultepec Zoo" label="Chapultepec Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171767" start="27302" end="27317" title="Zoológico Los Coyotes" label="Los Coyotes Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="28326" end="28354" title="subtropical highland climate" label="subtropical highland climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="28356" end="28385" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q741771" start="28566" end="28576" title="Iztapalapa" label="Iztapalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q953866" start="28578" end="28587" title="Iztacalco" label="Iztacalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832464" start="28589" end="28608" title="Venustiano Carranza, D.F." label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027082" start="28633" end="28650" title="Gustavo A. Madero, D.F." label="Gustavo A. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q408187" start="28716" end="28723" title="Tlalpan" label="Tlalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q936087" start="28728" end="28738" title="Milpa Alta" label="Milpa Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="28764" end="28768" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="28773" end="28776" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505665" start="28805" end="28811" title="Ajusco" label="Ajusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="29181" end="29185" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969483" start="29490" end="29506" title="lake-effect snow" label="lake-effect snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="29539" end="29551" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="29556" end="29570" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29878" end="29898" title="Lake Texcoco#Artificial drainage" label="Deep Drainage System"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="30080" end="30096" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709543" start="30106" end="30119" title="Anticyclone" label="anti-cyclonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="30220" end="30234" title="air pollution" label="air pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="30919" end="30927" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="31163" end="31176" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="Pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="31188" end="31205" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Anahuac"/>
<link wikidata="Q645293" start="31394" end="31412" title="Cuauhtémoc, Mexico City" label="Cuauhtémoc borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5845392" start="31518" end="31525" title="Mixcoac" label="Mixcoac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067789" start="31530" end="31539" title="San Ángel" label="San Ángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112865" start="31833" end="31847" title="Political divisions of Mexico" label="federal entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="32034" end="32049" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80903" start="32072" end="32079" title="Hidalgo (state)" label="Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="32166" end="32179" title="List of largest cities" label="most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q665894" start="32253" end="32285" title="Greater Mexico City" label="Metropolitan Area of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q919526" start="32402" end="32422" title="environmental policy" label="environmental policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="32448" end="32466" title="net migration rate" label="net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q665894" start="32565" end="32584" title="Greater Mexico City" label="Greater Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="32730" end="32745" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80903" start="32757" end="32770" title="Hidalgo (state)" label="Hidalgo state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201456" start="32851" end="32858" title="Metropolitan areas of Mexico" label="biggest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121208" start="33090" end="33109" title="Ecatepec de Morelos" label="Ecatepec de Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q210307" start="33125" end="33139" title="Ciudad Nezahualcóyotl" label="Nezahualcóyotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q219574" start="33155" end="33164" title="Naucalpan" label="Naucalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q195769" start="33178" end="33190" title="Chimalhuacán" label="Chimalhuacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q845307" start="33204" end="33223" title="Tlalnepantla de Baz" label="Tlalnepantla de Baz"/>
<link wikidata="Q471822" start="33316" end="33327" title="megalopolis" label="megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q428345" start="33402" end="33425" title="Mexico City megalopolis" label="Mexico City megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889548" start="33810" end="33816" title="Greater Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171558" start="33818" end="33827" title="Querétaro metropolitan area" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600784" start="33829" end="33835" title="Greater Toluca" label="Toluca"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="33837" end="33847" title="Cuernavaca" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q160750" start="33849" end="33856" title="Pachuca" label="Pachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357258" start="34195" end="34214" title="Greater Guadalajara" label="Greater Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243000" start="34219" end="34236" title="Greater Monterrey" label="Greater Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="34243" end="34261" title="net migration rate" label="net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="34632" end="34640" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="34728" end="34737" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="34899" end="34909" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q199282" start="34937" end="34955" title="History of the Jews in Mexico" label="Jewish communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="34957" end="34965" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="34967" end="34974" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="34985" end="34994" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="34999" end="35012" title="philosophical" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="35083" end="35091" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="35095" end="35102" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671480" start="35145" end="35160" title="Philip of Jesus" label="Philip of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="35164" end="35171" title="Mexican people" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="35172" end="35180" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q578963" start="35214" end="35241" title="Twenty-six Martyrs of Japan" label="Twenty-six Martyrs of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q586485" start="35248" end="35284" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mexico" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="35300" end="35311" title="archdiocese" label="archdiocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q610961" start="35377" end="35411" title="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35420" end="35440" title="Iztapalapa Cathedral, Mexico City" label="Iztapalapa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35524" end="35552" title="San José de Gracia Cathedral, Mexico City" label="San José de Gracia Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925183" start="35576" end="35597" title="Porta Coeli Cathedral, Mexico City" label="Porta Coeli Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942226" start="35638" end="35657" title="Valvanera Cathedral, Mexico City" label="Valvanera Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314452" start="35759" end="35777" title="Indigenous peoples in Mexico" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="35882" end="35889" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q36355" start="35891" end="35896" title="Otomi language" label="Otomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q623215" start="35898" end="35904" title="Mixtec" label="Mixtec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13214" start="35906" end="35913" title="Zapotec languages" label="Zapotec"/>
<link wikidata="Q36228" start="35918" end="35925" title="Mazahua language" label="Mazahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921225" start="36098" end="36110" title="Afro-Mexican" label="Afro-Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="36194" end="36204" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="36303" end="36312" title="Argentine people" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997267" start="36317" end="36325" title="Colombian people" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="36341" end="36347" title="Brazilian people" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276073" start="36349" end="36354" title="Chilean people" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901501" start="36356" end="36363" title="Uruguayan people" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996826" start="36368" end="36377" title="Venezuelan people" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195125" start="36432" end="36436" title="Cubans" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424171" start="36438" end="36447" title="Demographics of Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596307" start="36449" end="36460" title="List of Salvadorans" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131845" start="36462" end="36467" title="Haitian people" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035264" start="36472" end="36480" title="Hondurans" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="36508" end="36513" title="Spanish people" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="36515" end="36522" title="Germans" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="36527" end="36538" title="Swiss people" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="36554" end="36568" title="Czechs" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="36570" end="36577" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="36579" end="36585" title="French people" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="36587" end="36592" title="Italian people" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="36594" end="36601" title="Irish people" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="36603" end="36618" title="Dutch people" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="36620" end="36626" title="Polish people" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="36631" end="36638" title="Romanians" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965974" start="36780" end="36789" title="Demographics of the United States" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="37178" end="37195" title="Publicly-funded health care" label="public healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="37212" end="37226" title="private sector" label="private-sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q904999" start="37238" end="37242" title="Mexican Social Security Institute" label="IMSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212165" start="37332" end="37339" title="La Raza" label="La Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="37424" end="37437" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="37832" end="37846" title="Multiculturalism" label="multi-cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="37848" end="37861" title="Multilingualism" label="multi-lingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q572835" start="37866" end="37886" title="international school" label="international school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="37912" end="37928" title="International student" label="foreign students"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108057" start="37949" end="37963" title="Colegio Alemán Alexander von Humboldt (Mexico City)" label="Colegio Alemán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543124" start="38010" end="38032" title="Liceo Mexicano Japonés" label="Liceo Mexicano Japonés"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268669" start="38097" end="38118" title="Lycée Franco-Mexicain" label="Lycée Franco-Mexicain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654220" start="38133" end="38148" title="ASF Mexico" label="American School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102233" start="38154" end="38172" title="Westhill Institute" label="Westhill Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340264" start="38196" end="38209" title="Edron Academy" label="Edron Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050535" start="38218" end="38235" title="Greengates School" label="Greengates School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851912" start="38328" end="38354" title="Plaza de las Tres Culturas" label="Plaza de las Tres Culturas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477757" start="38362" end="38397" title="Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco" label="Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="38467" end="38482" title="higher learning" label="higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="38490" end="38498" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="38565" end="38574" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q372529" start="38599" end="38640" title="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico" label="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841540" start="38722" end="38761" title="List of colonial universities in Hispanic America" label="third oldest university in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="38767" end="38807" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="38944" end="38959" title="List of Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="39105" end="39124" title="scientific method" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q847843" start="39264" end="39282" title="College and university rankings" label="University Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475036" start="39296" end="39318" title="Times Higher Education" label="Times Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q130025" start="39501" end="39521" title="University City of Mexico" label="Ciudad Universitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539696" start="39630" end="39660" title="National Polytechnic Institute" label="National Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011793" start="39721" end="39768" title="CINVESTAV" label="Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados"/>
<link wikidata="Q972553" start="39919" end="39953" title="Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana" label="Metropolitan Autonomous University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624776" start="39965" end="40008" title="National School of Anthropology and History" label="National School of Anthropology and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665236" start="40021" end="40061" title="Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México" label="Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343885" start="40074" end="40128" title="Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education" label="Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q947259" start="40147" end="40171" title="Universidad Panamericana Sede México" label="Universidad Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q495014" start="40182" end="40202" title="Universidad La Salle" label="Universidad La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894274" start="40208" end="40236" title="Universidad Intercontinental" label="Universidad Intercontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156857" start="40248" end="40279" title="Universidad del Valle de México" label="Universidad del Valle de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q750169" start="40291" end="40310" title="Anahuac Universities Network" label="Universidad Anáhuac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639974" start="40312" end="40336" title="Simón Bolívar University (Mexico)" label="Simón Bolívar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894274" start="40348" end="40376" title="Universidad Intercontinental" label="Universidad Intercontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066989" start="40388" end="40420" title="Alliant International University" label="Alliant International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q689462" start="40426" end="40452" title="Universidad Iberoamericana" label="Universidad Iberoamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324001" start="40454" end="40474" title="El Colegio de México" label="El Colegio de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456057" start="40485" end="40509" title="Escuela Libre de Derecho" label="Escuela Libre de Derecho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054347" start="40518" end="40562" title="Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas" label="Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económica"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="40601" end="40625" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894319" start="40702" end="40735" title="Universidad Tecnológica de México" label="Universidad Tecnológica de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="40972" end="40993" title="Mexico" label="United Mexican States"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="41004" end="41031" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173121" start="41348" end="41357" title="Querétaro, Querétaro" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114256" start="41414" end="41437" title="Servando Teresa de Mier" label="Servando Teresa de Mier"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="41546" end="41555" title="Queretaro" label="Queretaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="41733" end="41739" title="Zócalo" label="Zocalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="41779" end="41794" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126272" start="41850" end="41908" title="Palace of the Inquisition (Museum of Mexican Medicine)" label="Palace of the Inquisition (now Museum of Mexican Medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141799" start="41924" end="41931" title="Texcoco, Mexico State" label="Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="41998" end="42006" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q643026" start="42008" end="42018" title="Xochimilco" label="Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308578" start="42020" end="42033" title="San Mateo Mexicaltzingo" label="Mexicaltzingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q408187" start="42038" end="42045" title="Tlalpan" label="Tlalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="42120" end="42147" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="42383" end="42403" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="42590" end="42597" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208980" start="42696" end="42709" title="Pedro María de Anaya" label="General Anaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q645293" start="43043" end="43053" title="Cuauhtémoc, Mexico City" label="Cuauhtémoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832732" start="43055" end="43069" title="Miguel Hidalgo, Mexico City" label="Miguel Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832464" start="43071" end="43090" title="Venustiano Carranza, Mexico City" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356998" start="43095" end="43108" title="Benito Juárez, Mexico City" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="43641" end="43663" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="Constitution of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44844" end="44856" title=":es:Constitución Política de la Ciudad de México" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056909" start="44995" end="45013" title="List of mayors of Mexico City" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867085" start="45034" end="45054" title="Congress of Mexico City" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484825" start="45079" end="45100" title="Congress of Mexico" label="Congress of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="45148" end="45159" title="government debt" label="public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668478" start="45687" end="45705" title="abortion in Mexico" label="abortion in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="45953" end="45970" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="46415" end="46424" title="plurality voting system" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="46588" end="46611" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356998" start="46793" end="46806" title="Benito Juarez, Mexico City" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832732" start="46871" end="46885" title="Miguel Hidalgo, Mexico City" label="Miguel Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="46948" end="46956" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q762749" start="47004" end="47014" title="Cuajimalpa" label="Cuajimalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q645293" start="47023" end="47033" title="Cuauhtémoc, Mexico City" label="Cuauhtémoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q994867" start="47046" end="47058" title="Azcapotzalco" label="Azcapotzalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q643026" start="47167" end="47177" title="Xochimilco" label="Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q408181" start="47187" end="47194" title="Tláhuac" label="Tláhuac"/>
<link wikidata="Q741771" start="47208" end="47218" title="Iztapalapa" label="Iztapalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q936087" start="47442" end="47452" title="Milpa Alta" label="Milpa Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923459" start="48004" end="48016" title="Public order crime" label="public order"/>
<link wikidata="Q60700696" start="48345" end="48371" title="Attorney General of Mexico" label="Attorney General of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396586" start="48921" end="48935" title="Marcelo Ebrard" label="Marcelo Ebrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135310" start="49198" end="49213" title="security camera" label="security camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342425" start="49864" end="49872" title="femicide" label="femicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034269" start="50080" end="50097" title="street harassment" label="street harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="50266" end="50283" title="sexual harassment" label="sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="50331" end="50338" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582862" start="50348" end="50353" title="Cusco" label="Cusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="50368" end="50374" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="50392" end="50398" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="50413" end="50418" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238" start="50436" end="50447" title="Tegucigalpa" label="Tegucigalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114984" start="50466" end="50490" title="San Antonio de los Baños" label="San Antonio de los Baños"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055715" start="50505" end="50519" title="Cerro, Havana" label="Cerro (Havana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="50534" end="50542" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="50563" end="50575" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="50595" end="50601" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="50617" end="50628" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="50652" end="50657" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="50673" end="50680" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="50696" end="50704" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="50721" end="50732" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="50749" end="50756" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="50844" end="50857" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="50912" end="50934" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="50963" end="50986" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055054" start="51024" end="51035" title="international rankings of South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q986194" start="51131" end="51148" title="disposable and discretionary income" label="disposable income"/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="51267" end="51279" title="luxury goods" label="luxury goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="51320" end="51323" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PwC"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="51682" end="51696" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="51949" end="51974" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="52105" end="52140" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="52303" end="52318" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832339" start="52572" end="52592" title="Traditional fixed markets in Mexico" label="fixed indoor markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943868" start="52597" end="52634" title="tianguis" label="mobile markets (&amp;quot;tianguis&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088981" start="52641" end="52655" title="Street vendors in Mexico City" label="street vendors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="52912" end="52925" title="big-box store" label="big-box store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943868" start="52977" end="52985" title="tianguis" label="tianguis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062089" start="53184" end="53201" title="Central de Abasto" label="Central de Abasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q741771" start="53251" end="53261" title="Iztapalapa" label="Iztapalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464186" start="53603" end="53616" title="La Nueva Viga Market" label="La Nueva Viga"/>
<link wikidata="Q932570" start="53694" end="53700" title="Tepito" label="Tepito"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694505" start="54259" end="54272" title="aguas frescas" label="aguas frescas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312651" start="54277" end="54282" title="atole" label="atole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777844" start="54985" end="55013" title="San Felipe de Jesús Tianguis" label="San Felipe de Jesús Tianguis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="55067" end="55097" title="Historic Center of Mexico City" label="Historic Center of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="55556" end="55586" title="Historic center of Mexico City" label="Historic center of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q643026" start="55658" end="55668" title="Xochimilco" label="Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="55712" end="55731" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="55736" end="55742" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="55789" end="55813" title="Zócalo" label="Plaza de la Constitución"/>
<link wikidata="Q610961" start="55887" end="55909" title="Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517884" start="55914" end="55929" title="National Palace (Mexico)" label="National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q774021" start="55958" end="55970" title="Templo Mayor" label="Templo Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q928541" start="56224" end="56245" title="Angel of Independence" label="Angel of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478843" start="56274" end="56293" title="Paseo de la Reforma" label="Paseo de la Reforma"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="56331" end="56351" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="56362" end="56376" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517884" start="56498" end="56513" title="National Palace (Mexico)" label="National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="56544" end="56565" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Castle of Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q891559" start="56658" end="56680" title="Mexican Stock Exchange" label="Mexican Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530704" start="56693" end="56715" title="corporate headquarters" label="corporate headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q790502" start="56761" end="56787" title="Avenida de los Insurgentes" label="Avenida de los Insurgentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q523194" start="56859" end="56870" title="Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="56887" end="56905" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Chapultepec Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q524249" start="57019" end="57050" title="Museo Nacional de Antropología" label="National Museum of Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q786806" start="57069" end="57089" title="Aztec calendar stone" label="Aztec Calendar Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139081" start="57130" end="57153" title="Palacio de Bellas Artes" label="Palacio de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="57317" end="57330" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="57381" end="57399" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851912" start="57419" end="57445" title="Plaza de las Tres Culturas" label="Plaza de las Tres Culturas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477757" start="57478" end="57513" title="Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco" label="College of Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780184" start="57523" end="57543" title="List of oldest buildings in the Americas" label="the first and oldest"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="57586" end="57594" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623034" start="57630" end="57654" title="Tlatelolco (archaeological site)" label="city-state of Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q305419" start="57675" end="57708" title="Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe" label="Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="57746" end="57763" title="double-decker bus" label="double-decker bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="57994" end="58001" title="museums" label="museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q207694" start="58086" end="58099" title="art museum" label="art galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="58113" end="58126" title="List of concert halls" label="concert halls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58244" end="58276" title="National Institute of Cardiology" label="National Institute of Cardiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="58301" end="58313" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="58331" end="58342" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="58352" end="58360" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="58461" end="58473" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="58590" end="58598" title="hacienda" label="hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q860559" start="58776" end="58809" title="Mexico City International Airport" label="Mexico City International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="58849" end="58866" title="International Air Transport Association airport code" label="IATA Airport Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q381563" start="58899" end="58909" title="Aeroméxico" label="Aeroméxico"/>
<link wikidata="Q212282" start="58911" end="58918" title="SkyTeam" label="Skyteam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721568" start="58921" end="58957" title="Felipe Ángeles International Airport" label="Felipe Ángeles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="58959" end="58976" title="International Air Transport Association airport code" label="IATA Airport Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115965" start="59117" end="59125" title="Zumpango" label="Zumpango"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="59127" end="59142" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="59167" end="59197" title="historic center of Mexico City" label="historic center of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9020185" start="59276" end="59287" title="Lance Wyman" label="Lance Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781949" start="59408" end="59438" title="Movilidad Integrada" label="Sistema de Movilidad Integrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771800" start="59519" end="59536" title="Claudia Sheinbaum" label="Claudia Sheinbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q735042" start="59697" end="59714" title="Mexico City Metro" label="Mexico City Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="59718" end="59723" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437031" start="59847" end="59859" title="List of Mexico City metro stations" label="195 stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621240" start="59957" end="59971" title="Tren Suburbano" label="Tren Suburbano"/>
<link wikidata="Q735042" start="60026" end="60031" title="Mexico City Metro" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q845307" start="60081" end="60093" title="Tlalnepantla de Baz" label="Tlalnepantla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321216" start="60098" end="60116" title="Cuautitlán Izcalli, Mexico State" label="Cuautitlán Izcalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962104" start="60162" end="60168" title="Chalco de Díaz Covarrubias" label="Chalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276224" start="60173" end="60179" title="Los Reyes Acaquilpan" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845243" start="60258" end="60280" title="Trolleybuses in Mexico City" label="Mexico City trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576140" start="60296" end="60317" title="Xochimilco Light Rail" label="Xochimilco Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9076469" start="60354" end="60388" title="Servicio de Transportes Eléctricos" label="Servicio de Transportes Eléctricos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="60419" end="60428" title="Tram" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="60453" end="60460" title=":es:Tranvía" label="tranvía"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="60567" end="60584" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="60590" end="60602" title="trolleybuses" label="trolleybuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506547" start="60782" end="60796" title="Hoy No Circula" label="Hoy No Circula"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="61012" end="61026" title="Vehicle registration plate" label="license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5817067" start="61173" end="61180" title="Ecobici (Mexico City)" label="Ecobici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="61218" end="61240" title="bicycle sharing system" label="bicycle sharing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="61508" end="61523" title="Historic center of Mexico City" label="Historic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q785318" start="61527" end="61534" title="Polanco (Mexico)" label="Polanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="62083" end="62103" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="62107" end="62126" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="Charles IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374668" start="62241" end="62253" title="Manuel Tolsá" label="Manuel Tolsá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62284" end="62295" title="Plaza Tolsá" label="Plaza Tolsá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431087" start="62313" end="62331" title="Palacio de Mineria" label="Palacio de Mineria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138147" start="62391" end="62413" title="Museo Nacional de Arte" label="Museo Nacional de Arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q337267" start="62514" end="62536" title="Academy of San Carlos" label="Academia de San Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885752" start="62662" end="62685" title="National School of Arts (UNAM)" label="National School of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q383092" start="62756" end="62766" title="art school" label="art school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940507" start="62892" end="62921" title="National Museum of San Carlos" label="National Museum of San Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q610971" start="62945" end="62963" title="José María Velasco Gómez" label="José María Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="63047" end="63060" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="63222" end="63243" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63248" end="63262" title="Manuel Manilla" label="Manuel Manilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="63420" end="63438" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="63443" end="63454" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="63455" end="63472" title="art movement" label="artistic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="63500" end="63505" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q332041" start="63541" end="63561" title="José Clemente Orozco" label="José Clemente Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="63563" end="63585" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="63590" end="63602" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517884" start="63672" end="63687" title="National Palace (Mexico)" label="National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139081" start="63696" end="63719" title="Palacio de Bellas Artes" label="Palacio de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="63721" end="63732" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289547" start="63938" end="63952" title="Dolores Olmedo" label="Dolores Olmedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38856" start="64234" end="64254" title="Mexican Hairless Dog" label="Mexican Hairless Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="64337" end="64347" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q711906" start="64514" end="64529" title="Leopoldo Méndez" label="Leopoldo Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64632" end="64657" title="Popular Graphics Workshop" label="Popular Graphics Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="64677" end="64688" title="Blue-collar worker" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="64773" end="64780" title="Catalonia" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235275" start="64789" end="64802" title="Remedios Varo" label="Remedios Varo"/>
<link wikidata="Q475650" start="64964" end="64980" title="José Luis Cuevas" label="José Luis Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="65187" end="65203" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q690790" start="65358" end="65371" title="Rufino Tamayo" label="Rufino Tamayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032842" start="65536" end="65557" title="Museo de Arte Moderno" label="Museo de Arte Moderno"/>
<link wikidata="Q352356" start="65660" end="65666" title="Gunther Gerzso" label="Gerzso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65790" end="65809" title="Carrillo Gil Museum" label="Carrillo Gil Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033782" start="65853" end="65891" title="Museo Universitario Arte Contemporáneo" label="Museo Universitario Arte Contemporáneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q723981" start="65923" end="65947" title="Teodoro González de León" label="Teodoro González de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097646" start="65980" end="65993" title="Museo Soumaya" label="Museo Soumaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q170419" start="66035" end="66046" title="Carlos Slim" label="Carlos Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q30755" start="66095" end="66100" title="Auguste Rodin" label="Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="66165" end="66169" title="Dalí" label="Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q301" start="66252" end="66260" title="El Greco" label="El Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18375262" start="66262" end="66271" title="Velázquez" label="Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="66273" end="66280" title="Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q182664" start="66285" end="66294" title="Canaletto" label="Canaletto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66423" end="66435" title="Museo Soumaya#Plaza Loreto" label="Plaza Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142722" start="66465" end="66480" title="Colección Júmex" label="Colección Júmex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375400" start="66550" end="66555" title="Jumex" label="Jumex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121208" start="66607" end="66615" title="San Cristóbal Ecatepec" label="Ecatepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="66675" end="66688" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297137" start="66809" end="66841" title="Colegio de San Ildefonso, Mexico City" label="Antiguo Colegio de San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138147" start="67029" end="67051" title="Museo Nacional de Arte" label="Museo Nacional de Arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="67236" end="67248" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q978135" start="67375" end="67392" title="Mexico City Blues" label="Mexico City Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="67430" end="67450" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q584381" start="67466" end="67478" title="Colonia Roma" label="Colonia Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033509" start="67838" end="67865" title="Memory and Tolerance Museum" label="Memory and Tolerance Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="68074" end="68079" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="68103" end="68113" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17561006" start="68266" end="68290" title="Mexico City Philharmonic" label="Mexico City Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410782" start="68339" end="68366" title="National Symphony Orchestra (Mexico)" label="National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139081" start="68391" end="68414" title="Palacio de Bellas Artes" label="Palacio de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="68430" end="68439" title="Fine art" label="Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="68459" end="68470" title="Art Nouveau" label="art nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="68496" end="68518" title="Orchestra" label="Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q541806" start="68568" end="68574" title="OFUNAM" label="OFUNAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68585" end="68611" title="Minería Symphony Orchestra" label="Minería Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68642" end="68661" title="Sala Nezahualcóyotl" label="Sala Nezahualcóyotl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68855" end="68883" title="Carlos Chávez Youth Symphony" label="Carlos Chávez Youth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254956" start="68889" end="68913" title="Cuarteto Latinoamericano" label="Cuarteto Latinoamericano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012600" start="68919" end="68938" title="New World Symphony Orchestra" label="New World Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68971" end="69002" title="National Polytechnical Symphony" label="National Polytechnical Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69011" end="69041" title="Bellas Artes Chamber Orchestra" label="Bellas Artes Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="69118" end="69133" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q286179" start="69256" end="69275" title="National Auditorium" label="National Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="69400" end="69415" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q599099" start="69458" end="69469" title="grand opera" label="grand opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="69504" end="69522" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446543" start="69711" end="69730" title="Teatro Metropolitan" label="Teatro Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q301937" start="69748" end="69771" title="Palacio de los Deportes" label="Palacio de los Deportes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347689" start="69800" end="69808" title="Foro Sol" label="Foro Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="69886" end="69902" title="Cirque du Soleil" label="Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69935" end="69949" title="Carpa Santa Fe" label="Carpa Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812900" start="69958" end="69966" title="Santa Fe (Mexico City)" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655372" start="70104" end="70118" title="Hard Rock Live" label="Hard Rock Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826206" start="70233" end="70255" title="Arena Ciudad de México" label="Arena Ciudad de México"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70381" end="70409" title="National Center for the Arts" label="National Center for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70571" end="70596" title="University Culture Center" label="University Culture Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495070" start="70629" end="70645" title="National Library of Mexico" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005964" start="70663" end="70695" title="Universum (UNAM)" label="Universum, Museo de las Ciencias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033782" start="70777" end="70814" title="Museo Universitario Arte Contemporáneo" label="University Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="70942" end="70969" title="Foreign minister" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294156" start="71027" end="71051" title="José Vasconcelos Library" label="José Vasconcelos Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060078" start="71179" end="71202" title="Papalote Museo del Niño" label="Papalote Museo del Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q523194" start="71318" end="71329" title="Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71340" end="71357" title="Museo Tecnológico" label="Museo Tecnológico"/>
<link wikidata="Q125261430" start="71363" end="71383" title="Aztlán Parque Urbano" label="Aztlán Parque Urbano"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="71388" end="71402" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562111" start="71419" end="71435" title="Six Flags México" label="Six Flags México"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505665" start="71500" end="71506" title="Ajusco" label="Ajusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="71605" end="71611" title="Zócalo" label="Zócalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="71643" end="71659" title="ice rink" label="ice skating rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q41116" start="71735" end="71745" title="Red Square" label="Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71881" end="71903" title="Muestra Internacional de Cine" label="International Showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686673" start="72008" end="72017" title="Cinépolis" label="Cinépolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333072" start="72022" end="72029" title="Cinemex" label="Cinemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q507619" start="72052" end="72067" title="chain store" label="business chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="72196" end="72200" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="72396" end="72400" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010259" start="72506" end="72515" title="taquerias" label="taquerias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838998" start="72702" end="72710" title="barbacoa" label="barbacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q876096" start="72737" end="72747" title="enchiladas" label="enchiladas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584732" start="72787" end="72795" title="gorditas" label="gorditas"/>
<link wikidata="Q515692" start="72984" end="72990" title="pozole" label="pozole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394051" start="73024" end="73030" title="hominy" label="hominy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="73051" end="73062" title="Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="73064" end="73071" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464186" start="73170" end="73190" title="La Nueva Viga Market" label="La Nueva Viga Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q859471" start="73251" end="73270" title="Tsukiji fish market" label="Tsukiji fish market"/>
<link wikidata="Q263359" start="73558" end="73572" title="Brasserie Lipp" label="Brasserie Lipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q125994144" start="73609" end="73618" title="Quintonil" label="Quintonil"/>
<link wikidata="Q130853" start="73676" end="73691" title="Plácido Domingo" label="Plácido Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="73715" end="73723" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345267" start="73735" end="73742" title="Suntory" label="Suntory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="73744" end="73751" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022759" start="73804" end="73817" title="Morton&amp;#x27;s Restaurant Group" label="Morton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755959" start="73822" end="73830" title="The Palm (restaurant)" label="The Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="73873" end="73877" title="Lima, Peru" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q249277" start="73885" end="73890" title="Haute cuisine" label="Haute"/>
<link wikidata="Q749847" start="73912" end="73928" title="Peruvian cuisine" label="Peruvian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918929" start="74027" end="74059" title="Restaurant (magazine) Top 50" label="World&amp;#x27;s 50 Best Restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q246400" start="74099" end="74109" title="Restaurant (magazine)" label="Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259065" start="74186" end="74191" title="Pujol (restaurant)" label="Pujol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562283" start="74215" end="74229" title="Enrique Olvera" label="Enrique Olvera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254739" start="74285" end="74289" title="Biko (restaurant)" label="Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q126089080" start="74531" end="74560" title="List of Michelin-starred restaurants in Mexico" label="seven restaurants in the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="74570" end="74584" title="Michelin stars" label="Michelin stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q511700" start="74634" end="74640" title="pulque" label="pulque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="74819" end="74834" title="publishing" label="book publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321495" start="74905" end="74917" title="El Universal (Mexico City)" label="El Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347987" start="74931" end="74940" title="Excélsior" label="Excélsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473369" start="74954" end="74961" title="Reforma (newspaper)" label="Reforma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496821" start="74978" end="74988" title="La Jornada" label="La Jornada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273191" start="75029" end="75036" title="Milenio" label="Milenio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191494" start="75050" end="75057" title="Crónica, Buenos Aires" label="Crónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324106" start="75071" end="75084" title="El Economista (Mexico)" label="El Economista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889009" start="75131" end="75138" title="Proceso (magazine)" label="Proceso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75152" end="75157" title="Poder" label="Poder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914894" start="75227" end="75236" title="Vanidades" label="Vanidades"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75250" end="75255" title="Quién (magazine)" label="Quién"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072693" start="75269" end="75277" title="Chilango" label="Chilango"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75291" end="75299" title="TVNotas" label="TV Notas"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="75335" end="75340" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="75354" end="75356" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q634937" start="75374" end="75394" title="Architectural Digest" label="Architectural Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23700481" start="75438" end="75458" title="advertising industry" label="advertising industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676726" start="75530" end="75533" title="J. Walter Thompson" label="JWT"/>
<link wikidata="Q326356" start="75535" end="75546" title="Leo Burnett" label="Leo Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664673" start="75548" end="75557" title="Euro RSCG" label="Euro RSCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q571438" start="75559" end="75563" title="BBDO" label="BBDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207680" start="75573" end="75594" title="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi" label="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779040" start="75600" end="75615" title="McCann Erickson" label="McCann Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161477" start="75672" end="75680" title="Alazraki" label="Alazraki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75682" end="75702" title="Olabuenaga/Chemistri" label="Olabuenaga/Chemistri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635827" start="75774" end="75788" title="List of radio stations in Mexico City" label="radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q490933" start="75820" end="75835" title="local community" label="local community"/>
<link wikidata="Q47099" start="75929" end="75937" title="Televisa" label="Televisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281055" start="75942" end="75951" title="TV Azteca" label="TV Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q47099" start="75987" end="75995" title="Televisa" label="Televisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="76077" end="76093" title="television channel" label="local television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104550" start="76113" end="76117" title="XHDF-TDT" label="XHDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149687" start="76134" end="76137" title="XEW-TDT" label="XEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q26438660" start="76154" end="76160" title="XHCTMX-TDT" label="XHCTMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q28905" start="76164" end="76168" title="XHTV-TDT" label="XHTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099000" start="76172" end="76176" title="XHGC-TDT" label="XHGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392269" start="76180" end="76186" title="XHTDMX-TDT" label="XHTDMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104561" start="76190" end="76195" title="XHIMT-TDT" label="XHIMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094517" start="76199" end="76202" title="XEQ-TDT" label="XEQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050762" start="76206" end="76211" title="XEIPN-TDT" label="XEIPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846104" start="76216" end="76222" title="XHUNAM-TDT" label="XHUNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110445" start="76227" end="76232" title="XHCDM-TDT" label="XHCDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041826" start="76237" end="76242" title="XEIMT-TDT" label="XEIMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104768" start="76247" end="76253" title="XHTRES-TDT" label="XHTRES"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104776" start="76258" end="76263" title="XHTVM-TDT" label="XHTVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090778" start="76271" end="76276" title="XHHCU-TDT" label="XHHCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="76297" end="76317" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q162402" start="76362" end="76388" title="Broadcasting of sports events" label="televised franchised sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q320454" start="76438" end="76452" title="Azteca Stadium" label="Azteca Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="76466" end="76495" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q459090" start="76507" end="76514" title="Club América" label="América"/>
<link wikidata="Q845859" start="76519" end="76528" title="Cruz Azul" label="Cruz Azul"/>
<link wikidata="Q767558" start="76610" end="76625" title="Estadio Olímpico Universitario" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130025" start="76629" end="76649" title="University City of Mexico" label="Ciudad Universitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143000" start="76686" end="76706" title="Club Universidad Nacional" label="Universidad Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="76715" end="76731" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369097" start="76752" end="76771" title="Estadio Ciudad de los Deportes" label="Sports City Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712478" start="76810" end="76840" title="World Trade Center Mexico City" label="World Trade Center Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148198" start="76859" end="76871" title="Colonia (Mexico)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q849949" start="76903" end="76910" title="Atlante F.C." label="Atlante"/>
<link wikidata="Q764690" start="76997" end="77011" title="Primera División de México" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q503321" start="77063" end="77089" title="Club Deportivo Guadalajara" label="Club Deportivo Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980458" start="77186" end="77199" title="Clásico Joven" label="Clásico Joven"/>
<link wikidata="Q935023" start="77313" end="77331" title="Clásico Capitalino" label="Clásico Capitalino"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="77492" end="77506" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="77510" end="77514" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="77519" end="77523" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020214" start="77659" end="77678" title="2026 FIFA World Cup" label="2026 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="77768" end="77783" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="77814" end="77826" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="77828" end="77832" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="77880" end="77898" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q911134" start="77954" end="77994" title="ICF Canoe Sprint World Championships" label="ICF Flatwater Racing World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="78030" end="78041" title="Lucha libre" label="Lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q641374" start="78169" end="78181" title="Arena México" label="Arena México"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251625" start="78186" end="78199" title="Arena Coliseo" label="Arena Coliseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173099" start="78206" end="78234" title="Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez" label="Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8109" start="78293" end="78311" title="Mexican Grand Prix" label="Mexican Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044632" start="78472" end="78489" title="Mexico City ePrix" label="Mexico City ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751410" start="78561" end="78570" title="Champ Car" label="Champ Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113887" start="78584" end="78605" title="Gran Premio de México" label="Gran Premio de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="78630" end="78636" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="78637" end="78654" title="Nationwide Series" label="Nationwide Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134505" start="78663" end="78689" title="Corona México 200" label="Telcel-Motorola México 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460640" start="78756" end="78764" title="Grand American Road Racing Association" label="Grand-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q766520" start="78765" end="78788" title="Rolex Sports Car Series" label="Rolex Sports Car Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047634" start="78947" end="78969" title="Diablos Rojos del México" label="Mexico City Red Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349768" start="78977" end="78991" title="Mexican League (baseball)" label="Mexican League"/>
<link wikidata="Q60830511" start="79093" end="79118" title="Estadio Alfredo Harp Helú" label="Estadio Alfredo Harp Helú"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483415" start="79192" end="79217" title="Francisco Gonzalez Pulido" label="Francisco Gonzalez Pulido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="79389" end="79392" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q320454" start="79450" end="79464" title="Estadio Azteca" label="Azteca Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="79622" end="79625" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q810304" start="79690" end="79716" title="FIBA Americas Championship" label="FIBA Americas Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347689" start="79791" end="79799" title="Foro Sol" label="Foro Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679786" start="79827" end="79838" title="Adam Silver" label="Adam Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="79872" end="79884" title="NBA G League" label="NBA G League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826206" start="80035" end="80052" title="Mexico City Arena" label="Mexico City Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535763" start="80058" end="80062" title="Liga Nacional de Baloncesto Profesional" label="LNBP"/>
<link wikidata="Q39081462" start="80069" end="80098" title="Capitanes de Ciudad de México" label="Capitanes de Ciudad de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q301937" start="80224" end="80247" title="Palacio de los Deportes" label="Palacio de los Deportes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484285" start="80262" end="80301" title="Alberca Olímpica Francisco Márquez" label="Francisco Márquez Olympic Swimming Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376677" start="80307" end="80332" title="Hipódromo de las Américas" label="Hipódromo de Las Américas"/>
<link wikidata="Q399314" start="80338" end="80370" title="Agustin Melgar Olympic Velodrome" label="Agustin Melgar Olympic Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="80431" end="80436" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q184940" start="80489" end="80501" title="Bullfighting" label="Bullfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525012" start="80573" end="80585" title="Plaza México" label="Plaza México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="80641" end="80652" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="80679" end="80683" title="LPGA" label="LPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="80700" end="80726" title="World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Golf World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754766" start="80825" end="80847" title="Cuisine of Mexico City" label="Cuisine of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850657" start="80850" end="80879" title="Gentrification of Mexico City" label="Gentrification of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863756" start="80882" end="80912" title="Barrios Mágicos of Mexico City" label="Barrios Mágicos of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q485087" start="80915" end="80952" title="Large Cities Climate Leadership Group" label="Large Cities Climate Leadership Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489234" start="80955" end="80985" title="Largest cities in the Americas" label="Largest cities in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201456" start="80988" end="81016" title="Metropolitan areas of Mexico" label="Metropolitan areas of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191907" start="81019" end="81036" title="Outline of Mexico" label="Outline of Mexico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18989" wikidata="Q213338" url="?curid=18989" title="Merlot">
<text>Merlot ( ) is a dark blue–colored wine grape variety that is used as both a blending grape and for varietal wines. The name &quot;Merlot&quot; is thought to be a diminutive of , the French name for the blackbird, probably a reference to the color of the grape. Its softness and &quot;fleshiness,&quot; combined with its earlier ripening, make Merlot a popular grape for blending with the sterner, later-ripening Cabernet Sauvignon, which tends to be higher in tannin.

Along with Cabernet Sauvignon, Cabernet Franc, Malbec, and Petit Verdot, Merlot is one of the primary grapes used in Bordeaux wine, and it is the most widely planted grape in the Bordeaux wine regions. Merlot is also one of the most popular red wine varietals in many markets. This flexibility has helped to make it one of the world&#x27;s most planted grape varieties. As of 2004, Merlot was estimated to be the third most grown variety at globally.
The area dedicated to Merlot has continued to increase, with in 2015.

While Merlot is made across the globe, there tend to be two main styles. The &quot;International style&quot; favored by many New World wine regions tends to emphasize late harvesting to gain physiological ripeness and produce inky, purple-colored wines that are full in body with high alcohol and lush, velvety tannins with hints of plum and blackberry. While this international style is practiced by many Bordeaux wine producers, the traditional &quot;Bordeaux style&quot; of Merlot involves harvesting Merlot earlier. This maintains the acidity and produces more medium-bodied wines with moderate alcohol levels that have fresh, red fruit flavors (raspberries, strawberries) and potentially leafy, vegetal notes.

== History and name ==

The earliest recorded mention of Merlot (under the synonym of &quot;Merlau&quot;) was in the notes of a local Bordeaux official who in 1784 labeled wine made from the grape in the Libournais region as one of the area&#x27;s best. In 1824, the word &quot;Merlot&quot; itself appeared in an article on Médoc wine which mentioned that the grape was named after the local black bird (called in the local variant of Occitan language, in standard French) who liked eating the ripe grapes on the vine. Other descriptions of the grape from the 19th century called the variety &quot;lou seme doù flube&quot; (meaning &quot;the seedling from the river&quot;) with the grape thought to have originated on one of the islands found along the Garonne river.

By the 19th century it was being regularly planted in the Médoc on the &quot;Left Bank&quot; of the Gironde. After a series of setbacks that included a severe frost in 1956 and several vintages in the 1960s lost to rot, French authorities in Bordeaux banned new plantings of Merlot vines between 1970 and 1975.

It was first recorded in Italy around Venice under the synonym &quot;Bordò&quot; in 1855. The grape was introduced to the Swiss, from Bordeaux, sometime in the 19th century and was recorded in the Swiss canton of Ticino between 1905 and 1910. In the 1990s, Merlot saw an upswing of popularity in the United States. Red wine consumption, in general, increased in the US following the airing of the &quot;60 Minutes&quot; report on the French Paradox and the potential health benefits of wine and, possibly, the chemical resveratrol. The popularity of Merlot stemmed in part from the relative ease in pronouncing the name of the wine as well as its softer, fruity profile that made it more approachable to some wine drinkers.

=== Parentage and relationship to other grapes ===

In the late 1990s, researchers at the University of California, Davis, showed that Merlot is an offspring of Cabernet Franc and is a half-sibling of Carménère, Malbec, and Cabernet Sauvignon. The identity of the second parent of Merlot wouldn&#x27;t be discovered till the late 2000s when an obscure and unnamed variety, first sampled in 1996 from vines growing in an abandoned vineyard in Saint-Suliac in Brittany, was shown by DNA analysis to be the mother of Merlot.

This grape, later discovered in front of houses as a decorative vine in the villages of Figers, Mainxe, Saint-Savinien, and Tanzac in the Poitou-Charentes, was colloquially known as &quot;Madeleina&quot; or &quot;Raisin de La Madeleine&quot; due to its propensity to be fully ripe and ready for harvest around the July 22nd feast day of Mary Magdalene. As the connection to Merlot became known, the grape was formally registered under the name Magdeleine Noire des Charentes. Through its relationship with Magdeleine Noire des Charentes, Merlot is related to the Southwest France wine grape Abouriou, though the exact nature of that relationship (with Abouriou potentially being either a parent of Magdeleine Noire or an offspring) is not yet known.

Grape breeders have used Merlot crossed with other grapes to create several new varieties including Carmine (an Olmo grape made by crossing a Carignan x Cabernet Sauvignon cross with Merlot), Ederena (with Abouriou), Evmolpia (with Mavrud), Fertilia (with Raboso Veronese), Mamaia (a Romanian wine grape made by crossing a Muscat Ottonel x Babeasca negra cross with Merlot), Nigra (with Barbera), Prodest (with Barbera), and Rebo (with Teroldego).

Over the years, Merlot has spawned a color mutation that is used commercially, a pink-skinned variety known as &quot;Merlot gris&quot;. However, unlike the relationship between Grenache noir and Grenache blanc or Pinot noir and Pinot blanc, the variety known as Merlot blanc is not a color mutation but rather an offspring variety of Merlot crossing with Folle blanche.

== Viticulture ==

Merlot grapes are identified by their loose bunches of large berries. The color has less of a blue/black hue than Cabernet Sauvignon grapes and with a thinner skin and fewer tannins per unit volume. It normally ripens up to two weeks earlier than Cabernet Sauvignon. Also compared to Cabernet, Merlot grapes tend to have a higher sugar content and lower malic acid. Ampelographer J.M. Boursiquot has noted that Merlot has seemed to inherit some of the best characteristics from its parent varieties—its fertility and easy ripening ability from Magdeleine Noire des Charentes and its color, tannin and flavor phenolic potential from Cabernet Franc.

Merlot thrives in cold soil, particularly ferrous clay. The vine tends to bud early which gives it some risk to cold frost and its thinner skin increases its susceptibility to the viticultural hazard of Botrytis bunch rot. If bad weather occurs during flowering, the Merlot vine is prone to develop coulure. The vine can also be susceptible to downy mildew (though it has better resistance to powdery mildew than other Bordeaux varieties) and to infection by leafhopper insect varieties.

Water stress is important to the vine with it thriving in well-drained soil more so than at base of a slope. Pruning is a major component to the quality of the wine that is produced with some producers believing it is best to prune the vine &quot;short&quot; (cutting back to only a few buds). Wine consultant Michel Rolland is a major proponent of reducing the yields of Merlot grapes to improve quality. The age of the vine is also important, with older vines contributing character to the resulting wine.

A characteristic of the Merlot grape is the propensity to quickly overripen once it hits its initial ripeness level, sometimes in a matter of a few days. There are two schools of thought on the right time to harvest Merlot. The wine makers of Château Pétrus favor early picking to best maintain the wine&#x27;s acidity and finesse as well as its potential for aging. Others, such as Rolland, favor late picking and the added fruit body that comes with a little bit of over-ripeness.

== Wine regions ==
Merlot is one of the world&#x27;s most widely planted grape variety with plantings of the vine outpacing even the more well-known Cabernet Sauvignon in many regions, including the grape&#x27;s homeland of France. Here, France is home to nearly two thirds of the world&#x27;s total plantings of Merlot. Beyond France it is also grown in Italy (where it is the country&#x27;s 5th most planted grape), Algeria, California, Romania, Australia, Argentina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Greece, New Zealand, South Africa, Switzerland, Croatia, Hungary, Montenegro, Slovenia, Mexico, and other parts of the United States such as Washington, Virginia, and Long Island. It grows in many regions that also grow Cabernet Sauvignon but tends to be cultivated in the cooler portions of those areas. In areas that are too warm, Merlot will ripen too early.

In places like Israel, Merlot is the second most widely planted grape variety after Cabernet Sauvignon with in cultivation, making very &quot;New World-style&quot; wines. The grape can also be found in Turkey ( in 2010), Malta, and Cyprus.

=== France ===

Merlot is the most commonly grown grape variety in France. In 2004, total French plantations stood at . By 2017, that number had dropped slightly to . It is most prominent in Southwest France in regions like Bordeaux, Bergerac, and Cahors, where it is often blended with Malbec. The largest recent increase in Merlot plantations has occurred in the south of France, such as Languedoc-Roussillon, where it is often made under the designation of &quot;Vin de Pays&quot; wine. Here, Merlot accounted for , more than doubling the devoted to Cabernet Sauvignon in the Languedoc.

In the traditional Bordeaux blend, Merlot&#x27;s role is to add body and softness. Despite accounting for 50-60% of overall plantings in Bordeaux, the grape tends to account for an average of 25% of the blends—especially in the Bordeaux wine regions of Graves and Médoc. Of these Left Bank regions, the commune of St-Estephe uses the highest percentage of Merlot in the blends. However, Merlot is much more prominent on the Right Bank of the Gironde in the regions of Pomerol and Saint-Émilion, where it will commonly comprise the majority of the blend. One of the most famous and rare wines in the world, Château Pétrus, is almost all Merlot. In Pomerol, where Merlot usually accounts for around 80% of the blend, the iron-clay soils of the region give Merlot more of a tannic backbone than what is found in other Bordeaux regions. It was in Pomerol that the &quot;garagistes&quot; movement began with small-scale production of highly sought after Merlot-based wines. In the sandy, clay-limestone-based soils of Saint-Émilion, Merlot accounts for around 60% of the blend and is usually blended with Cabernet Franc. In limestone, Merlot tends to develop more perfume notes while in sandy soils the wines are generally softer than Merlot grown in clay dominant soils. Merlot can also be found in significant quantities in Provence, Loire Valley, Savoie, Ardèche, Charente, Corrèze, Drôme, Isère and Vienne.

=== Italy ===
In Italy, there were of the grape planted in 2000 with more than two-thirds of Italian Merlot being used in &quot;Indicazione geografica tipica&quot; (IGT) blends (such as the so-called &quot;Super Tuscans&quot;) versus being used in classified &quot;Denominazione di origine controllata&quot; (DOC) or &quot;Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita&quot; (DOCG) wines. A large portion of Merlot is planted in the Friuli wine region where it is made as a varietal or sometimes blended with Cabernet Sauvignon or Cabernet Franc. In other parts of Italy, such as the Maremma coast in Tuscany, it is often blended with Sangiovese to give the wine a similar softening effect as the Bordeaux blends.

Italian Merlots are often characterized by their light bodies and herbal notes. Merlot&#x27;s low acidity serves as a balance for the higher acidity in many Italian wine grapes with the grape often being used in blends in the Veneto, Alto Adige, and Umbria regions. Global warming is potentially having an influence on Italian Merlot as more cooler-climate regions in northern Italy are being able to ripen the grape successfully while other regions already planted are encountering issues with over-ripeness.

According to Master of Wine Jancis Robinson, some of the higher quality Italian Merlots are often from vineyards planted with cuttings sourced from France. Robinson describes the style of Friuli Merlots from regarded estates as having potentially a &quot;Pomerol-quality&quot; to them while Merlots from the warm plains of the Veneto can often be over-ripe with high yields giving them a &quot;sweet and sour&quot; quality. Robinson notes that the Merlots from Trentino-Alto-Adige can fall somewhere between those of Friuli and the Veneto. The &quot;Strada del Merlot&quot; is a popular tourist route through Italian Merlot regions along the Isonzo river.

=== Spain ===
In the hot continental climate of many of Spain&#x27;s major wine regions, Merlot is less valued than it is in the damp maritime climate of Bordeaux or the warm Mediterranean climate of the Tuscan coast. But as the popularity of international varieties continue to grow on the world wine market, Spanish wine producers have been experimenting with the variety with even winemakers in Rioja petitioning authorities to allow Merlot to be a permitted grape to be blended with Tempranillo in the red wines of the region.

In 2008, there were of Merlot, a significant increase from the that were being cultivated in the country only four years earlier. In 2015, this had dropped slightly to , making Merlot the eighth most planted red grape variety in Spain. The largest concentration of the grape is in the Mediterranean climate of Catalonia and the continental climate of Castilla–La Mancha, with significant plantings also in Navarra and Aragon. In Costers del Segre, the grape is often used in Bordeaux-style blends while in Aragon, Navarra, and Castilla-La Mancha it is sometimes blended with Tempranillo and other local Spanish wine grape varieties.

=== Central Europe ===
In Germany, there were of Merlot growing in 2008 with the grape mostly planted in the warmer German wine regions of the Palatinate and Rheinhessen.

In Switzerland, Merlot accounts for nearly 85% of the wine production in Ticino where it is often made in a pale &quot;white Merlot&quot; style. In 2009, there were plantings of Swiss Merlot.

Plantings of Merlot have increased in recent years in the Austrian wine region of Burgenland where vineyards previously growing Welschriesling are being uprooted to make room for more plantings. The grape still lags behind its parent variety, Cabernet Franc, with in cultivation in 2008. Outside of Burgenland, nearly half of all Austrian Merlot plantings are found in Lower Austria.

=== Rest of Europe ===
In the Eastern European countries of Bulgaria, Moldova, Croatia, and Romania, Merlot is often produced as a full bodied wine that can be very similar to Cabernet Sauvignon. In Bulgaria, plantings of Merlot lag slightly behind Cabernet Sauvignon with in 2009 while Croatia had . In the Czech Republic, most of the country&#x27;s were found in Moravia while Moldova had in 2009.

In Slovenia, Merlot was the most widely planted grape variety of any color in the Vipava Valley in the Slovene Littoral and the second most widely planted variety in the Gorizia Hills located across the Italian border from Friuli. In the Slovene Littoral, collectively, Merlot accounts for around 15% of total vineyard plantings with of Merlot in cultivation across Slovenia in 2009.

In Hungary, Merlot complements Kékfrankos, Kékoportó, and Kadarka as a component in Bull&#x27;s Blood. It is also made into varietal wine known as &quot;Egri Médoc Noir&quot; which is noted for its balanced acid levels and sweet taste. In 2009, there were of Merlot planted across Hungary. Most of these hectares can be found in the wine regions of Szekszárd and Villány on the warm Pannonian Basin with significant plantings also found in Kunság, Eger, and Balaton.

In Romania, Merlot is the most widely exported red wine grape variety with in cultivation in 2008. Most of these plantings are found along the Black Sea in Dobruja, further inland in the Muntenia region of Dealu Mare and in the western Romanian wine region of Drăgășani. Here the grape is often made a varietal but is sometimes blended with other international varieties such as Cabernet Sauvignon and with local grape varieties such as Fetească neagră.

In 2009, Ukraine had of Merlot in cultivation.

Russia had .

Portugal, has only a very limited amount of Merlot compared to the abundance of native Portuguese grape varieties with planted in 2010, mostly in the Portuguese wine regions along the Tagus river.

In Greece, Merlot is one of the top six grape varieties planted in the eastern wine regions of Macedonia ()and Western Thrace (). In central Greece, there were of Merlot in cultivation as of 2012.

=== United States ===
Merlot is grown across the United States—as of 2015, it is the fourth most planted wine grape—with California and Washington growing the most. Other regions producing significant quantities of Merlot include New York State with in 2006 with most of it in the maritime climate of the Long Island AVA and multiple regions in Ohio. In Texas, Merlot is the second most widely planted red wine grape after Cabernet Sauvignon with . In Virginia, the grape was the most widely planted red variety with in 2010, most of it in the Monticello AVA and Shenandoah Valley AVA, while Oregon had in 2008 with most planted in the Rogue Valley AVA.

==== California ====

In the early history of California wine, Merlot was used primarily as a 100% varietal wine until winemaker Warren Winiarski encouraged taking the grape back to its blending roots with Bordeaux style blends. Others saw its potential as a stand-alone labeled varietal: The first wineries to market Merlot as a varietal in the post WWII period were Louis M. Martini winery, which made a non-vintage dated Merlot, a blend of the 1968 and 1970 vintages, and Sterling Vineyards, which issued the first Merlot with a vintage, 1969 —Sterling&#x27;s winemaker, Ric Forman, was an early advocate of Merlot as a varietal bottling. Following the &quot;Merlot wine craze&quot; of the 1990s, sparked by &quot;60 Minutes&quot; French Paradox report, sales of Merlot spiked, with the grape plantings of over in 2004. A study published in &quot;Wine and Vines&quot; magazine indicated that the 2004 movie &quot;Sideways&quot;, where the lead character is a Pinot noir fan who expresses his disdain of Merlot, caused a decline in Merlot sales in the US after its release (and an even larger spike of interest in Pinot noir). By 2010, plantings of California Merlot had dropped slightly to . Following that dip, Merlot plantings rebounded, totaling approximately 39,000 acres in 2020.

In California, Merlot can range from very fruity simple wines (sometimes referred to by critics as a &quot;red Chardonnay&quot;) to more serious, barrel aged examples. It can also be used as a primary component in Meritage blends.

While Merlot is grown throughout the state, it is particularly prominent in Napa, Monterey, and Sonoma County. In Napa, examples from Los Carneros, Mount Veeder, Oakville and Rutherford tend to show ripe blackberry and black raspberry notes. Sonoma Merlots from Alexander Valley, Carneros and Dry Creek Valley tend to show plum, tea leaf, and black cherry notes.

==== Washington State ====
In the 1980s, Merlot helped put the Washington wine industry on the world&#x27;s wine map. Prior to this period there was a general perception that the climate of Washington State was too cold to produce red wine varietals. Merlots from Leonetti Cellar, Andrew Will, Columbia Crest, and Chateau Ste. Michelle demonstrated that areas of the Eastern Washington were warm enough for red wine production. Today it is the second most widely grown red wine grape in the state (after Cabernet Sauvignon), following many years of being the most widely planted variety, and accounts for nearly one fifth of the state&#x27;s entire production. In 2011, there were of Washington Merlot in cultivation.
It is widely planted throughout the Columbia Valley AVA but has earned particular notice from plantings grown in Walla Walla, Red Mountain, and the Horse Heaven Hills. Washington Merlots are noted for their deep color and balanced acidity. The state&#x27;s climate lends itself towards long days and hours of sunshine with cool nights that contributes to a significant diurnal temperature variation and produces wines with New World fruitiness and Old World structure.

=== Canada ===
In Canada, Merlot can be found across the country from the Short Hills Bench of the Niagara Peninsula Ontario, where there were of the grape in 2008, to British Columbia, where the grape is the most widely planted wine grape variety of either color at . Here Merlot accounts for almost a third of all red wine grape plantings and is used for both varietal and Bordeaux-style blends.

=== Mexico ===
In Mexico, Merlot is cultivated primarily in the Valle de Guadalupe of Baja California, the country&#x27;s main wine-producing area. Plantings have increased substantially since the 1980s, and cultivation has spread into the nearby areas of Ojos Negros and Santo Tomás. The grape can also be found in the north eastern Mexican wine region of Coahuila, across the border from Texas.

=== Chile ===
In Chile, Merlot thrives in the Apalta region of Colchagua Province. It is also grown in significant quantities in Curicó, Casablanca, and the Maipo Valley. Until the early 1990s, the Chilean wine industry mistakenly sold a large quantity of wine made from the Carménère grape as Merlot. Following the discovery that many Chilean vineyards thought to be planted with Sauvignon blanc were actually Sauvignonasse, the owners of the Chilean winery Domaine Paul Bruno (who previously worked with Château Margaux and Château Cos d&#x27;Estournel) invited ampelographers to comb through their vineyards to make sure that their wines were properly identified. Genetic studies discovered that much of what had been grown as Merlot was actually Carménère, an old French variety that had gone largely extinct in France due to its poor resistance to phylloxera. While the vines, leaves, and grapes look very similar, both grapes produce wines with distinct characteristics—Carménère being more strongly flavored with green pepper notes and Merlot having softer fruit with chocolate notes.

Today, &quot;true&quot; Merlot is the third most widely planted grape variety in Chile after Cabernet Sauvignon and Listán Prieto with in 2009. Most of these planting are in the Central Valley, with Colchagua leading the way with , followed by Maule Valley with and Curicó with .

=== South America ===
In Uruguay, Merlot is often blended with Tannat and is the 2nd most widely planted red grape variety, representing around 10% of total vineyard plantings. More widely planted than Cabernet Sauvignon, there were of the grape in cultivation in 2009. Brazil is home to of Merlot (as of 2007) with most of them in the Rio Grande do Sul region that is across the border with Uruguay. Other South American wine regions growing Merlot include Bolivia with as of 2012 and Peru.

=== Argentina ===
In Argentina, Merlot plantings have been increasing in the Mendoza region with the grape showing an affinity to the Tupungato region of the Uco Valley. Argentine Merlots grown in the higher elevations of Tunpungato have shown a balance of ripe fruit, tannic structure, and acidity. The grape is not as widely planted here due to the natural fruity and fleshiness of the popular Malbec and Douce noir/Bonarda grapes that often don&#x27;t need to be &quot;mellowed&quot; by Merlot as Cabernet Sauvignon and Cabernet Franc may benefit from. In 2008, there were of Merlot growing in Argentina, most of it in the Mendoza region and in the San Juan Province.

=== Oceania, South Africa, and Asia ===
In New Zealand, plantings of Merlot have increased in the Hawke&#x27;s Bay region, particularly in Gimblett Gravels where the grape has shown the ability to produce Bordeaux-style wine. The grape has been growing in favor among New Zealand producers due to its ability to ripen better, with less green flavors, than Cabernet Sauvignon. Other regions with significant plantings include Auckland, Marlborough, and Martinborough. In 2008, Merlot was the second most widely red grape variety (after Pinot noir) in New Zealand and accounted for nearly 5% of all the country&#x27;s plantings with in cultivation.

In Australia, some vineyards labeled as &quot;Merlot&quot; were discovered to actually be Cabernet Franc. Merlot vines can also be found growing in the Barossa Valley, McLaren Vale, and Wrattonbully in South Australia. In 2008, it was the third most widely planted red grape variety after Syrah and Cabernet Sauvignon with . As in California, the global &quot;Merlot craze&quot; spurred an increase of plantings, most of it in the warm, irrigated regions of Murray Darling, Riverina, and Riverland, where the grape variety could be mass-produced. Recent plantings, such as those in the Margaret River area of Western Australia have been focusing on making more Bordeaux-style blends.

In South Africa, plantings of Merlot have focused on cooler sites within the Paarl and Stellenbosch regions. Here the grape is the third most widely planted red grape variety, accounting for nearly 15% of all red wine grape plantings, with of Merlot in cultivation in 2008. The majority of these plantings are found in the Stellenbosch region with and Paarl with . According to wine expert Jancis Robinson, South African Merlot tend to be made as a varietal in a &quot;chocolately, glossy California style&quot;.

In Asia, Merlot is planted in emerging wine regions in India. It can also be found in Japan with in 2009 and in China with .

== Wines ==
As a varietal wine, Merlot can make soft, velvety wines with plum flavors. While Merlot wines tend to mature faster than Cabernet Sauvignon, some examples can continue to develop in the bottle for decades. There are three main styles of Merlot—a soft, fruity, smooth wine with very little tannins; a fruity wine with more tannic structure; and, finally, a brawny, highly tannic style made in the profile of Cabernet Sauvignon. Some of the fruit notes commonly associated with Merlot include cassis, black and red cherries, blackberry, blueberry, boysenberry, mulberry, ollalieberry, and plum. Vegetable and earthy notes include black and green olives, cola nut, bell pepper, fennel, humus, leather, mushrooms, rhubarb, and tobacco. Floral and herbal notes commonly associated with Merlot include green and black tea, eucalyptus, laurel, mint, oregano, pine, rosemary, sage, sarsaparilla, and thyme. When Merlot has spent significant time in oak, the wine may show notes of caramel, chocolate, coconut, coffee bean, dill weed, mocha, molasses, smoke, vanilla, and walnut.

=== White Merlot ===
White Merlot is made the same way as White Zinfandel. The grapes are crushed, and after very brief skin contact, the resulting pink juice is run off the must and is then fermented. It normally has a hint of raspberry. White Merlot was reputedly first marketed in the late 1990s. In Switzerland, a type of White Merlot is made in the Ticino region but has been considered more a rosé.

White Merlot should not be confused with the grape variety Merlot blanc, which is a cross between Merlot and Folle blanche that was discovered in 1891, nor should it be confused with the white mutant variety of the Merlot grape.

== Food pairing ==
In food and wine pairings, the diversity of Merlot can lend itself to a wide array of matching options. Cabernet-like Merlots pair well with many of the same things that Cabernet Sauvignon would pair well with, such as grilled and charred meats. Softer, fruitier Merlots (particularly those with higher acidity from cooler climate regions like Washington State and Northeastern Italy) share many of the same food-pairing affinities with Pinot noir and go well with dishes like salmon, mushroom-based dishes, and greens like chard and radicchio. Light-bodied Merlots can go well with shellfish like prawns or scallops, especially if wrapped in a protein-rich food such as bacon or prosciutto. Merlot tends not to go well with strong and blue-veined cheeses that can overwhelm the fruit flavors of the wine. The capsaicins of spicy foods can accentuate the perception of alcohol in Merlot and make it taste more tannic and bitter.

== Synonyms ==
Over the years, Merlot has been known under many synonyms across the globe, including Bégney, Bidal, Bidalhe, Bigney, Bigney rouge, Bini, Bini Ruzh, Bioney, Bordeleza belcha, Crabutet, Crabutet noir, Crabutet noir merlau, Hebigney, Higney, Higney rouge, Langon, Lecchumskij, Médoc noir, Merlau, Merlaut, Merlaut noir, Merle, Merle Petite, Merleau, Merlô, Merlot noir, Merlot black, Merlot blauer, Merlot crni, Merlot nero, Merlott, Merlou, Odzalesi, Odzhaleshi, Odzhaleshi Legkhumskii, Petit Merle, Picard, Pikard, Plan medre, Planet Medok, Plant du Médoc, Plant Médoc, Saint-Macaire, Same de la Canan, Same dou Flaube, Sème de la Canau, Sème Dou Flube, Semilhon rouge, Semilhoum rouge, Semilhoun rouge, Sémillon rouge, Sud des Graves, Vidal, Vini Ticinesi, Vitrai, and Vitraille.

== See also ==
* International variety

== References ==
== External links ==
*Growing Merlot grapes in the U.S. - information from Cooperative Extension</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213338" start="0" end="6" title="Merlot" label="Merlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="34" end="38" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357585" start="39" end="52" title="grape variety" label="grape variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976944" start="76" end="84" title="Blending (alcohol production)" label="blending"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122120" start="99" end="107" title="varietal" label="varietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="162" end="172" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="182" end="188" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q25234" start="202" end="211" title="Common Blackbird" label="blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335587" start="320" end="336" title="earlier ripening (wine)" label="earlier ripening"/>
<link wikidata="Q207310" start="412" end="430" title="Cabernet Sauvignon" label="Cabernet Sauvignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076294" start="460" end="466" title="grape tannins" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207310" start="480" end="498" title="Cabernet Sauvignon" label="Cabernet Sauvignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63591" start="500" end="514" title="Cabernet Franc" label="Cabernet Franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414045" start="516" end="522" title="Malbec" label="Malbec"/>
<link wikidata="Q637453" start="528" end="540" title="Petit Verdot" label="Petit Verdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q168461" start="586" end="599" title="Bordeaux wine" label="Bordeaux wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984904" start="648" end="669" title="Bordeaux wine regions" label="Bordeaux wine regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122120" start="719" end="727" title="varietal" label="varietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9094265" start="1116" end="1130" title="New World wine" label="New World wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="1163" end="1170" title="harvest" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335587" start="1182" end="1204" title="physiological ripeness" label="physiological ripeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q895170" start="1253" end="1265" title="body (wine)" label="full in body"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="1302" end="1309" title="tannins" label="tannins"/>
<link wikidata="Q168461" start="1397" end="1410" title="Bordeaux wine" label="Bordeaux wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564911" start="1530" end="1537" title="acidity (wine)" label="acidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="1841" end="1849" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984904" start="1911" end="1921" title="Libournais" label="Libournais"/>
<link wikidata="Q592785" start="2031" end="2041" title="Médoc wine" label="Médoc wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25234" start="2099" end="2109" title="Common blackbird" label="black bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="2142" end="2158" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="2460" end="2467" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435049" start="2534" end="2539" title="Médoc" label="Médoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12526" start="2576" end="2583" title="Gironde" label="Gironde"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="2826" end="2832" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="2910" end="2915" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="2991" end="2997" title="Canton (country subdivision)" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="3001" end="3007" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3088" end="3101" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="3191" end="3201" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q920134" start="3222" end="3236" title="French Paradox" label="French Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116329" start="3255" end="3278" title="Health effects of wine" label="health benefits of wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407329" start="3307" end="3318" title="resveratrol" label="resveratrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="3603" end="3634" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q63591" start="3674" end="3688" title="Cabernet Franc" label="Cabernet Franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043868" start="3714" end="3723" title="Carménère" label="Carménère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414045" start="3725" end="3731" title="Malbec" label="Malbec"/>
<link wikidata="Q193562" start="3955" end="3967" title="Saint-Suliac" label="Saint-Suliac"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="3971" end="3979" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4124" end="4130" title="Figers" label="Figers"/>
<link wikidata="Q508972" start="4132" end="4138" title="Mainxe" label="Mainxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q549150" start="4140" end="4154" title="Saint-Savinien" label="Saint-Savinien"/>
<link wikidata="Q940993" start="4160" end="4166" title="Tanzac" label="Tanzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009" start="4174" end="4190" title="Poitou-Charentes" label="Poitou-Charentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="4331" end="4338" title="harvest (wine)" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="4360" end="4369" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="4373" end="4387" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4480" end="4510" title="Magdeleine Noire des Charentes" label="Magdeleine Noire des Charentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q927571" start="4599" end="4620" title="Southwest France wine" label="Southwest France wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671221" start="4627" end="4635" title="Abouriou" label="Abouriou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4787" end="4800" title="Grape breeder" label="Grape breeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069394" start="4819" end="4826" title="crossed (wine)" label="crossed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4887" end="4894" title="Carmine (grape)" label="Carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171664" start="4899" end="4909" title="Olmo grape" label="Olmo grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q251054" start="4929" end="4937" title="Carignan" label="Carignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17115970" start="4979" end="4986" title="Ederena" label="Ederena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5004" end="5012" title="Evmolpia" label="Evmolpia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731972" start="5019" end="5025" title="Mavrud" label="Mavrud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5028" end="5036" title="Fertilia (grape)" label="Fertilia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5043" end="5058" title="Raboso Veronese" label="Raboso Veronese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5061" end="5067" title="Mamaia (grape)" label="Mamaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319565" start="5071" end="5084" title="Romanian wine" label="Romanian wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q269102" start="5110" end="5124" title="Muscat Ottonel" label="Muscat Ottonel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5127" end="5141" title="Babeasca negra" label="Babeasca negra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5162" end="5167" title="Nigra (grape)" label="Nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q807812" start="5174" end="5181" title="Barbera" label="Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5184" end="5191" title="Prodest" label="Prodest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5212" end="5216" title="Rebo (grape)" label="Rebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405039" start="5223" end="5232" title="Teroldego" label="Teroldego"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069394" start="5273" end="5287" title="color mutation" label="color mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q390242" start="5413" end="5426" title="Grenache noir" label="Grenache noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421703" start="5431" end="5445" title="Grenache blanc" label="Grenache blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="5449" end="5459" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q950514" start="5464" end="5475" title="Pinot blanc" label="Pinot blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q126901" start="5498" end="5510" title="Merlot blanc" label="Merlot blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636775" start="5591" end="5604" title="Folle blanche" label="Folle blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635047" start="5956" end="5961" title="Sugars in wine" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="5980" end="5990" title="malic acid" label="malic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q474471" start="5992" end="6005" title="Ampelographer" label="Ampelographer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6006" end="6021" title="J.M. Boursiquot" label="J.M. Boursiquot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024923" start="6209" end="6214" title="color (wine)" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669761" start="6216" end="6222" title="tannin (wine)" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669761" start="6234" end="6242" title="phenolic (wine)" label="phenolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="6317" end="6324" title="ferrous" label="ferrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="6325" end="6329" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042397" start="6349" end="6352" title="bud (wine)" label="bud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251370" start="6455" end="6474" title="viticultural hazard" label="viticultural hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135851" start="6478" end="6496" title="Botrytis cinerea" label="Botrytis bunch rot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6527" end="6536" title="Annual growth cycle of grapevines#Flowering" label="flowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517765" start="6574" end="6581" title="coulure" label="coulure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394849" start="6619" end="6631" title="downy mildew" label="downy mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045958" start="6668" end="6682" title="powdery mildew" label="powdery mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q244452" start="6734" end="6744" title="leafhopper" label="leafhopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082249" start="6764" end="6776" title="Irrigation in viticulture" label="Water stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q500094" start="6873" end="6880" title="Pruning" label="Pruning"/>
<link wikidata="Q329751" start="7074" end="7088" title="Michel Rolland" label="Michel Rolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425216" start="7126" end="7132" title="yields (wine)" label="yields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335587" start="7374" end="7382" title="Ripeness in viticulture" label="ripeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="7481" end="7488" title="Harvest (wine)" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090667" start="7516" end="7530" title="Château Pétrus" label="Château Pétrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564911" start="7584" end="7591" title="Acids in wine" label="acidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q439086" start="7633" end="7638" title="Aging of wine" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q630531" start="7981" end="7987" title="France (wine)" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125341" start="8112" end="8117" title="Italy (wine)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="8175" end="8182" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134713" start="8184" end="8194" title="California (wine)" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319565" start="8196" end="8203" title="Romania (wine)" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129654" start="8205" end="8214" title="Australia (wine)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238914" start="8216" end="8225" title="Argentina (wine)" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806971" start="8227" end="8235" title="Bulgaria (wine)" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938910" start="8237" end="8243" title="Canada (wine)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896262" start="8245" end="8250" title="Chile (wine)" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779616" start="8252" end="8258" title="Greece (wine)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q918446" start="8260" end="8271" title="New Zealand (wine)" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143129" start="8273" end="8285" title="South Africa (wine)" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q674376" start="8287" end="8298" title="Switzerland (wine)" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q353953" start="8300" end="8307" title="Croatia (wine)" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054023" start="8309" end="8316" title="Hungary (wine)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905235" start="8318" end="8328" title="Montenegrin wine" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806907" start="8330" end="8338" title="Slovenia (wine)" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q246889" start="8340" end="8346" title="Mexico (wine)" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968496" start="8371" end="8384" title="United States (wine)" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555815" start="8393" end="8403" title="Washington (wine)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425173" start="8405" end="8413" title="Virginia (wine)" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736525" start="8419" end="8430" title="Long Island (wine)" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q426569" start="8630" end="8636" title="Israel (wine)" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9094265" start="8757" end="8766" title="New World (wine)" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q969280" start="8817" end="8823" title="Turkey (wine)" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q582745" start="8836" end="8841" title="Malta (wine)" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111867" start="8847" end="8853" title="Cyprus (wine)" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q927571" start="9047" end="9063" title="Southwest France (wine)" label="Southwest France"/>
<link wikidata="Q168461" start="9080" end="9088" title="Bordeaux (wine)" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q595034" start="9090" end="9098" title="Bergerac AOC" label="Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q23047" start="9104" end="9110" title="Cahors" label="Cahors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805438" start="9246" end="9266" title="Languedoc wine" label="Languedoc-Roussillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140793" start="9322" end="9333" title="Vin de Pays" label="Vin de Pays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="9584" end="9592" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984904" start="9675" end="9696" title="Bordeaux wine regions" label="Bordeaux wine regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558201" start="9700" end="9706" title="Graves (wine region)" label="Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435049" start="9711" end="9716" title="Médoc" label="Médoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q188750" start="9761" end="9771" title="Saint-Estèphe, Gironde" label="St-Estephe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12526" start="9889" end="9896" title="Gironde" label="Gironde"/>
<link wikidata="Q843917" start="9915" end="9922" title="Pomerol" label="Pomerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715616" start="9927" end="9940" title="Saint-Émilion AOC" label="Saint-Émilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090667" start="10053" end="10067" title="Château Pétrus" label="Château Pétrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="10166" end="10170" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="10171" end="10175" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q478650" start="10313" end="10323" title="garagistes" label="garagistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="10423" end="10427" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="10435" end="10444" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192548" start="10460" end="10473" title="Saint-Émilion" label="Saint-Émilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q815934" start="10768" end="10776" title="Provence (wine)" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954580" start="10778" end="10790" title="Loire Valley (wine)" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q850468" start="10792" end="10798" title="Savoie (wine)" label="Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148" start="10800" end="10807" title="Ardèche" label="Ardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266" start="10809" end="10817" title="Charente" label="Charente"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326" start="10819" end="10826" title="Corrèze" label="Corrèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364" start="10828" end="10833" title="Drôme" label="Drôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12559" start="10835" end="10840" title="Isère" label="Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="10845" end="10851" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410822" start="10982" end="11011" title="Indicazione geografica tipica" label="Indicazione geografica tipica"/>
<link wikidata="Q532538" start="11060" end="11073" title="Super Tuscans" label="Super Tuscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q654824" start="11119" end="11155" title="Denominazione di origine controllata" label="Denominazione di origine controllata"/>
<link wikidata="Q443118" start="11290" end="11301" title="Friuli wine" label="Friuli wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233184" start="11441" end="11448" title="Maremma" label="Maremma"/>
<link wikidata="Q532538" start="11458" end="11465" title="Tuscany (wine)" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q509162" start="11492" end="11502" title="Sangiovese" label="Sangiovese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013663" start="11798" end="11804" title="Veneto wine" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838516" start="11806" end="11816" title="Alto Adige (wine)" label="Alto Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="11822" end="11828" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="11838" end="11852" title="Global warming" label="Global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q465932" start="11868" end="11887" title="Effects of climate change on wine production" label="having an influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780702" start="12096" end="12110" title="Master of Wine" label="Master of Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q463895" start="12111" end="12126" title="Jancis Robinson" label="Jancis Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069394" start="12209" end="12217" title="cuttings (vine)" label="cuttings"/>
<link wikidata="Q202760" start="12725" end="12731" title="Soča" label="Isonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133458" start="12765" end="12784" title="continental climate (wine)" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133458" start="12874" end="12890" title="maritime climate (wine)" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133458" start="12915" end="12936" title="Mediterranean climate (wine)" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055309" start="12983" end="13006" title="international varieties" label="international varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569384" start="13138" end="13143" title="Rioja (wine)" label="Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q519874" start="13227" end="13238" title="Tempranillo" label="Tempranillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064010" start="13582" end="13591" title="Catalan wine" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748" start="13623" end="13641" title="Castilla–La Mancha" label="Castilla–La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q976624" start="13678" end="13685" title="Navarra (wine)" label="Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="13690" end="13696" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998459" start="13701" end="13718" title="Costers del Segre" label="Costers del Segre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="13778" end="13784" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q976624" start="13786" end="13793" title="Navarra (wine)" label="Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748" start="13799" end="13817" title="Castilla-La Mancha" label="Castilla-La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q833872" start="13932" end="13939" title="Germany (wine)" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571866" start="14022" end="14041" title="German wine regions" label="German wine regions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14049" end="14059" title="Palatinate (wine)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14064" end="14075" title="Rheinhessen (wine)" label="Rheinhessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674376" start="14081" end="14092" title="Switzerland (wine)" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800612" start="14151" end="14157" title="Ticino (wine region)" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q23237" start="14329" end="14342" title="Austrian wine" label="Austrian wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="14353" end="14363" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q644796" start="14399" end="14413" title="Welschriesling" label="Welschriesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="14640" end="14653" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="14686" end="14700" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806971" start="14716" end="14724" title="Bulgarian wine" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759568" start="14726" end="14733" title="Moldovan wine" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q353953" start="14735" end="14742" title="Croatia (wine)" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319565" start="14748" end="14755" title="Romania (wine)" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q695626" start="14964" end="14978" title="Czech Republic (wine)" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="15021" end="15028" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806907" start="15060" end="15068" title="Slovenia (wine)" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625492" start="15139" end="15152" title="Vipava Valley" label="Vipava Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="15160" end="15176" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109872" start="15227" end="15240" title="Gorizia Hills" label="Gorizia Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054023" start="15445" end="15452" title="Hungary (wine)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q882859" start="15473" end="15483" title="Blaufränkisch" label="Kékfrankos"/>
<link wikidata="Q646799" start="15485" end="15494" title="Blauer Portugieser" label="Kékoportó"/>
<link wikidata="Q576867" start="15500" end="15507" title="Kadarka" label="Kadarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q987960" start="15526" end="15543" title="Egri Bikavér" label="Bull&amp;#x27;s Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q189761" start="15791" end="15800" title="Szekszárd" label="Szekszárd"/>
<link wikidata="Q657642" start="15805" end="15812" title="Villány" label="Villány"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="15825" end="15840" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390906" start="15882" end="15888" title="Kunság" label="Kunság"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15890" end="15894" title="Eger (wine region)" label="Eger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15900" end="15907" title="Balaton (wine region)" label="Balaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="16053" end="16062" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="16066" end="16073" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q207388" start="16097" end="16105" title="Muntenia" label="Muntenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245932" start="16116" end="16126" title="Dealu Mare (wine region)" label="Dealu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q754726" start="16170" end="16179" title="Drăgășani" label="Drăgășani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409106" start="16347" end="16362" title="Fetească neagră" label="Fetească neagră"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786884" start="16374" end="16381" title="Ukraine (wine)" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041377" start="16413" end="16419" title="Russia (wine)" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754670" start="16427" end="16435" title="Portugal (wine)" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144227" start="16514" end="16540" title="Portuguese grape varieties" label="Portuguese grape varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023118" start="16577" end="16600" title="Portuguese wine regions" label="Portuguese wine regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14294" start="16611" end="16616" title="Tagus" label="Tagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779616" start="16628" end="16634" title="Greece (wine)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="16720" end="16729" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="16736" end="16750" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134713" start="16944" end="16954" title="California (wine)" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555815" start="16959" end="16969" title="Washington (wine)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259585" start="17053" end="17067" title="New York wine" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q736525" start="17128" end="17143" title="Long Island AVA" label="Long Island AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680311" start="17168" end="17172" title="Ohio (wine)" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="17177" end="17182" title="Texas (wine)" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946331" start="17367" end="17381" title="Monticello AVA" label="Monticello AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278039" start="17386" end="17407" title="Shenandoah Valley AVA" label="Shenandoah Valley AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q826908" start="17415" end="17421" title="Oregon (wine)" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q266538" start="17459" end="17475" title="Rogue Valley AVA" label="Rogue Valley AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9004308" start="17513" end="17539" title="history of California wine" label="history of California wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122120" start="17577" end="17585" title="varietal" label="varietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970601" start="17607" end="17623" title="Warren Winiarski" label="Warren Winiarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611485" start="17953" end="17971" title="Sterling Vineyards" label="Sterling Vineyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322465" start="18052" end="18062" title="Ric Forman" label="Ric Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="18195" end="18205" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q920134" start="18212" end="18226" title="French Paradox" label="French Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q675937" start="18394" end="18402" title="Sideways" label="Sideways"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="18440" end="18450" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="18878" end="18888" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q808963" start="18913" end="18933" title="oak (wine)" label="barrel aged examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745520" start="18981" end="18989" title="Meritage" label="Meritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151105" start="19075" end="19079" title="Napa Valley AVA" label="Napa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946108" start="19081" end="19089" title="Monterey AVA" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562180" start="19095" end="19108" title="Sonoma County wine" label="Sonoma County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870486" start="19133" end="19145" title="Los Carneros AVA" label="Los Carneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q183511" start="19147" end="19159" title="Mount Veeder AVA" label="Mount Veeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748339" start="19161" end="19169" title="Oakville AVA" label="Oakville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512490" start="19174" end="19184" title="Rutherford AVA" label="Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="19203" end="19213" title="blackberry" label="blackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922447" start="19218" end="19233" title="black raspberry" label="black raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669449" start="19261" end="19277" title="Alexander Valley (AVA)" label="Alexander Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261546" start="19292" end="19308" title="Dry Creek Valley (AVA)" label="Dry Creek Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="19322" end="19326" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="19328" end="19336" title="Tea" label="tea leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q158987" start="19342" end="19354" title="Prunus serotina" label="black cherry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19627" end="19642" title="Leonetti Cellar" label="Leonetti Cellar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19644" end="19655" title="Andrew Will" label="Andrew Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087545" start="19657" end="19671" title="Columbia Crest" label="Columbia Crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087545" start="19677" end="19698" title="Chateau Ste. Michelle" label="Chateau Ste. Michelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046581" start="19730" end="19748" title="Eastern Washington" label="Eastern Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984578" start="20117" end="20136" title="Columbia Valley AVA" label="Columbia Valley AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962694" start="20194" end="20205" title="Walla Walla Valley AVA" label="Walla Walla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572683" start="20207" end="20219" title="Red Mountain AVA" label="Red Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628973" start="20229" end="20247" title="Horse Heaven Hills AVA" label="Horse Heaven Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="20450" end="20479" title="diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal temperature variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9094265" start="20504" end="20513" title="New World wine" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085454" start="20529" end="20538" title="Old World wine" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938910" start="20569" end="20575" title="Canada (wine)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501800" start="20625" end="20642" title="Short Hills Bench" label="Short Hills Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147919" start="20650" end="20667" title="Niagara Peninsula" label="Niagara Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095007" start="20668" end="20675" title="Ontario (wine)" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969827" start="20719" end="20735" title="British Columbia (wine)" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q246889" start="20968" end="20974" title="Mexico (wine)" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q834310" start="21014" end="21032" title="Guadalupe, Baja California" label="Valle de Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="21036" end="21051" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21206" end="21217" title="Ojos Negros (Mexico)" label="Ojos Negros"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275308" start="21222" end="21233" title="Santo Tomás, Baja California" label="Santo Tomás"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="21307" end="21315" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896262" start="21365" end="21370" title="Chile (wine)" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779016" start="21394" end="21400" title="Apalta" label="Apalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q201304" start="21411" end="21429" title="Colchagua Province" label="Colchagua Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030" start="21477" end="21483" title="Curicó" label="Curicó"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742" start="21485" end="21495" title="Casablanca, Chile" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q738867" start="21505" end="21517" title="Maipo River" label="Maipo Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44542" start="21729" end="21744" title="Sauvignon blanc" label="Sauvignon blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468853" start="21759" end="21772" title="Sauvignon vert" label="Sauvignonasse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21807" end="21825" title="Domaine Paul Bruno" label="Domaine Paul Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063236" start="21854" end="21869" title="Château Margaux" label="Château Margaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q388478" start="21874" end="21902" title="Château Cos d&amp;#x27;Estournel" label="Château Cos d&amp;#x27;Estournel"/>
<link wikidata="Q474471" start="21912" end="21926" title="Ampelography" label="ampelographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043868" start="22098" end="22107" title="Carménère" label="Carménère"/>
<link wikidata="Q367315" start="22201" end="22211" title="phylloxera" label="phylloxera"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790190" start="22557" end="22570" title="Listán Prieto" label="Listán Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061975" start="22619" end="22633" title="Central Valley (Chilean wine region)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078441" start="22685" end="22697" title="Maule Valley" label="Maule Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q682082" start="22747" end="22754" title="Uruguay (wine)" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q928151" start="22785" end="22791" title="Tannat" label="Tannat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038437" start="22992" end="22998" title="Brazil (wine)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="23058" end="23075" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880868" start="23180" end="23187" title="Bolivia (wine)" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171211" start="23208" end="23212" title="Peru (wine)" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q238914" start="23236" end="23245" title="Argentina (wine)" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q166014" start="23292" end="23299" title="Mendoza wine" label="Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q756244" start="23349" end="23358" title="Tupungato" label="Tupungato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876801" start="23373" end="23383" title="Uco Valley" label="Uco Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414045" start="23611" end="23617" title="Malbec" label="Malbec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750961" start="23622" end="23632" title="Douce noir" label="Douce noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44805" start="23867" end="23884" title="San Juan Province, Argentina" label="San Juan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q918446" start="23930" end="23941" title="New Zealand (wine)" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q251825" start="23985" end="24008" title="Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay region" label="Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay region"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765961" start="24026" end="24042" title="Gimblett Gravels" label="Gimblett Gravels"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="24312" end="24320" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q140083" start="24322" end="24333" title="Marlborough Region" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905554" start="24339" end="24352" title="Martinborough" label="Martinborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129654" start="24538" end="24547" title="Australia (wine)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863063" start="24687" end="24701" title="Barossa Valley (wine)" label="Barossa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802082" start="24703" end="24715" title="McLaren Vale" label="McLaren Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037630" start="24721" end="24733" title="Wrattonbully" label="Wrattonbully"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566214" start="24737" end="24752" title="South Australia (wine)" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332720" start="24824" end="24829" title="Syrah" label="Syrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082249" start="24972" end="24981" title="irrigated (wine)" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182598" start="24993" end="25007" title="Murray Darling" label="Murray Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="25009" end="25017" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q372498" start="25023" end="25032" title="Riverland" label="Riverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13490974" start="25121" end="25135" title="Margaret River" label="Margaret River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984365" start="25144" end="25161" title="Western Australia (wine)" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143129" start="25223" end="25235" title="South Africa (wine)" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018144" start="25297" end="25302" title="Paarl" label="Paarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460" start="25307" end="25319" title="Stellenbosch" label="Stellenbosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022913" start="25789" end="25794" title="India (wine)" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q146604" start="26363" end="26369" title="Blackcurrant" label="cassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="26385" end="26393" title="Cherry" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="26395" end="26405" title="blackberry" label="blackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="26407" end="26416" title="blueberry" label="blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q896083" start="26418" end="26429" title="boysenberry" label="boysenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="26431" end="26439" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818551" start="26441" end="26453" title="ollalieberry" label="ollalieberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="26459" end="26463" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="26516" end="26521" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="26524" end="26532" title="cola nut" label="cola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="26534" end="26545" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43511" start="26547" end="26553" title="fennel" label="fennel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="26555" end="26560" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="26562" end="26569" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="26571" end="26580" title="mushrooms" label="mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="26582" end="26589" title="rhubarb" label="rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="26595" end="26602" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="26684" end="26687" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="26689" end="26699" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="26701" end="26707" title="Bay Laurel" label="laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="26709" end="26713" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="26715" end="26722" title="oregano" label="oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="26724" end="26728" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="26730" end="26738" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111359" start="26740" end="26744" title="Common sage" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117102" start="26746" end="26758" title="Smilax regelii" label="sarsaparilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="26764" end="26769" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q808963" start="26813" end="26816" title="oak (wine)" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q183440" start="26845" end="26852" title="caramel (aroma)" label="caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="26854" end="26863" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="26865" end="26872" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q153697" start="26874" end="26885" title="coffee bean" label="coffee bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26686" start="26887" end="26896" title="dill weed" label="dill weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q739929" start="26898" end="26903" title="Cafe mocha" label="mocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="26905" end="26913" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="26922" end="26929" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="26935" end="26941" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422847" start="27002" end="27017" title="White Zinfandel" label="White Zinfandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q278818" start="27118" end="27122" title="must" label="must"/>
<link wikidata="Q126901" start="27409" end="27421" title="Merlot blanc" label="Merlot blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636775" start="27459" end="27472" title="Folle blanche" label="Folle blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232886" start="27602" end="27623" title="food and wine pairing" label="food and wine pairing"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="28036" end="28046" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405484" start="28076" end="28082" title="Salmon as food" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157954" start="28123" end="28128" title="chard" label="chard"/>
<link wikidata="Q767765" start="28133" end="28142" title="radicchio" label="radicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="28182" end="28191" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106" start="28270" end="28275" title="bacon" label="bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065033" start="28279" end="28289" title="prosciutto" label="prosciutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="28335" end="28354" title="blue cheese" label="blue-veined cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q273169" start="28409" end="28418" title="capsaicin" label="capsaicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055309" start="29343" end="29364" title="International variety" label="International variety"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18991" wikidata="Q207900" url="?curid=18991" title="MM">
<text>MM or variants may refer to:
== Alphabets ==
* Meitei Mayek or Meetei Mayek, the writing system of Meitei language

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Music===
* &quot;MM&quot; (album), 1989, by Marisa Monte 
* Maelzel&#x27;s metronome, a music marking
* Marilyn Manson, an American musician
* Marshall Mathers, an American rapper (a.k.a. &quot;Eminem&quot;)
* Master of Music, an academic degree
* &quot;Melody Maker&quot; British music publication
* &quot;MM&quot;, a 1993 song by Mr. President
*Major Moment, an American rock music band from Boston, Massachusetts

===Television===
* MM (TV channel), Bulgaria
* MM, the production code for the 1967 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serial &quot;The Tomb of the Cybermen&quot;

===Other media===
* &quot;MM!&quot;, a Japanese light novel, manga and anime series by Akinari Matsuno
* &quot;Media Molecule&quot;, a video game developer in England
* &quot;Monster Manual&quot;, a 1977 &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; source book
* Mother&#x27;s Milk (character), aka &quot;MM&quot;, a fictional character in &quot;The Boys&quot; comicbook franchise

==Businesses, organizations, and teams==

* Middle-market company or mid-market companies have annual revenues of $50 million to $1 billion or between 100 and 1000 employees
* Maryknoll, a Catholic religious institute
* Maybach-Motorenbau GmbH and Maybach-Manufaktur and Mercedes-Maybach; an engine and car marque
* Moderation Management, alcohol support group
* Mumbai Magicians, a defunct Hockey India League franchise
* Peach (airline) (IATA code: MM)
* SAM Colombia (former IATA code: MM)
* MM, logo of the Leipzig Trade Fair abbreviation for &quot;Mustermesse&quot; (English: Sample fair)

==Degrees, honorifics, and titles==
* Machinist&#x27;s Mate in the US Navy
* Master mariner
* Master of Management, a degree
* Master of Medicine, a degree
* Master of Music, a degree
* Military Medal, British and Commonwealth
* Minister Mentor, a Singapore cabinet position
* &quot;messieurs&quot;, a plural honorific in French

==Latinisms==
* 2000 (number) in Roman numerals
* The year 2000 in Roman numerals
* &quot;Mutatis mutandis&quot; (&quot;m.m.&quot;), &quot;with things changed that should be changed&quot;

==Transportation==
*MM (New York City Subway service), a former New York City Subway service

==Places==
* Metro Manila, the Philippines&#x27; national capital region
** Mega Manila, its larger metropolis
* Myanmar (ISO 3166-1 country code: MM)

==Science, technology, and mathematics==
===Computing===
* .mm, Internet country code top-level domain for Myanmar
* &quot;.mm&quot;, the file extension for FreeMind and Freeplane data files
* &quot;.mm&quot;, the file extension for source code files of Objective-C++
* mm tree, the Andrew Morton&#x27;s Linux kernel tree
* MM algorithm, an iterative method for constructing optimization algorithms
* Columbia MM, an early e-mail client
* Multiple master fonts
* Mattermost, an online chat service

===Units of measurement===
* Megametre (Mm) (rare) 1,000km
*Mile Marker (MM)
* Millimetre (mm)
* Millimolar (mM), a unit of concentration of a solution
* Momme, a unit of textile measurement
* One million (MM), used in reference to currency
* Percent concentration by mass (m/m%, %m/m, or m%), a unit of relative mass concentration

===Other uses in science, technology, and mathematics===
* Minimax or maximin, a decision rule
* Modified Mercalli scale for earthquake intensity
* Molecular mechanics, computational chemistry technique
* Moving magnet, phonograph cartridge type
* Moving mean in statistics
* Multiple myeloma, blood cancer
* Mischmetal, alloy of similar lanthanoids

==See also==
* 
* M (disambiguation)
* M2 (disambiguation)
* 2M (disambiguation)
* MMS (disambiguation)
* M&amp;M (disambiguation)
* MMM (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207900" start="0" end="2" title="MM" label="MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981413" start="47" end="59" title="Meitei Mayek" label="Meitei Mayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981413" start="63" end="75" title="Meetei Mayek" label="Meetei Mayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q584713" start="165" end="187" title="MM (album)" label="&amp;quot;MM&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q156424" start="214" end="238" title="Maelzel&amp;#x27;s metronome" label="Maelzel&amp;#x27;s metronome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="258" end="272" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="297" end="313" title="Marshall Mathers" label="Marshall Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="364" end="379" title="Master of Music" label="Master of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="408" end="420" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q282387" start="486" end="499" title="Mr. President (band)" label="Mr. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q129744822" start="501" end="513" title="Major Moment" label="Major Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716873" start="590" end="605" title="MM (TV channel)" label="MM (TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469115" start="691" end="715" title="The Tomb of the Cybermen" label="The Tomb of the Cybermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483724" start="749" end="752" title="MM!" label="MM!"/>
<link wikidata="Q651140" start="834" end="848" title="Media Molecule" label="Media Molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844962" start="898" end="912" title="Monster Manual" label="Monster Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939580" start="976" end="1006" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Milk (character)" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s Milk (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055270" start="1139" end="1160" title="Middle-market company" label="Middle-market company"/>
<link wikidata="Q120737418" start="1271" end="1280" title="Maryknoll" label="Maryknoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q35989" start="1315" end="1338" title="Maybach-Motorenbau GmbH" label="Maybach-Motorenbau GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089026" start="1411" end="1432" title="Moderation Management" label="Moderation Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935286" start="1458" end="1474" title="Mumbai Magicians" label="Mumbai Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376634" start="1518" end="1533" title="Peach (airline)" label="Peach (airline)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388646" start="1552" end="1564" title="SAM Colombia" label="SAM Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678262" start="1606" end="1624" title="Leipzig Trade Fair" label="Leipzig Trade Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723766" start="1728" end="1749" title="Machinist&amp;#x27;s mate" label="Machinist&amp;#x27;s Mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785142" start="1767" end="1781" title="Master mariner" label="Master mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431638" start="1784" end="1804" title="Master of Management" label="Master of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785213" start="1817" end="1835" title="Master of Medicine" label="Master of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="1848" end="1863" title="Master of Music" label="Master of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="1876" end="1890" title="Military Medal" label="Military Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165270" start="1919" end="1934" title="Minister Mentor" label="Minister Mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092777" start="1973" end="1982" title="messieurs" label="messieurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241253" start="2036" end="2049" title="2000 (number)" label="2000 (number)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="2079" end="2083" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q153046" start="2110" end="2126" title="Mutatis mutandis" label="Mutatis mutandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126418" start="2229" end="2262" title="MM (New York City Subway service)" label="MM (New York City Subway service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580" start="2316" end="2328" title="Metro Manila" label="Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658330" start="2379" end="2390" title="Mega Manila" label="Mega Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="2416" end="2423" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41636" start="2514" end="2517" title=".mm" label=".mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331559" start="2612" end="2620" title="FreeMind" label="FreeMind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028675" start="2625" end="2634" title="Freeplane" label="Freeplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="2709" end="2722" title="Objective-C++" label="Objective-C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q307583" start="2725" end="2732" title="mm tree" label="mm tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885783" start="2779" end="2791" title="MM algorithm" label="MM algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149760" start="2856" end="2867" title="Columbia MM" label="Columbia MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952448" start="2894" end="2915" title="Multiple master fonts" label="Multiple master fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55478510" start="2918" end="2928" title="Mattermost" label="Mattermost"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="2983" end="2992" title="Megametre" label="Megametre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10145" start="3014" end="3025" title="Milestone" label="Mile Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="3033" end="3043" title="Millimetre" label="Millimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="3051" end="3061" title="Millimolar" label="Millimolar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3108" end="3113" title="Units of textile measurement#Momme" label="Momme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38526" start="3151" end="3158" title="million" label="million"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3267" end="3285" title="Mass concentration (chemistry)#Units" label="mass concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q751319" start="3346" end="3353" title="Minimax" label="Minimax"/>
<link wikidata="Q170350" start="3384" end="3407" title="Modified Mercalli scale" label="Modified Mercalli scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344441" start="3435" end="3454" title="Molecular mechanics" label="Molecular mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581044" start="3492" end="3505" title="Moving magnet" label="Moving magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130194" start="3535" end="3546" title="Moving mean" label="Moving mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="3563" end="3579" title="Multiple myeloma" label="Multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q908636" start="3596" end="3606" title="Mischmetal" label="Mischmetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26747" start="3656" end="3674" title="M (disambiguation)" label="M (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219225" start="3677" end="3696" title="M2 (disambiguation)" label="M2 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633143" start="3699" end="3718" title="2M (disambiguation)" label="2M (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225081" start="3721" end="3741" title="MMS (disambiguation)" label="MMS (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q446153" start="3744" end="3768" title="M&amp;amp;M (disambiguation)" label="M&amp;amp;M (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q293077" start="3771" end="3791" title="MMM (disambiguation)" label="MMM (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18995" wikidata="Q41148" url="?curid=18995" title="Martin Scorsese">
<text>Martin Charles Scorsese ( , ; born November17, 1942) is an American filmmaker. He emerged as one of the major figures of the New Hollywood era. He has received many accolades, including an Academy Award, four BAFTA Awards, three Emmy Awards, a Grammy Award, and three Golden Globe Awards. He has been honored with the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1997, the Film Society of Lincoln Center tribute in 1998, the Kennedy Center Honor in 2007, the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2010, and the BAFTA Fellowship in 2012. Four of his films have been inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as &quot;culturally, historically or aesthetically significant&quot;.

Scorsese received a Master of Arts degree from New York University&#x27;s Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development in 1968. His directorial debut, &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot; (1967), was accepted into the Chicago Film Festival. In the 1970s and 1980s, Scorsese&#x27;s films, much influenced by his Italian-American background and upbringing in New York City, center on macho-posturing men and explore crime, machismo, nihilism and Catholic concepts of guilt and redemption. His trademark styles include extensive use of slow motion and freeze frames, graphic depictions of extreme violence and liberal use of profanity. &quot;Mean Streets&quot; (1973) was a blueprint for his filmmaking styles.

Scorsese won the at Cannes with his psychological drama &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; (1976), which starred Robert De Niro as a disturbed Vietnam Veteran. De Niro became associated with Scorsese through eight more films including &quot;New York, New York&quot; (1977), &quot;Raging Bull&quot; (1980), &quot;The King of Comedy&quot; (1982), &quot;Goodfellas&quot; (1990), &quot;Casino&quot; (1995) and &quot;The Irishman&quot; (2019). In the following decades, he garnered box office success with a series of collaborations with Leonardo DiCaprio, including &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; (2002), &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004), &quot;The Departed&quot; (2006), &quot;Shutter Island&quot; (2010), and &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; (2013). He worked with both De Niro and DiCaprio on &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot; (2023). Scorsese&#x27;s other films include &quot;After Hours&quot; (1985), &quot;The Color of Money&quot; (1986), &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot; (1988), &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; (1993), &quot;Kundun&quot; (1997), &quot;Hugo&quot; (2011), and &quot;Silence&quot; (2016).

In addition to film, Scorsese has directed episodes for television, including the HBO series &quot;Boardwalk Empire&quot; (2010–2014) and &quot;Vinyl&quot; (2016), as well as the HBO documentary &quot;Public Speaking&quot; (2010) and the Netflix docu-series &quot;Pretend It&#x27;s a City&quot; (2021). He is also known for several rock music documentaries including &quot;The Last Waltz&quot; (1978), &quot;No Direction Home&quot; (2005), &quot;Shine a Light&quot; (2008), and &quot;George Harrison: Living in the Material World&quot; (2011). He has also directed a music video for Michael Jackson&#x27;s song &quot;Bad&quot;. He has explored cinema in the documentaries &quot;A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies&quot; (1995), &quot;Il Mio Viaggio in Italia&quot; (&quot;My Voyage to Italy&quot;) (1999), and &quot;Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger&quot; (2024). An advocate for film preservation and restoration, he founded three nonprofit organizations: The Film Foundation in 1990, the World Cinema Foundation in 2007 and the African Film Heritage Project in 2017.
== Early life and education ==
Martin Charles Scorsese was born in the Flushing neighborhood of New York City&#x27;s Queens borough on November 17, 1942. He grew up in the Little Italy neighborhood of the city&#x27;s Manhattan borough. Both of his parents, Catherine Scorsese (née Cappa) and Charles Scorsese, worked in the Garment District. Charles was a clothes presser and actor, while Catherine was a seamstress and an actress. All four of Scorsese&#x27;s grandparents were Italian immigrants from Sicily, hailing from Polizzi Generosa on his father&#x27;s side and Ciminna on his mother&#x27;s side. The original surname of the family was Scozzese, meaning &quot;Scot&quot; or &quot;Scottish&quot; in Italian, and was later changed to Scorsese because of a transcription error.

Scorsese was raised in a predominantly Catholic environment. As a boy, he had asthma and could not play sports or take part in any activities with other children, so his parents and his older brother would often take him to movie theaters; it was at this stage in his life that he developed a passion for cinema. He has spoken of the influence of Powell and Pressburger&#x27;s &quot;Black Narcissus&quot; (1947) and &quot;The Red Shoes&quot; (1948). As a teenager in the Bronx, he frequently rented Powell and Pressburger&#x27;s &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot; (1951) from a store that had one copy of the reel. He was one of only two people who regularly rented it; the other, George A. Romero, also became a director.

Scorsese has named Sabu and Victor Mature as his favorite actors in his youth. He recalls his father taking him to see Jean Renoir&#x27;s &quot;The River&quot; (1951) and being fascinated by its depiction of India. He became &quot;obsessed&quot; with Renoir&#x27;s &quot;La Grande Illusion&quot; (1937) when it was rereleased. He names John Ford&#x27;s &quot;The Quiet Man&quot; (1952) and &quot;The Searchers&quot; (1956) as formative influences. In a documentary on Italian neorealism, he commented on how Roberto Rossellini&#x27;s &quot;Rome, Open City&quot; (1945) and Vittorio De Sica&#x27;s &quot;Bicycle Thieves&quot; (1946) inspired him and influenced his view of his Sicilian roots. In his documentary &quot;Il Mio Viaggio in Italia&quot; (&quot;My Voyage to Italy&quot;), Scorsese noted that the Sicilian episode of Rossellini&#x27;s &quot;Paisà&quot; (1946), which he first saw on television with his relatives who were themselves Sicilian immigrants, had a significant impact on his life. He remembers responding &quot;very strongly&quot; to Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Vertigo&quot; (1958). He acknowledges owing a great debt to the French New Wave and has stated that &quot;the French New Wave has influenced all filmmakers who have worked since, whether they saw the films or not.&quot; He has also cited the works of Satyajit Ray, Ingmar Bergman, Andrzej Wajda, Michelangelo Antonioni, Federico Fellini, Ishirō Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya as major influences on his career. Although there was no habit of reading at home, towards the end of the 1950s, Scorsese began to approach literature, being marked in particular by Fyodor Dostoevsky&#x27;s &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; (1864), James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man&quot; (1916) and Graham Greene&#x27;s &quot;The Heart of the Matter&quot; (1948).

Scorsese attended the all-boys Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx, graduating in 1960. He had initially desired to become a priest, attending a preparatory seminary, but failed after the first year and was unable to attend Fordham University. This gave way to cinema and consequently Scorsese enrolled in NYU&#x27;s Washington Square College (now known as the College of Arts and Science), where he earned a B.A. in English in 1964. He went on to earn his MA from New York University&#x27;s School of Education (now the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development) in 1968, a year after the school was founded.

== Career ==
=== 1963–1972: Short films and feature debut ===
While attending the Tisch School of the Arts, Scorsese made the short films &quot;What&#x27;s a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?&quot; (1963) and &quot;It&#x27;s Not Just You, Murray!&quot; (1964). His most famous short of the period is the darkly comic &quot;The Big Shave&quot; (1967), which features Peter Bernuth. The film is an indictment of America&#x27;s involvement in Vietnam, suggested by its alternative title &quot;Viet &#x27;67&quot;. Scorsese has mentioned on several occasions that he was greatly inspired in his early days at New York University by film professor Haig P. Manoogian. Scorsese&#x27;s first professional job was when he was at NYU he was the assistant cameraman to cinematographer Baird Bryant on the John G. Avildsen directed short film &quot;Smiles&quot; (1964). Scorsese stated, &quot;It was really important because they were filming on 35mm&quot;. He stated he was terrible at the job because he could not judge the distance of the focus. He also worked as a gaffer for Albert and David Maysles and as an editor for CBS News, the later of whom offered him a full time position but Scorsese declined due to his pursuit in film.

In 1967, Scorsese made his first feature-length film, the black and white &quot;I Call First&quot;, later retitled &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot;, with his fellow students actor Harvey Keitel and editor Thelma Schoonmaker, both of whom were to become long-term collaborators. Roger Ebert saw the film at the 1967 Chicago International Film Festival and wrote, in Scorsese&#x27;s first published review: &quot;it brings together two opposing worlds of American cinema. On the one hand, there have been traditional films like &quot;Marty&quot;, &quot;View from the Bridge&quot;, &quot;On the Waterfront&quot; and &quot;David and Lisa&quot; -- all sincere attempts to function at the level where real lives are led and all suffering to some degree from their makers&#x27; romantic and idealistic ideas, about such lives. On the other hand there have been experimental films from Jonas Mekas, Shirley Clarke and other pioneers of the New York underground. In &quot;The Connection&quot;, &quot;Shadows&quot; and &quot;Guns of the Trees&quot;, they used improvised dialog and scenes and hidden and hand-held cameras in an attempt to capture the freshness of a spontaneous experience ... &quot;I Call First&quot; brings these two kinds of films together into a work that is absolutely genuine, artistically satisfying and technically comparable to the best films being made anywhere. I have no reservations in describing it as a great moment in American movies.&quot;

Scorsese became friends with the influential &quot;movie brats&quot; of the 1970s: Brian De Palma, Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg. It was De Palma who introduced Scorsese to Robert De Niro. During this period, Scorsese worked as the assistant director and one of the editors on Michael Wadleigh&#x27;s documentary &quot;Woodstock&quot; (1970) and met actor–director John Cassavetes, who became a close friend and mentor.

Scorsese met Roger Corman after coming to Hollywood to edit &quot;Medicine Ball Caravan&quot; and Corman, who had seen and liked &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot;, asked Scorsese to make a sequel to &quot;Bloody Mama&quot; (1970). This came to be &quot;Boxcar Bertha&quot; (1972). It was Corman who taught Scorsese that entertaining films could be shot with very little money or time, preparing the young director well for the challenges to come. Following the film&#x27;s release, Cassavetes encouraged Scorsese to make the films that he wanted to make, rather than someone else&#x27;s projects.

=== 1973–1989: Breakthrough and acclaim ===

&quot;Mean Streets&quot; was a breakthrough for Scorsese, Keitel and Robert De Niro. Pauline Kael wrote: &quot;Martin Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;Mean Streets&quot; is a true original of our time, a triumph of personal filmmaking. It has its own hallucinatory look; the characters live in the darkness of bars, with lighting and color just this shade of lurid ... It&#x27;s about American life here and now, and it doesn&#x27;t look like an American movie, or feel like one. If it were subtitled, we could hail a new European or South American talent — a new Buñuel steeped in Verdi, perhaps.&quot; By now the signature Scorsese style was in place: macho posturing, bloody violence, Catholic guilt and redemption, gritty New York locale (though the majority of &quot;Mean Streets&quot; was shot in Los Angeles), rapid-fire editing, and a soundtrack with contemporary music. Although the film was innovative, its wired atmosphere, edgy documentary style, and gritty street-level direction owed a debt to Cassavetes, Samuel Fuller and early Jean-Luc Godard. In 1974, actress Ellen Burstyn chose Scorsese to direct her in &quot;Alice Doesn&#x27;t Live Here Anymore&quot;, for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress. Although well regarded, the film remains an anomaly in Scorsese&#x27;s early career as it focuses on a central female character. Returning to Little Italy to explore his ethnic roots, Scorsese directed &quot;Italianamerican&quot; (1974), a documentary featuring his parents Charles and Catherine Scorsese.

Scorsese followed with &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; in 1976, which depicted a Vietnam veteran who takes the law into his own hands on New York&#x27;s crime-ridden streets. The film established him as an accomplished filmmaker and also brought attention to cinematographer Michael Chapman, whose style tends towards high contrasts, strong colors, and complex camera movements. The film starred De Niro as the angry and alienated Travis Bickle, and co-starred Jodie Foster in a highly controversial role as an underage prostitute, with Harvey Keitel as her pimp. &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; also marked the start of a series of collaborations between Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader, whose influences included the diary of would-be assassin Arthur Bremer, John Ford&#x27;s &quot;The Searchers&quot; (1956), and Robert Bresson&#x27;s &quot;Pickpocket&quot; (1959). Already controversial upon its release, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; hit the headlines again five years later, when John Hinckley Jr. made an assassination attempt on then-president Ronald Reagan. He subsequently blamed his act on his obsession with Jodie Foster&#x27;s &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; character (in the film, De Niro&#x27;s character, Travis Bickle, makes an assassination attempt on a senator).

&quot;Taxi Driver&quot; won the at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival, also receiving four Oscar nominations, including Best Picture. The critical and financial success of &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; encouraged Scorsese to move ahead with his first big-budget project: the highly stylized musical &quot;New York, New York&quot;. This tribute to Scorsese&#x27;s home town and the classic Hollywood musical was a box-office failure. The film was the director&#x27;s third collaboration with De Niro, co-starring with Liza Minnelli. The film is best remembered today for the title theme song, which was popularized by Frank Sinatra. Although possessing Scorsese&#x27;s usual visual panache and stylistic bravura, many critics felt its enclosed studio-bound atmosphere left it leaden in comparison with his earlier work. Despite its weak reception, the film is regarded positively by some critics. Richard Brody wrote: 

In 1977, he directed the Broadway musical &quot;The Act&quot;, starring Minnelli. The disappointing reception of &quot;New York, New York&quot; drove Scorsese into depression. By this stage Scorsese had developed a serious cocaine addiction. However, he did find the creative drive to make the highly regarded &quot;The Last Waltz&quot;, documenting the final concert by The Band. It was held at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco on Thanksgiving Day, 1976, and featured one of the most extensive lineups of prominent guest performers at a single concert, including Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Ringo Starr, Muddy Waters, Joni Mitchell, Van Morrison, Paul Butterfield, Neil Diamond, Ronnie Wood and Eric Clapton. However, Scorsese&#x27;s commitments to other projects delayed the release of the film until 1978. Another Scorsese-directed documentary, titled &quot;American Boy&quot;, also appeared in 1978, focusing on Steven Prince, the cocky gun salesman who appeared in &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;. A period of wild partying followed, damaging Scorsese&#x27;s already fragile health. Scorsese helped provide footage for the documentary &quot;Elvis on Tour&quot;.

By several accounts (Scorsese&#x27;s included), De Niro saved Scorsese&#x27;s life when he persuaded him to kick his cocaine addiction to make his highly regarded film &quot;Raging Bull&quot;. Mark Singer summarized Scorsese&#x27;s condition: He (Scorsese) was more than mildly depressed. Drug abuse, and abuse of his body in general, culminated in a terrifying episode of internal bleeding. Robert De Niro came to see him in the hospital and asked, in so many words, whether he wanted to live or die. If you want to live, De Niro proposed, let&#x27;s make this picture—referring to &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, an as-told-to book by Jake LaMotta, the former world middleweight boxing champion, that De Niro had given him to read years earlier. Convinced that he would never make another movie, he poured his energies into making the violent biopic of middleweight boxing champion Jake LaMotta, calling it a kamikaze method of film-making. The film is widely viewed as a masterpiece and was voted the greatest film of the 1980s by Britain&#x27;s &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; magazine. It received eight Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Actor for De Niro, Best Supporting Actress for Cathy Moriarty, Best Supporting Actor for Joe Pesci and Scorsese&#x27;s first for Best Director. De Niro won, as did Thelma Schoonmaker for editing, but Best Director went to Robert Redford for &quot;Ordinary People&quot;. From this work onwards, Scorsese&#x27;s films are always labeled as &quot;A Martin Scorsese Picture&quot; on promotional material. &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, filmed in high contrast black and white, is where Scorsese&#x27;s style reached its zenith: &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; and &quot;New York, New York&quot; had used elements of expressionism to replicate psychological points of view, but here the style was taken to new extremes, employing extensive slow-motion, complex tracking shots, and extravagant distortion of perspective (for example, the size of boxing rings would change from fight to fight). Thematically too, the concerns carried on from &quot;Mean Streets&quot; and &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;: insecure males, violence, guilt, and redemption.
Although the screenplay for &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was credited to Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin (who earlier co-wrote &quot;Mean Streets&quot;), the finished script differed extensively from Schrader&#x27;s original draft. It was rewritten several times by various writers including Jay Cocks. The final draft was largely written by Scorsese and De Niro. In 1997, the American Film Institute ranked &quot;Raging Bull&quot; as the twenty-fourth greatest American film of all time on their AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. In 2007, they ranked &quot;Raging Bull&quot; as the fourth American greatest film on their AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list.

Scorsese&#x27;s next project was his fifth collaboration with De Niro, &quot;The King of Comedy&quot; (1982). It is a satire on the world of media and celebrity, whose central character is a troubled loner who ironically becomes famous through a criminal act (kidnapping). The film was an obvious departure from the more emotionally committed films he had become associated with. Visually, it was far less kinetic than the style Scorsese had developed previously, often using a static camera and long takes. Here the expressionism of his previous work gave way to moments of almost total surrealism. It still bore many of Scorsese&#x27;s trademarks, however. &quot;The&quot; &quot;King of Comedy&quot; failed at the box office, but has become increasingly well regarded by critics in the years since its release. German director Wim Wenders numbered it among his 15 favorite films. In 1983, Scorsese made a brief cameo appearance in &quot;Anna Pavlova&quot; (also known as &quot;A Woman for All Time&quot;), originally intended to be directed by one of his heroes, Michael Powell. This led to a more significant acting appearance in Bertrand Tavernier&#x27;s jazz film &quot;Round Midnight&quot;. He also made a brief venture into television, directing an episode of Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;.

With &quot;After Hours&quot; (1985), for which he won a Best Director Award at Cannes, Scorsese made an esthetic shift back to a pared-down, almost &quot;underground&quot; film-making style. Filmed on an extremely low budget, on location, and at night in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan, the film is a black comedy about one increasingly misfortunate night for a mild New York word processor (Griffin Dunne) and features cameos by such disparate actors as Teri Garr and Cheech &amp; Chong. Along with the 1987 Michael Jackson music video &quot;Bad&quot;, in 1986 Scorsese made &quot;The Color of Money&quot;, a sequel to Robert Rossen&#x27;s &quot;The Hustler&quot; (1961) with Paul Newman, which co-starred Tom Cruise. Although adhering to Scorsese&#x27;s established style, &quot;The Color of Money&quot; was Scorsese&#x27;s first official foray into mainstream film-making. The film finally won Newman an Oscar and gave Scorsese the clout to finally secure backing for a project that had been a longtime goal for him: &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;.

In 1983, Scorsese began work on this long-cherished personal project. &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;, based on the 1955 novel by Nikos Kazantzakis, retold the life of Christ in human rather than divine terms. Barbara Hershey recalls introducing Scorsese to the book while they were filming &quot;Boxcar Bertha&quot;. The film was slated to shoot under the Paramount Pictures banner, but shortly before principal photography was to start, Paramount pulled the plug on the project, citing pressure from religious groups. In this aborted 1983 version, Aidan Quinn was cast as Jesus, and Sting was cast as Pontius Pilate. (In the 1988 version, these roles were played by Willem Dafoe and David Bowie respectively.) However, following his mid-1980s flirtation with commercial Hollywood, Scorsese made a major return to personal filmmaking with the project; Universal Pictures agreed to finance the film as Scorsese agreed to make a more mainstream film for the studio in the future (it eventually resulted in &quot;Cape Fear&quot;). Even prior to its 1988 release, the film (adapted by &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; and &quot;Raging Bull&quot; veteran Paul Schrader) caused a massive furor, with worldwide protests against its perceived blasphemy effectively turning a low-budget independent film into a media sensation. Most of the controversy centered on the final passages of the film, which depicted Christ marrying and raising a family with Mary Magdalene in a Satan-induced hallucination while on the cross.

In 1986, Scorsese directed the 18-minute short film &quot;Bad&quot; featuring Michael Jackson and Wesley Snipes (in his film debut). The short also serves as a music video and was shot in the Hoyt–Schermerhorn Streets station in Brooklyn over a 6-week period during November and December 1986. Chapman was the film&#x27;s cinematographer. The direction and choreography were heavily influenced by &quot;West Side Story&quot; (1961). Scorsese also noted the influence of &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; in Spike Lee&#x27;s documentary &quot;Bad 25&quot; (2012). The short has been praised by critics as one of the greatest and most iconic videos of all time. That year, he had signed a deal with upstart major The Walt Disney Studios to produce and direct features, following the success of &quot;The Color of Money&quot;.

Looking past the controversy, &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot; gained critical acclaim and remains an important work in Scorsese&#x27;s canon: an explicit attempt to wrestle with the spirituality underpinning his films up until that point. He received his second nomination for a Best Director Academy Award (again unsuccessfully, this time losing to Barry Levinson for &quot;Rain Man&quot;). Scorsese directed &quot;Life Lessons&quot;, one of three segments in the anthology film &quot;New York Stories&quot; (1989). Ebert gave the film a mixed review, while praising Scorsese&#x27;s short as &quot;really successful&quot;.

=== 1990–1999: Established director ===

After a decade of films considered by critics to be mixed results, some considered Scorsese&#x27;s gangster epic &quot;Goodfellas&quot; (1990) his return to directorial form, and his most confident and fully realized film since &quot;Raging Bull&quot;. De Niro and Joe Pesci offered a virtuoso display of Scorsese&#x27;s bravura cinematic technique in the film and re-established, enhanced, and consolidated his reputation. After the film was released, Roger Ebert, a friend and supporter of Scorsese, named &quot;Goodfellas&quot; &quot;the best mob movie ever&quot;. It is ranked No. 1 on Ebert&#x27;s movie list for 1990, along with those of Gene Siskel and Peter Travers&#x27;, and is widely considered one of the director&#x27;s greatest achievements. The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and Scorsese earned his third Best Director nomination but again lost to a first-time director, Kevin Costner (&quot;Dances with Wolves&quot;). Joe Pesci earned the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance. Scorsese and the film also won many other awards, including five BAFTA Awards, a Silver Lion and more. The American Film Institute placed &quot;Goodfellas&quot; at No. 94 on the AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. On the 2007 updated version, they moved &quot;Goodfellas&quot; up to No. 92 on the AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies list (10th Anniversary Edition) and put &quot;Goodfellas&quot; at No. 2 on their list of the top 10 gangster films (after &quot;The Godfather&quot;).

In 1990, he released his only short-form documentary: &quot;Made in Milan&quot; about fashion designer Giorgio Armani. The following year brought &quot;Cape Fear&quot;, a remake of a cult 1962 movie of the same name and the director&#x27;s seventh collaboration with De Niro. Another foray into the mainstream, the film was a stylized thriller taking its cues heavily from Alfred Hitchcock and Charles Laughton&#x27;s &quot;The Night of the Hunter&quot; (1955). &quot;Cape Fear&quot; received a mixed critical reception and was lambasted in many quarters for its scenes depicting misogynistic violence. However, the lurid subject matter gave Scorsese a chance to experiment with visual tricks and effects. The film garnered two Oscar nominations. Earning $80 million domestically, it stood as Scorsese&#x27;s most commercially successful release until &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004), and then &quot;The Departed&quot; (2006). The film also marked the first time Scorsese used wide-screen Panavision with an aspect ratio of 2.39:1.

In 1990, Scorsese acted in a small role as Vincent van Gogh in the film &quot;Dreams&quot; by Japanese director Akira Kurosawa. Scorsese&#x27;s 1994 cameo appearance in the Robert Redford film &quot;Quiz Show&quot; is remembered for the telling line: &quot;You see, the audience didn&#x27;t tune in to watch some amazing display of intellectual ability. They just wanted to watch the money.&quot;

In 1994, Scorsese and producer Barbara De Fina formed the production company 
De Fina-Cappa. In the early 1990s, Scorsese also expanded his role as a film producer. He produced a wide range of films, including major Hollywood studio productions (&quot;Mad Dog and Glory&quot;, &quot;Clockers&quot;), low-budget independent films (&quot;The Grifters&quot;, &quot;Naked in New York&quot;, &quot;Grace of My Heart&quot;, &quot;Search and Destroy&quot;, &quot;The Hi-Lo Country&quot;), and even the foreign film (&quot;Con gli occhi chiusi&quot; (&quot;With Closed Eyes&quot;)).

&quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; (1993) was a significant departure for Scorsese, a period adaptation of the Edith Wharton novel about the constrictive high society of late-19th century New York. It was highly lauded by critics upon its original release but was a box office bomb, making an overall loss. As noted in &quot;Scorsese on Scorsese&quot; by editor–interviewer Ian Christie, the news that Scorsese wanted to make a film about a failed 19th-century romance raised many eyebrows among the film fraternity; all the more when Scorsese made it clear that it was a personal project and not a studio for-hire job.

Scorsese was interested in doing a &quot;romantic piece&quot;, and he was strongly drawn to the characters and the story of Wharton&#x27;s text. Scorsese wanted his film to be as rich an emotional experience as the book was to him rather than the traditional academic adaptations of literary works. To this end, Scorsese sought influence from diverse period films that had had an emotional impact on him. In &quot;Scorsese on Scorsese&quot;, he documents influences from films such as Luchino Visconti&#x27;s &quot;Senso&quot; and his &quot;Il Gattopardo&quot; (&quot;The Leopard&quot;) as well as Orson Welles&#x27;s &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot; and also Roberto Rossellini&#x27;s &quot;La prise de pouvoir par Louis XIV&quot; (&quot;The Taking of Power by Louis XIV&quot;). Although &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; was ultimately different from these films in terms of narrative, story, and thematic concern, the presence of a lost society, of lost values as well as detailed re-creations of social customs and rituals continues the tradition of these films. It came back into the public eye, especially in countries such as the UK and France, but still is largely neglected in North America. The film earned five Academy Award nominations (including Best Adapted Screenplay for Scorsese), winning the Costume Design Oscar. This was his first collaboration with the Academy Award-winning actor Daniel Day-Lewis, with whom he would work again on &quot;Gangs of New York&quot;. This was Scorsese&#x27;s first film to be shot on Super 35 format.

&quot;Casino&quot; (1995), like &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; before it, focused on a tightly wound male whose well-ordered life is disrupted by the arrival of unpredictable forces. The fact that it was a violent gangster film made it more palatable to the director&#x27;s fans who perhaps were baffled by the apparent departure of the earlier film. &quot;Casino&quot; was a box office success, and it received generally positive notices from critics. Comparisons were drawn to his earlier film &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, and Scorsese admitted &quot;Casino&quot; bore a superficial resemblance to it, but he maintained that the story was significantly larger in scope. Sharon Stone was nominated for the Best Actress Academy Award for her performance. During the filming, Scorsese played a background part as a gambler at one of the tables.

Scorsese still found time for a four-hour documentary in 1995, titled &quot;A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies&quot;, offering a thorough trek through American cinema. It covered the silent era to 1969, a year after which Scorsese began his feature career. He said, &quot;I wouldn&#x27;t feel right commenting on myself or my contemporaries.&quot; In the four-hour documentary, Scorsese lists the four aspects of the director he believes are the most important as (1) the director as storyteller; (2) the director as an illusionist: D. W. Griffith or F. W. Murnau, who created new editing techniques among other innovations that made the appearance of sound and color possible later on; (3) the director as a smuggler—filmmakers such as Douglas Sirk, Samuel Fuller, and Vincente Minnelli, who used to hide subversive messages in their films; and (4) the director as iconoclast. In the preface to this documentary, Scorsese states his commitment to the &quot;Director&#x27;s Dilemma&quot;, in which a successful contemporary director must be pragmatic about the realities of getting financing for films of personal esthetic interest by accepting the need of &quot;making one film for the studio, and (then) making one for oneself.&quot;

If &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; alienated and confused some fans, then &quot;Kundun&quot; (1997) went several steps further, offering an account of the early life of Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army&#x27;s entry into Tibet, and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s subsequent exile to India. Not only a departure in subject matter, &quot;Kundun&quot; saw Scorsese employing a fresh narrative and visual approach. Traditional dramatic devices were substituted for a trance-like meditation achieved through an elaborate tableau of colorful visual images. The film was a source of turmoil for its distributor, Buena Vista Pictures, which was planning significant expansion into the Chinese market at the time. Initially defiant in the face of pressure from Chinese officials, Disney has since distanced itself from the project, hurting &quot;Kundun&quot;″s commercial profile. In the short term, the sheer eclecticism in evidence enhanced the director&#x27;s reputation. In the long term, however, it appears &quot;Kundun&quot; has been sidelined in most critical appraisals of the director, mostly noted as a stylistic and thematic detour. &quot;Kundun&quot; was Scorsese&#x27;s second attempt to profile the life of a great religious leader, following &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;.

&quot;Bringing Out the Dead&quot; (1999) was a return to familiar territory, with the director and writer Paul Schrader constructing a pitch-black comic take on their own earlier &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;. Like earlier Scorsese-Schrader collaborations, its final scenes of spiritual redemption explicitly recall the films of Robert Bresson. (It is also worth noting that the film&#x27;s incident-filled nocturnal setting is reminiscent of &quot;After Hours&quot;.) It received generally positive reviews, although not the universal critical acclaim of some of his other films. It stars Nicolas Cage, Ving Rhames, John Goodman, Tom Sizemore, and Patricia Arquette.

On various occasions Scorsese has been asked to present the Honorary Academy Award during the Oscar telecast. In 1998, at the 70th Academy Awards, Scorsese presented the award to film legend Stanley Donen. When accepting the award Donen quipped, &quot;Marty this is backwards, I should be giving this to you, believe me&quot;. In 1999, at the 71st Academy Awards, Scorsese and De Niro presented the award to film director Elia Kazan. This was a controversial pick for the academy due to Kazan&#x27;s involvement with the Hollywood blacklist in the 1950s. Several members of the audience including Nick Nolte and Ed Harris refused to applaud Kazan when he received the award while others such as Warren Beatty, Meryl Streep, Kathy Bates, and Kurt Russell gave him a standing ovation.

=== 2000–2015: Film and television work ===
In 1999, Scorsese directed a documentary on Italian filmmakers titled &quot;Il Mio Viaggio in Italia&quot;, also known as &quot;My Voyage to Italy&quot;. The documentary foreshadowed Scorsese&#x27;s next project, the epic &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; (2002), influenced by (amongst many others) major Italian directors such as Luchino Visconti and filmed in its entirety at Rome&#x27;s famous Cinecittà film studios. With a production budget said to be in excess of $100 million, &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; was Scorsese&#x27;s biggest and arguably most mainstream venture to date. Like &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot;, it was set in 19th-century New York, although focusing on the other end of the social scale (and like that film, also starring Daniel Day-Lewis). The film marked the first collaboration between Scorsese and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, who became a fixture in later Scorsese films. The production was highly troubled, with many rumors referring to the director&#x27;s conflict with Miramax Films boss Harvey Weinstein. Despite denials of artistic compromise, some felt that it was Scorsese&#x27;s most conventional film, featuring standard film tropes that Scorsese had traditionally avoided, such as characters existing purely for exposition purposes and explanatory flashbacks.

The final cut of the movie ran to 168 minutes, while Scorsese&#x27;s original cut was over 180 minutes long. Even so, the film received generally positive reviews with the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reporting that 75 percent of the reviews for the film they tallied were positive and summarizing the critics writing, &quot;Though flawed, the sprawling, messy &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; is redeemed by impressive production design and Day-Lewis&#x27;s electrifying performance.&quot; The film&#x27;s central themes are consistent with Scorsese&#x27;s established concerns: New York, violence as culturally endemic, and subcultural divisions down ethnic lines. Originally filmed for a release in the winter of 2001 (to qualify for Academy Award nominations), Scorsese delayed the final production of the film until after the beginning of 2002; Miramax Films consequently delayed the film until its release in the Oscar season of late 2002. &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; earned Scorsese his first Golden Globe for Best Director. In February 2003, &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; received 10 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor for Daniel Day-Lewis; however, it did not win in any category.

The following year, Scorsese completed production of &quot;The Blues&quot;, an expansive seven-part documentary tracing the history of blues music from its African roots to the Mississippi Delta and beyond. Seven filmmakers including Wim Wenders, Clint Eastwood, Mike Figgis, and Scorsese himself each contributed a 90-minute film (Scorsese&#x27;s entry was titled &quot;Feel Like Going Home&quot;). In the early 2000s, Scorsese produced several films for up-and-coming directors, such as &quot;You Can Count on Me&quot; (directed by Kenneth Lonergan), &quot;Rain&quot; (directed by Katherine Lindberg), &quot;Lymelife&quot; (directed by Derick Martini) and &quot;The Young Victoria&quot; (directed by Jean-Marc Vallée). At that time, he established Sikelia Productions. In 2003, producer Emma Tillinger Koskoff joined the company. Scorsese also produced several documentaries, such as &quot;The Soul of a Man&quot; (directed by Wim Wenders) and &quot;Lightning in a Bottle&quot; (directed by Antoine Fuqua).
Scorsese&#x27;s film &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004) is a lavish, large-scale biopic of eccentric aviation pioneer and film mogul Howard Hughes and reunited Scorsese with actor Leonardo DiCaprio. The film received highly positive reviews. The film was a widespread box office success and gained Academy recognition. &quot;The Aviator&quot; was nominated for six Golden Globe Awards, including Best Motion Picture-Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama for Leonardo DiCaprio. It won three, including Best Motion Picture-Drama and Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama. In January 2005 &quot;The Aviator&quot; became the most-nominated film of the 77th Academy Awards nominations, nominated in 11 categories including Best Picture. The film also garnered nominations in nearly all the other major categories, including a fifth Best Director nomination for Scorsese. Despite having the most nominations, the film won only five Oscars. Scorsese lost again, this time to director Clint Eastwood for &quot;Million Dollar Baby&quot; (which also won Best Picture).

&quot;No Direction Home&quot; is a documentary film by Scorsese that tells of the life of Bob Dylan, and his impact on American popular music and the culture of the 20th century. The film does not cover Dylan&#x27;s entire career; it focuses on his beginnings, his rise to fame in the 1960s, his then-controversial transformation from an acoustic guitar-based musician and performer to an electric guitar-influenced sound and his &quot;retirement&quot; from touring in 1966 following an infamous motorcycle accident. The film was first presented on television in both the United States (as part of the PBS &quot;American Masters&quot; series) and the United Kingdom (as part of the BBC Two &quot;Arena&quot; series) on September 26 to 27, 2005. A DVD version of the film was released the same month. The film won a Peabody Award and the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video. In addition, Scorsese received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Documentary/Nonfiction Program, losing to &quot;Baghdad ER&quot;.

Scorsese returned to the crime genre with the Boston-set thriller &quot;The Departed&quot;, based on the Hong Kong police drama &quot;Infernal Affairs&quot; (which is co-directed by Andrew Lau and Alan Mak). The film continued Scorsese&#x27;s collaboration with Leonardo DiCaprio and was the first time he worked with Matt Damon, Jack Nicholson, Mark Wahlberg, and Martin Sheen. &quot;The Departed&quot; opened to widespread critical acclaim, with some proclaiming it as one of the best efforts Scorsese had brought to the screen since 1990&#x27;s &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, and still others putting it at the same level as Scorsese&#x27;s most celebrated classics &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; and &quot;Raging Bull&quot;. With domestic box office receipts surpassing million, &quot;The Departed&quot; was Scorsese&#x27;s highest-grossing film (not accounting for inflation) until 2010&#x27;s &quot;Shutter Island&quot;. &quot;The Departed&quot; earned Scorsese a second Golden Globe for Best Director, as well as a Critics&#x27; Choice Award, his first Directors Guild of America Award, and the Academy Award for Best Director. Presented with the latter, Scorsese poked fun at his track record of nominations, asking, &quot;Could you double-check the envelope?&quot; The award was presented by his longtime friends and colleagues Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg. &quot;The Departed&quot; also received the Academy Award for the Best Motion Picture of 2006, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Film Editing by longtime Scorsese editor Thelma Schoonmaker, her third win for a Scorsese film.

&quot;Shine a Light&quot; captures rock and roll band The Rolling Stones&#x27; performing at New York City&#x27;s Beacon Theatre on October 29 and November 1, 2006, intercut with brief news and interview footage from throughout their career. The film was initially scheduled for release on September 21, 2007, but Paramount Classics postponed its general release until April 2008. Its world premiere was at the opening of the 58th Berlinale Film Festival on February 7, 2008. &quot;Marty did an amazing job of making us look great...&quot; observed drummer Charlie Watts. &quot;It&#x27;s all in the edits and the cuts. That&#x27;s a movie maker rather than a guy just shooting a band onstage... It&#x27;s not &quot;Casablanca&quot;, but it&#x27;s a great thing to have from our point of view, not being egotistical. It&#x27;s a document.&quot;

In 2009, Scorsese signed a petition in support of director Roman Polanski, who had been detained while traveling to a film festival in relation to his 1977 sexual abuse charges, which the petition argued would undermine the tradition of film festivals as a place for works to be shown &quot;freely and safely&quot;, and that arresting filmmakers traveling to neutral countries could open the door &quot;for actions of which no-one can know the effects.&quot;

On October 22, 2007, &quot;Daily Variety&quot; reported that Scorsese would reunite with Leonardo DiCaprio on a fourth picture, &quot;Shutter Island&quot;. Principal photography on the Laeta Kalogridis screenplay, based on the novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane, began in Massachusetts in March 2008. In December 2007, actors Mark Ruffalo, Max von Sydow, Ben Kingsley, and Michelle Williams joined the cast, marking the first time these actors had worked with Scorsese. The film was released on February 19, 2010. On May 20, 2010, &quot;Shutter Island&quot; became Scorsese&#x27;s highest-grossing film. In 2010, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that Scorsese was supporting the David Lynch Foundation&#x27;s initiative to help 10,000 military veterans overcome posttraumatic stress disorder through Transcendental Meditation; Scorsese has publicly discussed his own practice of TM.

Scorsese directed a television commercial for Chanel&#x27;s then-new men&#x27;s fragrance, &quot;Bleu de Chanel&quot;, starring French actor Gaspard Ulliel. Filmed in New York City, it debuted online on August 25, 2010, and was released on TV in September 2010. Scorsese directed the series premiere for &quot;Boardwalk Empire&quot;, an HBO drama series, starring Steve Buscemi and Michael Pitt, based on Nelson Johnson&#x27;s book &quot;Boardwalk Empire: The Birth, High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City&quot;. Terence Winter, who wrote for &quot;The Sopranos&quot;, created the series. In addition to directing the pilot (for which he won the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing), Scorsese also served as an executive producer on the series. The series premiered on September 19, 2010, and ran for five seasons.

Scorsese directed the three-and-a-half-hour documentary &quot;George Harrison: Living in the Material World&quot; about the life and music of former Beatles&#x27; member George Harrison, which premiered in the United States on HBO over two parts on October 5 and 6, 2011. His next film &quot;Hugo&quot; is a 3D adventure drama film based on Brian Selznick&#x27;s novel &quot;The Invention of Hugo Cabret&quot;. The film stars Asa Butterfield, Chloë Grace Moretz, Ben Kingsley, Sacha Baron Cohen, Ray Winstone, Emily Mortimer, Christopher Lee, and Jude Law. The film has been met with critical acclaim and earned Scorsese his third Golden Globe Award for Best Director. The film was also nominated for 11 Academy Awards, winning five of them and becoming tied with Michel Hazanavicius&#x27;s film &quot;The Artist&quot; for the most Academy Awards won by a single film in 2011. &quot;Hugo&quot; also won two BAFTA awards, among numerous other awards and nominations. &quot;Hugo&quot; was Scorsese&#x27;s first 3D film and was released in the United States on November 23, 2011.

Scorsese&#x27;s 2013 film, &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot;, is an American biographical black comedy based on Jordan Belfort&#x27;s memoir of the same name. The screenplay was written by Terence Winter and starred Leonardo DiCaprio as Belfort, along with Jonah Hill, Matthew McConaughey, and others. The film marked the fifth collaboration between Scorsese and DiCaprio and the second between Scorsese and Winter after &quot;Boardwalk Empire&quot;. It was released on December 25, 2013. The film tells the story of a New York stockbroker, played by DiCaprio, who engages in a large securities fraud case involving illicit stock manipulation, by way of the practice of &quot;pump and dump&quot;. DiCaprio was given the award for Best Actor-Motion Picture Musical or Comedy at the 2014 Golden Globe Awards. The film was also nominated for Best Motion Picture-Musical or Comedy as well. &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor for Leonardo DiCaprio, Best Supporting Actor for Jonah Hill, Best Director for Martin Scorsese, and Best Adapted Screenplay for Terence Winter but did not win in any category. In a 2016 critics&#x27; poll conducted by the BBC, the film was ranked among the 100 greatest motion pictures since 2000.

Scorsese and David Tedeschi made a documentary about the history of the &quot;New York Review of Books&quot;, titled &quot;The 50 Year Argument&quot;. It screened as a work in progress at the Berlin International Film Festival in February 2014 and premiered in June 2014 at the Sheffield Doc/Fest. It was also screened in Oslo, and Jerusalem before being shown on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Arena&quot; series in July and at Telluride in August. In September, it was screened at the Toronto and Calgary International Film Festivals, and the New York Film Festival. It aired on HBO on September 29, 2014.

Scorsese directed the pilot for &quot;Vinyl&quot; written by Terence Winter and George Mastras, with Mick Jagger producing and Mastras as showrunner. The series stars Bobby Cannavale as Richie Finestra, founder and president of a top-tier record label, set in 1970s New York City&#x27;s drug-and sex-fueled music business as punk and disco were breaking out, all told through the eyes of Finestra trying to resurrect his label and find the next new sound. Filming began on July 25, 2014. Co-stars include Ray Romano, Olivia Wilde, Juno Temple, Andrew Dice Clay, Ato Essandoh, Max Casella, and James Jagger. On December 2, 2014, &quot;Vinyl&quot; was picked up by HBO. The series lasted one season. Scorsese has acted as executive producer of several indie films, like the 2014 &quot;The Third Side of the River&quot; (directed by his protege Celina Murga), another 2014 film &quot;Revenge of the Green Dragons&quot; (co-directed by Andrew Lau, whose film &quot;Infernal Affairs&quot; inspired &quot;The Departed&quot;), as well as &quot;Bleed for This&quot; and &quot;Free Fire&quot;.

Scorsese directed &quot;The Audition&quot;, a short film that also served as a promotional piece for casinos Studio City in Macau and City of Dreams in Manila, Philippines. The short brought together Scorsese&#x27;s long-time muses Leonardo DiCaprio and Robert De Niro for the first time under his direction. The short film featured the two actors, playing fictionalized versions of themselves, competing for a role in Scorsese&#x27;s next film. It was Scorsese&#x27;s first collaboration with De Niro in two decades. The film premiered in October 2015 in conjunction with the grand opening of Studio City.

=== 2016–present ===

Scorsese had long anticipated filming an adaptation of Shūsaku Endō&#x27;s novel &quot;Silence&quot;, a drama about the lives of two Portuguese Jesuit priests in Japan during the 17th century. He had originally planned &quot;Silence&quot; as his next project following &quot;Shutter Island.&quot; On April 19, 2013, financing was secured for &quot;Silence&quot; by Emmett/Furla Films, and filming began in January 2015. By November 2016, the film had completed post-production. It was written by Jay Cocks and Scorsese, based on the novel, and stars Andrew Garfield, Liam Neeson, and Adam Driver. The film was released on December 23, 2016, to positive reviews from critics. Scorsese was recognized as an Italian citizen by &quot;jus sanguinis&quot; in 2018.

On January 10, 2019, &quot;Variety&quot;″s Chris Willman reported that Scorsese&#x27;s long-anticipated documentary of Bob Dylan&#x27;s 1975 tour, the Rolling Thunder Revue, would be released by Netflix: &quot;&quot;Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese&quot; captures the troubled spirit of America in 1975 and the joyous music that Dylan performed during the fall of that year. Part documentary, part concert film, part fever dream, &quot;Rolling Thunder&quot; is a one of a kind experience, from master filmmaker Martin Scorsese.&quot; On April 25, 2019, it was announced that the documentary would be released on Netflix on June 12, 2019, with a concurrent theatrical engagement in twenty American, European, and Australian cities the night before, and an extended theatrical schedule in Los Angeles and New York so that the film will qualify for award consideration. After years of development, principal photography on Scorsese&#x27;s crime film &quot;The Irishman&quot;, based on the book &quot;I Heard You Paint Houses&quot; by Charles Brandt, began in August 2017, starring Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, and Al Pacino. The film had its world premiere at the 57th New York Film Festival on September 27, 2019. It received a limited theatrical release on November 1, 2019, followed by digital streaming on November 27, 2019, on Netflix. In January 2020, &quot;The Irishman&quot; received ten Academy Award nominations, including for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor for Pacino and Pesci.

On December 29, 2020, the trailer for Scorsese&#x27;s Netflix documentary series &quot;Pretend It&#x27;s a City&quot; was released. The series features Fran Lebowitz and Scorsese as they delve into her personal beliefs and thoughts on New York City. The project was released January 8, 2021, on Netflix. This is Scorsese&#x27;s second documentary featuring Lebowitz, the first being &quot;Public Speaking&quot; (2010) which was released on HBO. In October 2022, Scorsese and David Tedeschi premiered their collaborative film &quot;Personality Crisis: One Night Only&quot;, at the New York Film Festival. The film is a documentary about David Johansen, featuring both contemporary concert footage shot for the project as well as archival footage.
In July 2019, Scorsese started scouting locations in preparation for the 2020 filming of his next film &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot;, a film adaptation of the book of the same name by David Grann. Scorsese would team up with Leonardo DiCaprio for the sixth time and Robert De Niro for the tenth time. In December 2019, Scorsese&#x27;s frequent cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto confirmed that &quot;Flower Moon&quot; was gearing up to start principal photography in March 2020, which was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2020, it was announced that filming for &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot; had been postponed indefinitely in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, that the potential cost of the film had ballooned to $200 million, and that Scorsese was in talks with Netflix or Apple Inc. to produce and distribute, with Paramount Pictures involved as a partner. On May 27, 2020, Apple bought the production and distribution rights to the film, which was released theatrically by Paramount and streamed on Apple TV+. Principal photography commenced in April 2021. It premiered at the 76th Cannes Film Festival on May 20, 2023, receiving a nine-minute standing ovation and was released theatrically on October 20, 2023. On May 16, 2023, while promoting &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot;, Scorsese spoke about his eagerness to continue working, stating that &quot;I&#x27;m old. I read stuff. I see things. I want to tell stories, and there&#x27;s no more time.&quot; It was nominated for ten Oscars, and seven Golden Globes, winning one for Best Actress in a Drama Lily Gladstone. That same year he directed a commercial for Bleu de Chanel starring Timothée Chalamet.

In 2024 Scorsese narrated the documentary film &quot;Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger&quot; directed by David Hinton. Guy Lodge of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote, &quot;Scorsese may not have directed this engaging tour through a vital filmography, but he narrates with palpable, personal devotion to his subject.&quot; The film premiered at the Berlin International Film Festival where it was picked up for distribution by MUBI.

==== Upcoming projects ====
In November 2021, Scorsese was set to direct a biopic feature about rock band the Grateful Dead for Apple Studios featuring Jonah Hill. In July 2022, it was announced Scorsese would direct an adaptation of David Grann&#x27;s non-fiction novel &quot;The Wager&quot; for Apple Studios, reteaming once again with DiCaprio. In May 2023, after meeting with Pope Francis, Scorsese said he was considering writing and directing a new film about Jesus. More details were revealed in January 2024, revealing that it would likely be Scorsese&#x27;s next film and that he had co-written it with Kent Jones, based on the Shūsaku Endō novel &quot;A Life of Jesus&quot;. In 2023, during an interview with &quot;GQ&quot;, it was revealed that Scorsese was working on an adaptation of Marilynne Robinson&#x27;s &quot;Home&quot; with Todd Field and Jones. It was announced in February 2025 that Scorsese would be directing a mob movie set in Hawaii, starring and being co-produced by Dwayne Johnson, Leonardo DiCaprio, and Emily Blunt. Johnson and Blunt pitched the plot to Scorsese and DiCaprio, which was described as being &quot;a cross between Goodfellas and The Departed&quot;, and Nick Bilton was hired as a screenwriter.

== Filmmaking style and technique ==
Several recurring filmmaking techniques are identifiable in many of Scorsese&#x27;s films. He has established a filmmaking history which involves repeat collaborations with actors, screenwriters, film editors, and cinematographers, sometimes extending over several decades, such as that with recurring cinematographers Michael Ballhaus, Robert Richardson, and Rodrigo Prieto.

===Slow motion and freeze frame===
Scorsese is known for his frequent use of slow motion, for example, in &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot; (1967) and &quot;Mean Streets&quot; (1973). He is also known for using freeze frames, such as: in the opening credits of &quot;The King of Comedy&quot; (1983), throughout &quot;Goodfellas&quot; (1990), &quot;Casino&quot; (1995), &quot;The Departed&quot; (2006), and in &quot;The Irishman&quot; (2019). His blonde leading ladies are usually seen through the eyes of the protagonist as angelic and ethereal; they wear white in their first scene and are photographed in slow motion—Cybill Shepherd in &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;; Cathy Moriarty&#x27;s white bikini in &quot;Raging Bull&quot;; Sharon Stone&#x27;s white minidress in &quot;Casino&quot;. This may be a nod to director Alfred Hitchcock. Scorsese often uses long tracking shots, as seen in &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, &quot;Casino&quot;, &quot;Gangs of New York&quot;, and &quot;Hugo&quot;. MOS sequences set to popular music or voice-over are regularly seen in his films, often involving aggressive camera movement or rapid editing. Scorsese sometimes highlights characters in a scene with an iris, an homage to 1920s silent film cinema (as scenes at the time sometimes used this transition). This effect can be seen in &quot;Casino&quot; (it is used on Sharon Stone and Joe Pesci), &quot;Life Lessons&quot;, &quot;The Departed&quot; (on Matt Damon), and &quot;Hugo&quot;. Some of his films include references/allusions to Westerns, particularly &quot;Rio Bravo&quot;, &quot;The Great Train Robbery&quot;, &quot;Shane&quot;, &quot;The Searchers&quot;, and &quot;The Oklahoma Kid&quot;. Slow motion flashbulbs and accented camera/flash/shutter sounds are often used, as is the song &quot;Gimme Shelter&quot; by The Rolling Stones heard in several of Scorsese&#x27;s films: &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, &quot;Casino&quot;, and &quot;The Departed&quot;.

===Cameo appearances===
Scorsese usually has a quick cameo in his films (&quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot;, &quot;Boxcar Bertha&quot;, &quot;Mean Streets&quot;, &quot;Alice Doesn&#x27;t Live Here Anymore&quot;, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, &quot;The King of Comedy&quot;, &quot;After Hours&quot;, &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot; (albeit hidden under a hood), &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot;, &quot;Gangs of New York&quot;, &quot;Hugo&quot;, &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot;), he is also known to contribute his voice to a film without appearing on screen (e.g. as in &quot;The Aviator&quot; and &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot;). In &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot;, for example, he appears in the non-speaking role of a large format portrait photographer in one of the passing scenes of the film. He provides the opening voice-over narration in &quot;Mean Streets&quot; and &quot;The Color of Money&quot;; plays the off-screen dressing room attendant in the final scene of &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, and provides the voice of the unseen ambulance dispatcher in &quot;Bringing Out the Dead&quot;. He also appears as the director of fictional newly formed Vatican Television in the Italian comedy &quot;In the Pope&#x27;s Eye&quot;.

===Religious guilt===
Guilt is a prominent theme in many of his films, as is the role of Catholicism in creating and dealing with guilt (&quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot;, &quot;Mean Streets&quot;, &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, &quot;Bringing Out the Dead&quot;, &quot;The Departed&quot;, &quot;Shutter Island&quot;, and &quot;The Irishman&quot;). In a similar manner, Scorsese considered &quot;Silence&quot; a &quot;passion project&quot;: it had been in development since 1990, two years after the release of his film &quot;The Last Temptation of Christ&quot;, which also contained strongly religious themes. When asked why he retained interest in a project dealing with strong theological themes for over 26 years, Scorsese said,As you get older, ideas go and come. Questions, answers, loss of the answer again and more questions, and this is what really interests me. Yes, the cinema and the people in my life and my family are most important, but ultimately as you get older, there&#x27;s got to be more ... &quot;Silence&quot; is just something that I&#x27;m drawn to in that way. It&#x27;s been an obsession, it has to be done ... it&#x27;s a strong, wonderful true story, a thriller in a way, but it deals with those questions.

===Political corruption===
More recently, his films have featured corrupt authority figures, such as policemen in &quot;The Departed&quot; and politicians in &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; and &quot;The Aviator&quot;. He is also known for his liberal usage of profanity, dark humor, and violence.

Scorsese&#x27;s interest in political corruption as depicted in his films was expanded further in his 2019 film &quot;The Irishman&quot;. Richard Brody writing for &quot;The New Yorker&quot; found the main interpretation of the film to be a dark allegory of a realist reading of American politics and American society stating: The real-life Hoffa... (was) a crucial player in both gangland politics and the actual practical politics of the day, and the movie&#x27;s key through line is the inseparability of those two realms. &quot;The Irishman&quot; is a sociopolitical horror story that views much of modern American history as a continuous crime in motion, in which every level of society—from domestic life through local business through big business through national and international politics—is poisoned by graft and bribery, shady deals and dirty money, threats of violence and its gruesome enactment, and the hard-baked impunity that keeps the entire system running.

=== Frequent collaborators ===

Scorsese often casts the same actors in his projects, particularly Robert De Niro, who has collaborated with Scorsese on ten feature films and one short film. Included are the three films (&quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, and &quot;Goodfellas&quot;) that made AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies list. Scorsese has often said he thinks De Niro&#x27;s best work under his direction was Rupert Pupkin in &quot;The King of Comedy&quot;. After the turn of the century, Scorsese found a new muse with younger actor Leonardo DiCaprio, collaborating on six feature films and one short to date. Several critics have compared Scorsese&#x27;s new partnership with DiCaprio with his previous one with De Niro. Frequent collaborators also include: Victor Argo (6), Harvey Keitel (6), Harry Northup (6), J. C. MacKenzie (5), Murray Moston (5), Illeana Douglas (4), Joe Pesci (4), Frank Vincent (3), Barry Primus (3), and Verna Bloom (3). Others who have appeared in multiple Scorsese projects include Daniel Day-Lewis, who had become very reclusive to the Hollywood scene, Alec Baldwin, Willem Dafoe, Ben Kingsley, Jude Law, Dick Miller, Liam Neeson, Emily Mortimer, Jesse Plemons, John C. Reilly, David Carradine, Barbara Hershey, Kevin Corrigan, Jake Hoffman, Frank Sivero, Ray Winstone and Nick Nolte. Before their deaths, Scorsese&#x27;s parents, Charles Scorsese and Catherine Scorsese, appeared in bit parts, walk-ons or supporting roles, such as in &quot;Goodfellas&quot;.

For his crew, Scorsese frequently worked with editors Marcia Lucas and Thelma Schoonmaker, cinematographers Michael Ballhaus, Robert Richardson, Michael Chapman and Rodrigo Prieto, screenwriters Paul Schrader, Mardik Martin, Jay Cocks, Terrence Winter, John Logan and Steven Zaillian, costume designer Sandy Powell, production designers Dante Ferretti and Bob Shaw, music producer Robbie Robertson, and composers Howard Shore and Elmer Bernstein. Schoonmaker, Richardson, Powell, and Ferretti have each won Academy Awards in their respective categories on collaborations with Scorsese. Elaine and Saul Bass, the latter being Hitchcock&#x27;s frequent title designer, designed the opening credits for &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot;, &quot;Casino&quot; and &quot;Cape Fear&quot;.

== Personal life ==
=== Marriages ===
Scorsese has been married five times.

In 1965, Scorsese married Laraine Marie Brennan. They have a daughter, Catherine, who was named after Scorsese&#x27;s mother. The couple remained together until 1971.

In 1976, Scorsese married writer Julia Cameron. They have a daughter, Domenica Cameron-Scorsese, an actress who appeared in &quot;The Age of Innocence.&quot; After one year of marriage, the couple had an acrimonious divorce which served as the basis of Cameron&#x27;s first feature, the dark comedy &quot;God&#x27;s Will&quot;, which also starred their daughter. The latter had a small role in &quot;Cape Fear&quot; using the name Domenica Scorsese and has continued to act, write, direct and produce.

In 1979, Scorsese married actress Isabella Rossellini. The couple divorced in 1983.

In March 1983, Scorsese met Dawn Steel (then-junior executive at Paramount) at an annual ShoWest Convention (in Las Vegas, NV), after which the pair began a romantic relationship. Scorsese moved from New York to live in her Sunset Plaza residence while his &quot;Last Temptation of Christ&quot; was initially in development at Paramount (Steel reportedly recused herself from her boyfriend&#x27;s passion project). In her 1993 memoir, Steel discussed their relationship, including attending the Cannes Film Festival premiere of &quot;The King of Comedy&quot; and later location scouting in Tunisia together. The two would reconnect professionally in 1987, jump-starting the restoration of &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot; (shortly after Steel&#x27;s installation as president at Columbia Pictures).

In 1985, Scorsese married producer Barbara De Fina. The couple divorced in 1991.

From 1989 to 1997, Scorsese was romantically involved with actress Illeana Douglas.

In 1999, Scorsese married Helen Schermerhorn Morris. They have a daughter, actress and filmmaker Francesca, who appeared in his films &quot;The Departed&quot;, &quot;Hugo&quot;, and &quot;The Aviator&quot;, and had a leading role in HBO/Sky&#x27;s miniseries &quot;We Are Who We Are&quot; in 2020.

=== Politics ===
Scorsese was an opponent of the Iraq War, wearing a white dove pin to the 75th Academy Awards in 2003 and clapping for Michael Moore&#x27;s acceptance speech wherein he criticized President George W. Bush and the invasion.

=== Legal issues ===
In March 2024, Scorsese settled a lawsuit with aspiring screenwriter Simon Afram. Afram accused him of pocketing $500,000 to help handle casting, production and postproduction of his screenplay about World War II&#x27;s Operation Fortitude, which was titled &quot;Operation Fortitude&quot;, only for Scorsese to then do nothing.

=== Religious beliefs ===
Scorsese previously identified as a lapsed Catholic, declaring &quot;I&#x27;m a lapsed Catholic. But I am Roman Catholic; there&#x27;s no way out of it.&quot; In 2016, Scorsese identified himself as a Catholic again, saying, &quot;my way has been, and is, Catholicism. After many years of thinking about other things, dabbling here and there, I am most comfortable as a Catholic. I believe in the tenets of Catholicism.&quot;

== Filmography ==
, Scorsese has directed 26 full-length narrative films and 16 full-length documentary films.

== Other work ==
=== Film preservation ===
Scorsese had been at the forefront in film preservation and restoration ever since 1990, when he created The Film Foundation, a non-profit film organization which collaborates with film studios to restore prints of old or damaged films. Scorsese launched the organization with Woody Allen, Robert Altman, Francis Ford Coppola, Clint Eastwood, Stanley Kubrick, George Lucas, Sydney Pollack, Robert Redford, and Steven Spielberg, who all sat on the foundation&#x27;s original board of directors. In 2006, Paul Thomas Anderson, Wes Anderson, Curtis Hanson, Peter Jackson, Ang Lee and Alexander Payne joined them. In 2015, Christopher Nolan also joined the board. Recent members include Spike Lee, Sofia Coppola, Guillermo del Toro, Barry Jenkins, Lynne Ramsay, Joanna Hogg and Kathryn Bigelow.

The foundation has restored more than 800 films from around the world and conducts a free educational curriculum for young people on the language and history of film. Scorsese and the Foundation spearheaded fundraising for the film restoration of Michael Powell, and Emeric Pressburger&#x27;s &quot;The Red Shoes&quot; (1948). For his advocacy in film restoration he received the Robert Osborne Award at the 2018 TCM Film Festival. The award was given to Scorsese as &quot;an individual who has significantly contributed to preserving the cultural heritage of classic films&quot;.

In November 2020, The Criterion Channel released a 30-minute video titled, &quot;30 Years of The Film Foundation: Martin Scorsese and Ari Aster in Conversation&quot;, celebrating the &quot;mission, evolution, and ongoing work of The Film Foundation&quot;. Scorsese stated as of 2020, the Foundation has helped restore 850 films.

On April 20, 2024, Scorsese partnered with Seth MacFarlane to showcase &quot;Back From the Ink: Restored Animated Shorts&quot; at the 2024 TCM Classic Film Festival. Macfarlane and Scorsese funded the restoration, and worked with the UCLA Film and Television Archive and The Film Foundation with Paramount Pictures Archives.

==== The World Cinema Project ====
In 2007, Scorsese established the World Cinema Project with the mission to preserve and present marginalized and infrequently screened films from regions generally ill-equipped to preserve their own cinema history. Scorsese&#x27;s organization has worked with the Criterion Collection to not only preserve the films but to allow them to be released on DVD and Blu-ray boxsets and on streaming services such as The Criterion Channel. Films in the WCP include Ousmane Sembène&#x27;s &quot;Black Girl&quot; (1966), and Djibril Diop Mambéty&#x27;s &quot;Touki Bouki&quot; (1973).

The Criterion Collection so far has released four Vol. boxsets on DVD and Blu-ray, titled, &quot;Martin Scorsese&#x27;s World Cinema Project&quot;. The first Volume includes 6 titles, &quot;Touki Bouki&quot; (1973), &quot;Redes&quot; (1936), &quot;A River Called Titas&quot; (1973), &quot;Dry Summer&quot; (1964), &quot;Trances&quot; (1981) and &quot;The Housemaid&quot; (1960). The second volume also includes 6 titles, &quot;Insiang&quot; (1976), &quot;Mysterious Object at Noon&quot; (2000), &quot;Revenge&quot; (1989), &quot;Limite&quot; (1931), &quot;Law of the Border&quot; (1967), and &quot;Taipei Story&quot; (1985). The third volume includes 6 titles as well: &quot;Lucía&quot; (1968), &quot;After the Curfew&quot; (1954), &quot;Pixote&quot; (1980), &quot;Dos monjes&quot; (1934), &quot;Soleil Ô&quot; (1970), and &quot;Downpour&quot; (1972). The 6 films included in the fourth set are &quot;Sambizanga&quot; (1972), &quot;Prisioneros de la tierra&quot; (1939), &quot;Chess of the Wind&quot; (1979), &quot;Muna Moto&quot; (1975), &quot;Two Girls on the Street&quot; (1939), and &quot;Kalpana&quot; (1948).

==== The African Film Heritage Project ====
In 2017, Scorsese also introduced The African Film Heritage Project (AFHP), which is a joint initiative between Scorsese&#x27;s non-profit The Film Foundation, UNESCO, Cineteca di Bologna, and the Pan African Federation of Filmmakers (FEPACI). The project aims to locate and preserve 50 classic African films, some thought lost and others beyond repair, with hopes to make them available to audiences everywhere. In an interview with &quot;Cinema Escapist&quot; in 2018, Scorsese talked about the ambitious collaboration saying, &quot;Our first goal is to launch and conduct a thorough investigation in film archives and laboratories around the world, in order to locate the best surviving elements—original negatives, we hope—for our first 50 titles.&quot; He also stated that &quot;Restoration is always the primary goal, of course, but within the initiative, it&#x27;s also a starting point of a process that follows through with exhibition and dissemination in Africa and abroad. And of course, our restoration process always includes the creation of preservation elements.&quot;

In 2019, the AFHP, announced that they would screen restorations of four African films on their home continent for the first time as part of the 50th anniversary of the Pan African Film Festival of Ouagadougou. The movies in question are Med Hondo&#x27;s &quot;Soleil Ô&quot; (1970), Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina&#x27;s &quot;Chronique des années de braise&quot; (1975), Timité Bassori&#x27;s &quot;La Femme au couteau&quot; (1969), and Jean-Pierre Dikongue-Pipa&#x27;s &quot;Muna Moto&quot; (1975).

=== Film activism ===
Scorsese has mentioned his mentors being such filmmakers as John Cassavetes, Roger Corman, and Michael Powell. In film critic Roger Ebert&#x27;s book, &quot;Scorsese by Ebert&quot;, Ebert praised Scorsese for championing and supporting other filmmakers by serving as an executive producer on projects of filmmakers such as Antoine Fuqua, Wim Wenders, Kenneth Lonergan, Stephen Frears, Allison Anders, Spike Lee, and John McNaughton. More recently he has executive produced the films of the Safdie Brothers, Joanna Hogg, Kornél Mundruczó, Josephine Decker, Danielle Lessovitz, Alice Rohrwacher, Jonas Carpignano, Amélie van Elmbt, and Celina Murga. Scorsese has also chosen to name filmmakers throughout the years that he admires such as fellow New York City-based directors Woody Allen and Spike Lee, as well as other artists such as Wes Anderson, Bong Joon-ho, Greta Gerwig, Ari Aster, Kelly Reichardt, Claire Denis, Noah Baumbach, Paul Thomas Anderson, Christopher Nolan, the Coen Brothers, and Kathryn Bigelow.

===Favorite films===
Scorsese listed &quot;Pickup on South Street&quot; as one of his favorite films. &quot;The Band Wagon&quot; is his favorite musical.

In 2012, Scorsese participated in the &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; film polls of that year. Held every ten years to select the greatest films of all time, contemporary directors were asked to select ten films of their choice. Scorsese, however, picked 12, which are listed below in alphabetical order:
* &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; (US/UK,1968)
* &quot;8½&quot; (Italy, 1963)
* &quot;Ashes and Diamonds&quot; (Poland, 1958)
* &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; (US, 1941)
* &quot;The Leopard&quot; (Italy, 1963)
* &quot;Paisà&quot; (Italy, 1946)
* &quot;The Red Shoes&quot; (UK, 1948)
* &quot;The River&quot; (US, 1951)
* &quot;Salvatore Giuliano&quot; (Italy, 1962)
* &quot;The Searchers&quot; (US, 1956)
* &quot;Ugetsu&quot; (Japan, 1953)
* &quot;Vertigo&quot; (US, 1958)
Ten years later, Scorsese participated again in the &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; polls, picking 15 films, the same 12 of the 2012 list, plus the following:
* &quot;Diary of a Country Priest&quot; (France, 1951)
* &quot;Ikiru&quot; (Japan, 1952)
* &quot;Ordet&quot; (Denmark, 1955)
In 1999, after the death of Gene Siskel, Scorsese joined Roger Ebert as the guest co-host for an episode of &quot;Siskel &amp; Ebert&quot; where they each stated their 10 favorite films of the 1990s. Scorsese&#x27;s list numerically is:
#&quot;The Horse Thief&quot; (China, 1986)
#&quot;The Thin Red Line&quot; (US, 1998)
#&quot;A Borrowed Life&quot; (Taiwan, 1994)
#&quot;Eyes Wide Shut&quot; (US/UK, 1999)
#&quot;Bad Lieutenant&quot; (US, 1992)
#&quot;Breaking the Waves&quot; (Denmark/UK, 1996)
#&quot;Bottle Rocket&quot; (US, 1996)
#&quot;Crash&quot; (Canada, 1996)
#&quot;Fargo&quot; (US, 1996)
#&quot;Malcolm X&quot; (US, 1992) and &quot;Heat&quot; (US, 1995) (tie)
In 2012, Scorsese recommended 39 foreign films to Colin Levy.

In 2019, Martin Scorsese contributed his list of favorite films to LaCinetek, a streaming platform that compiles film lists from filmmakers worldwide. As a tireless cinephile, Scorsese submitted two lists: one featuring 73 &quot;founding&quot; films and another &quot;alternative list&quot; with 106 films. He also included a letter to Cédric Klapisch, one of LaCinetek&#x27;s founders, explaining his selections and noting that many filmmakers and films he admires are not included in these lists.

==Legacy and honors==

Scorsese&#x27;s films have been nominated for numerous awards both nationally and internationally, with an Academy Award win for &quot;The Departed&quot;. In 1991, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In 1997, Scorsese received the AFI Life Achievement Award. In 1998, the American Film Institute placed three Scorsese films on their list of the greatest American movies: &quot;Raging Bull&quot; at No. 24, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; at No. 47, and &quot;Goodfellas&quot; at No. 94. For the tenth-anniversary edition of their list, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was moved to No. 4, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; was moved to No. 52, and &quot;Goodfellas&quot; was moved to No. 92. In 2001, the American Film Institute placed two Scorsese films on their list of the most &quot;heart-pounding movies&quot; in American cinema: &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; at No. 22 and &quot;Raging Bull&quot; at No. 51. At a ceremony in Paris, France, on January 5, 2005, Martin Scorsese was awarded the French Legion of Honour in recognition of his contribution to cinema. On February 8, 2006, at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards, Scorsese was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video for &quot;No Direction Home&quot;.

Lynda Myles organized a retrospective of Scorsese&#x27;s work at the Edinburgh International Film Festival in 1975.

In 2007, Scorsese was listed among &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s 100 Most Influential People in The World. In August 2007, Scorsese was named the second-greatest director of all time in a poll by &quot;Total Film&quot; magazine, in front of Steven Spielberg and behind Alfred Hitchcock. In 2007, Scorsese was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (N.I.A.F.) at the nonprofit&#x27;s thirty-second Anniversary Gala. During the ceremony, Scorsese helped launch N.I.A.F.&#x27;s Jack Valenti Institute in memory of former foundation board member and past president of the Motion Picture Association of America (M.P.A.A.) Jack Valenti. The Institute provides support to Italian film students in the U.S. Scorsese received his award from Mary Margaret Valenti, Jack Valenti&#x27;s widow. Certain pieces of Scorsese&#x27;s film-related material and personal papers are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives, to which scholars and media experts from around the world may have full access. On September 11, 2007, the Kennedy Center Honors committee, which recognizes career excellence and cultural influence, named Scorsese as one of the honorees for the year. On June 17, 2008, the American Film Institute placed two of Scorsese&#x27;s films on the AFI&#x27;s 10 Top 10 list: &quot;Raging Bull&quot; at number one for the Sports genre and &quot;Goodfellas&quot; at number two for the Gangster genre. In 2013, the staff of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; voted &quot;Mean Streets&quot; the seventh greatest film ever made.
On January 17, 2010, at the 67th Golden Globe Awards, Scorsese was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award. On September 18, 2011, at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards, Scorsese won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for his work on the series premiere of &quot;Boardwalk Empire&quot;. In 2011, Scorsese received an honorary doctorate from the National Film School in Lodz. At the awards ceremony he said, &quot;I feel like I&#x27;m a part of this school and that I attended it,&quot; paying tribute to the films of Wajda, Munk, Has, Polanski and Skolimowski. King Missile wrote &quot;Martin Scorsese&quot; in his honor. On February 12, 2012, at the 65th British Academy Film Awards, Scorsese was the recipient of the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award.
On September 16, 2012, Scorsese won two Emmy Awards for Outstanding Directing for Nonfiction Programming and Outstanding Nonfiction Special for his work on the documentary &quot;George Harrison: Living in the Material World&quot;. In 2013, the National Endowment for the Humanities selected Scorsese for the Jefferson Lecture, the U.S. federal government&#x27;s highest honor for achievement in the humanities. He was the first filmmaker chosen for the honor. His lecture, delivered on April 1, 2013, at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, was titled &quot;Persistence of Vision: Reading the Language of Cinema&quot;. Scorsese was awarded the Polish Gold Medal for Merit to Culture – Gloria Artis on April 11, 2017, in recognition of his contribution to Polish cinema.
Scorsese has also garnered favorable responses from numerous film giants including Ingmar Bergman, Frank Capra, Jean-Luc Godard, Werner Herzog, Elia Kazan, Akira Kurosawa, David Lean, Michael Powell, Satyajit Ray, and François Truffaut. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2008. He was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Oxford on June 20, 2018. As of 2021, four of Scorsese&#x27;s films (&quot;Mean Streets&quot;, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, and &quot;Goodfellas&quot;) have been selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;. In commenting on Scorsese&#x27;s 2019 film &quot;The Irishman&quot;, Guillermo del Toro cited Scorsese&#x27;s ability as a director for the depiction of character development comparable to the films of &quot;Renoir, Bresson, Bergman, Oliveira or Kurosawa&quot;. Sam Mendes, in his acceptance speech after winning the 2020 Golden Globe Award for Best Director for &quot;1917&quot;, praised Scorsese&#x27;s contribution to cinema, stating, &quot;There&#x27;s not one director in this room, not one director in the world, that is not in the shadow of Martin Scorsese... I just have to say that.&quot; Bong Joon-ho, in his acceptance speech for the 2020 Academy Award for Best Director for &quot;Parasite&quot;, said, &quot;When I was young and studying cinema, there was a saying that I carved deep into my heart, which is, the most personal is the most creative.&quot; He then said that this quote had come from Scorsese, which prompted the audience to give Scorsese a standing ovation.

In 2021, lifelong friend George Lucas and his wife Mellody Hobson through the Hobson/Lucas Family Foundation made a donation to NYU to establish the Martin Scorsese Institute of Global Cinematic Arts.

== Awards and nominations ==


==Notes==
==See also==
*Martin Scorsese&#x27;s unrealized projects

==References==
==Works cited==

== External links ==
* 
* 
* Martin Scorsese on Letterboxd
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="0" end="23" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Charles Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q377616" start="125" end="138" title="New Hollywood" label="New Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779161" start="160" end="174" title="List of awards and nominations received by Martin Scorsese" label="many accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="189" end="202" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="209" end="221" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="229" end="240" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="244" end="256" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="268" end="287" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q292044" start="318" end="344" title="AFI Life Achievement Award" label="AFI Life Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q627964" start="358" end="388" title="Film at Lincoln Center" label="Film Society of Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="410" end="430" title="Kennedy Center Honor" label="Kennedy Center Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q640353" start="444" end="466" title="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award" label="Cecil B. DeMille Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="484" end="500" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="556" end="578" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="586" end="605" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="724" end="743" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q966540" start="751" end="813" title="Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development" label="Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575227" start="852" end="887" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Knocking at My Door" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Knocking at My Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071936" start="924" end="945" title="Chicago Film Festival" label="Chicago Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776557" start="971" end="992" title="Martin Scorsese filmography" label="Scorsese&amp;#x27;s films"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="1017" end="1033" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="1137" end="1145" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1150" end="1158" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="1239" end="1250" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q663012" start="1255" end="1268" title="freeze-frame shot" label="freeze frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="1328" end="1337" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q841335" start="1345" end="1357" title="Mean Streets" label="Mean Streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q922048" start="1435" end="1441" title="1976 Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="1477" end="1488" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="1517" end="1531" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776558" start="1579" end="1628" title="Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro" label="associated with Scorsese through eight more films"/>
<link wikidata="Q743367" start="1639" end="1669" title="New York, New York (1977 film)" label="&amp;quot;New York, New York&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="1684" end="1695" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122281" start="1716" end="1734" title="The King of Comedy (1982 film)" label="The King of Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="1755" end="1765" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q220910" start="1786" end="1792" title="Casino (1995 film)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q29057443" start="1816" end="1828" title="The Irishman" label="The Irishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349951" start="1905" end="1931" title="Martin Scorsese and Leonardo DiCaprio" label="a series of collaborations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="1937" end="1954" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154581" start="1972" end="1989" title="Gangs of New York" label="Gangs of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="2010" end="2021" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="2042" end="2054" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q210364" start="2075" end="2089" title="Shutter Island (film)" label="Shutter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="2114" end="2137" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q66316924" start="2202" end="2228" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (film)" label="Killers of the Flower Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846209" start="2279" end="2302" title="After Hours (film)" label="&amp;quot;After Hours&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q470916" start="2317" end="2335" title="The Color of Money" label="The Color of Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="2356" end="2385" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="The Last Temptation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125442" start="2406" end="2426" title="The Age of Innocence (1993 film)" label="The Age of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q944291" start="2447" end="2453" title="Kundun" label="Kundun"/>
<link wikidata="Q206576" start="2474" end="2478" title="Hugo (film)" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811634" start="2503" end="2510" title="Silence (2016 film)" label="Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2608" end="2611" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q585758" start="2625" end="2641" title="Boardwalk Empire" label="Boardwalk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20743300" start="2670" end="2675" title="Vinyl (TV series)" label="Vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257627" start="2727" end="2742" title="Public Speaking (film)" label="Public Speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="2764" end="2771" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603925" start="2772" end="2783" title="docu-series" label="docu-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764029" start="2790" end="2814" title="Pretend It&amp;#x27;s a City" label="Pretend It&amp;#x27;s a City"/>
<link wikidata="Q847599" start="2899" end="2913" title="The Last Waltz" label="The Last Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760695" start="2934" end="2951" title="No Direction Home" label="No Direction Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q432102" start="2972" end="2985" title="Shine a Light (film)" label="Shine a Light"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3010" end="3055" title="George Harrison: Living in the Material World" label="George Harrison: Living in the Material World"/>
<link wikidata="Q275422" start="3143" end="3146" title="Bad (Michael Jackson song)" label="Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354637" start="3204" end="3267" title="A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies" label="A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550265" start="3288" end="3312" title="Il Mio Viaggio in Italia" label="Il Mio Viaggio in Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="3453" end="3470" title="film preservation" label="film preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="3475" end="3486" title="film restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520874" start="3530" end="3549" title="The Film Foundation" label="The Film Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364276" start="3563" end="3586" title="World Cinema Foundation" label="World Cinema Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058775" start="3713" end="3721" title="Flushing, Queens" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q201462" start="3814" end="3826" title="Little Italy, Manhattan" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q441713" start="3899" end="3917" title="Catherine Scorsese" label="Catherine Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066037" start="3934" end="3950" title="Charles Scorsese" label="Charles Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494337" start="3966" end="3982" title="Garment District, Manhattan" label="Garment District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="4144" end="4150" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q502657" start="4165" end="4181" title="Polizzi Generosa" label="Polizzi Generosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q491383" start="4212" end="4219" title="Ciminna" label="Ciminna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4465" end="4473" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="4504" end="4510" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400831" start="4773" end="4795" title="Powell and Pressburger" label="Powell and Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q252529" start="4809" end="4824" title="Black Narcissus" label="Black Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q625780" start="4842" end="4867" title="The Red Shoes (1948 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Red Shoes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="4893" end="4902" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249349" start="4955" end="4988" title="The Tales of Hoffmann (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="5106" end="5122" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q921798" start="5168" end="5172" title="Sabu Dastagir" label="Sabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q358317" start="5177" end="5190" title="Victor Mature" label="Victor Mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q50713" start="5268" end="5279" title="Jean Renoir" label="Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q919673" start="5287" end="5308" title="The River (1951 film)" label="&amp;quot;The River&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5357" end="5362" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q470336" start="5420" end="5438" title="La Grande Illusion" label="La Grande Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="5485" end="5494" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q470560" start="5508" end="5521" title="The Quiet Man" label="The Quiet Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q276769" start="5545" end="5558" title="The Searchers" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q167776" start="5617" end="5635" title="Italian neorealism" label="Italian neorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q53003" start="5657" end="5675" title="Roberto Rossellini" label="Roberto Rossellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q721146" start="5689" end="5704" title="Rome, Open City" label="Rome, Open City"/>
<link wikidata="Q53004" start="5722" end="5738" title="Vittorio De Sica" label="Vittorio De Sica"/>
<link wikidata="Q172837" start="5752" end="5767" title="Bicycle Thieves" label="Bicycle Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550265" start="5866" end="5890" title="Il Mio Viaggio in Italia" label="Il Mio Viaggio in Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764086" start="5999" end="6004" title="Paisan" label="Paisà"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="6203" end="6219" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="6227" end="6246" title="Vertigo (film)" label="&amp;quot;Vertigo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193541" start="6297" end="6312" title="French New Wave" label="French New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q8873" start="6484" end="6496" title="Satyajit Ray" label="Satyajit Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="6498" end="6512" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="6514" end="6527" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q55433" start="6529" end="6551" title="Michelangelo Antonioni" label="Michelangelo Antonioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371" start="6553" end="6569" title="Federico Fellini" label="Federico Fellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="6571" end="6583" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="6588" end="6602" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="6785" end="6802" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q695116" start="6816" end="6838" title="Notes from Underground" label="Notes from Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="6853" end="6864" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q465360" start="6878" end="6917" title="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" label="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="6935" end="6948" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168936" start="6962" end="6985" title="The Heart of the Matter" label="The Heart of the Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038559" start="7032" end="7058" title="Cardinal Hayes High School" label="Cardinal Hayes High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="7130" end="7136" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="7162" end="7170" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q130965" start="7229" end="7247" title="Fordham University" label="Fordham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339065" start="7322" end="7347" title="Washington Square College" label="Washington Square College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339065" start="7366" end="7393" title="NYU College of Arts and Science" label="College of Arts and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="7462" end="7464" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="7470" end="7489" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q966540" start="7526" end="7588" title="Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development" label="Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409857" start="7781" end="7841" title="What&amp;#x27;s a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?" label="What&amp;#x27;s a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284170" start="7865" end="7896" title="It&amp;#x27;s Not Just You, Murray!" label="It&amp;#x27;s Not Just You, Murray!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005061" start="7973" end="7986" title="The Big Shave" label="The Big Shave"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8090" end="8097" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639077" start="8293" end="8310" title="Haig P. Manoogian" label="Haig P. Manoogian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848609" start="8424" end="8436" title="Baird Bryant" label="Baird Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q260125" start="8444" end="8460" title="John G. Avildsen" label="John G. Avildsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424726" start="8707" end="8713" title="gaffer (filmmaking)" label="gaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831691" start="8718" end="8742" title="Albert and David Maysles" label="Albert and David Maysles"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="8764" end="8772" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575227" start="8997" end="9032" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Knocking at My Door" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Knocking at My Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="9071" end="9084" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q166887" start="9096" end="9114" title="Thelma Schoonmaker" label="Thelma Schoonmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="9169" end="9180" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071936" start="9206" end="9241" title="Chicago International Film Festival" label="Chicago International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q237116" start="9417" end="9434" title="Marty (film)" label="&amp;quot;Marty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563739" start="9436" end="9468" title="A View from the Bridge (film)" label="&amp;quot;View from the Bridge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211372" start="9476" end="9493" title="On the Waterfront" label="On the Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q533449" start="9510" end="9524" title="David and Lisa" label="David and Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q699702" start="9769" end="9780" title="Jonas Mekas" label="Jonas Mekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q774517" start="9782" end="9796" title="Shirley Clarke" label="Shirley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993435" start="9848" end="9874" title="The Connection (1961 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Connection&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535980" start="9876" end="9895" title="Shadows (1959 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shadows&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105010821" start="9906" end="9923" title="Guns of the Trees" label="Guns of the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q189526" start="10438" end="10452" title="Brian De Palma" label="Brian De Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="10454" end="10474" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="10476" end="10488" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="10493" end="10509" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="10554" end="10568" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929690" start="10658" end="10674" title="Michael Wadleigh" label="Michael Wadleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q956288" start="10700" end="10709" title="Woodstock (film)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="10746" end="10761" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="10815" end="10827" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q885281" start="11021" end="11032" title="Bloody Mama" label="Bloody Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212396" start="11069" end="11082" title="Boxcar Bertha" label="Boxcar Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q841335" start="11465" end="11477" title="Mean Streets" label="Mean Streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="11528" end="11542" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="11544" end="11556" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="12012" end="12018" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="12030" end="12035" title="Verdi" label="Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q262479" start="12468" end="12481" title="Samuel Fuller" label="Samuel Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="12492" end="12507" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211144" start="12526" end="12539" title="Ellen Burstyn" label="Ellen Burstyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q916431" start="12578" end="12614" title="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore" label="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q738533" start="12883" end="12898" title="Italianamerican" label="Italianamerican"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="13011" end="13022" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="13055" end="13062" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q487094" start="13249" end="13264" title="Michael Chapman (cinematographer)" label="Michael Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498720" start="13405" end="13418" title="Travis Bickle" label="Travis Bickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="13435" end="13447" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="13642" end="13655" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865153" start="13714" end="13727" title="Arthur Bremer" label="Arthur Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="13729" end="13738" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q276769" start="13752" end="13765" title="The Searchers" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="13784" end="13798" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q664726" start="13806" end="13828" title="Pickpocket (film)" label="&amp;quot;Pickpocket&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q343960" start="13948" end="13965" title="John Hinckley Jr." label="John Hinckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="14014" end="14027" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="14324" end="14329" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="14353" end="14365" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q743367" start="14532" end="14550" title="New York, New York (1977 film)" label="New York, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="14744" end="14757" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="14844" end="14857" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19539028" start="15123" end="15136" title="Richard Brody" label="Richard Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409374" start="15194" end="15201" title="The Act (musical)" label="The Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="15369" end="15376" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q847599" start="15462" end="15476" title="The Last Waltz" label="The Last Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="15517" end="15525" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423180" start="15546" end="15565" title="Winterland Ballroom" label="Winterland Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="15586" end="15602" title="Thanksgiving Day" label="Thanksgiving Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="15718" end="15727" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="15729" end="15739" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="15741" end="15752" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="15754" end="15766" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="15768" end="15781" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="15783" end="15795" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q918576" start="15797" end="15813" title="Paul Butterfield" label="Paul Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q294531" start="15815" end="15827" title="Neil Diamond" label="Neil Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q211094" start="15829" end="15840" title="Ronnie Wood" label="Ronnie Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="15845" end="15857" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16010" end="16022" title="American Boy: A Profile of Steven Prince" label="American Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460817" start="16287" end="16300" title="Elvis on Tour" label="Elvis on Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="16426" end="16433" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="16483" end="16494" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189741" start="16502" end="16513" title="Mark Singer (journalist)" label="Mark Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335855" start="17186" end="17198" title="Jake LaMotta" label="Jake LaMotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="17213" end="17221" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="17357" end="17374" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="17452" end="17462" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="17476" end="17499" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q242732" start="17504" end="17518" title="Cathy Moriarty" label="Cathy Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="17520" end="17541" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20178" start="17546" end="17555" title="Joe Pesci" label="Joe Pesci"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="17586" end="17599" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="17679" end="17693" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q503313" start="17704" end="17719" title="Ordinary People" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="18055" end="18068" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="18178" end="18189" title="slow-motion" label="slow-motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528025" start="18199" end="18212" title="tracking shot" label="tracking shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758676" start="18567" end="18580" title="Mardik Martin" label="Mardik Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684311" start="18768" end="18777" title="Jay Cocks" label="Jay Cocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="18853" end="18876" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18973" end="19008" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19106" end="19168" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122281" start="19253" end="19271" title="The King of Comedy (film)" label="The King of Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="19294" end="19300" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310043" start="19376" end="19381" title="loner" label="loner"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="19436" end="19446" title="kidnapping" label="kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="19764" end="19774" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="20005" end="20016" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="20089" end="20105" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964256" start="20115" end="20127" title="Anna Pavlova (film)" label="Anna Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="20241" end="20255" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q337226" start="20309" end="20327" title="Bertrand Tavernier" label="Bertrand Tavernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="20335" end="20339" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q576371" start="20351" end="20365" title="Round Midnight (film)" label="Round Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="20443" end="20459" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="20473" end="20488" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q846209" start="20508" end="20519" title="After Hours (film)" label="After Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q510175" start="20553" end="20572" title="Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director" label="Best Director Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q461572" start="20756" end="20760" title="SoHo" label="SoHo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470260" start="20893" end="20906" title="Griffin Dunne" label="Griffin Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q233873" start="20956" end="20965" title="Teri Garr" label="Teri Garr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066813" start="20970" end="20988" title="Cheech &amp;amp; Chong" label="Cheech &amp;amp; Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="21010" end="21025" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21044" end="21047" title="Bad (Michael Jackson song)#Music video" label="Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q470916" start="21083" end="21101" title="The Color of Money" label="The Color of Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q433113" start="21121" end="21134" title="Robert Rossen" label="Robert Rossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130084" start="21148" end="21159" title="The Hustler" label="The Hustler"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="21178" end="21189" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="21208" end="21218" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="21527" end="21556" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="The Last Temptation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323860" start="21691" end="21701" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (novel)" label="1955 novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214622" start="21705" end="21722" title="Nikos Kazantzakis" label="Nikos Kazantzakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="21743" end="21749" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q229042" start="21785" end="21800" title="Barbara Hershey" label="Barbara Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="21932" end="21950" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q403902" start="22125" end="22136" title="Aidan Quinn" label="Aidan Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="22160" end="22165" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131" start="22178" end="22192" title="Pontius Pilate" label="Pontius Pilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188772" start="22243" end="22255" title="Willem Dafoe" label="Willem Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="22260" end="22271" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="22428" end="22446" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q501995" start="22586" end="22595" title="Cape Fear (1991 film)" label="Cape Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="22802" end="22811" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="23011" end="23025" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="23031" end="23036" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="23045" end="23058" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q275422" start="23138" end="23141" title="Bad (Michael Jackson song)" label="Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="23158" end="23173" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q189694" start="23178" end="23191" title="Wesley Snipes" label="Wesley Snipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="23240" end="23251" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330847" start="23272" end="23305" title="Hoyt–Schermerhorn Streets station" label="Hoyt–Schermerhorn Streets station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="23309" end="23317" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q273704" start="23483" end="23498" title="West Side Story (1961 film)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="23577" end="23586" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q616806" start="23612" end="23618" title="Bad 25 (film)" label="Bad 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="23781" end="23804" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="The Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q470916" start="23868" end="23886" title="The Color of Money" label="The Color of Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q269692" start="24255" end="24269" title="Barry Levinson" label="Barry Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188845" start="24280" end="24288" title="Rain Man" label="Rain Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q977372" start="24391" end="24407" title="New York Stories" label="New York Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="24690" end="24700" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20178" start="24836" end="24845" title="Joe Pesci" label="Joe Pesci"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="25024" end="25035" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="25215" end="25226" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="25231" end="25244" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="25512" end="25525" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20456" start="25533" end="25551" title="Dances with Wolves" label="Dances with Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="25581" end="25620" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="25707" end="25712" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337827" start="25723" end="25734" title="Silver Lion" label="Silver Lion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26056" end="26095" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10#Gangster" label="their list of the top 10 gangster films"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="26109" end="26122" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821292" start="26192" end="26205" title="Made in Milan" label="Made in Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q157054" start="26235" end="26249" title="Giorgio Armani" label="Giorgio Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q501995" start="26284" end="26293" title="Cape Fear (1991 film)" label="Cape Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q529106" start="26320" end="26330" title="Cape Fear (1962 film)" label="1962 movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="26505" end="26521" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264" start="26526" end="26542" title="Charles Laughton" label="Charles Laughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132629" start="26556" end="26579" title="The Night of the Hunter (film)" label="The Night of the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="26712" end="26724" title="misogynistic" label="misogynistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="27207" end="27223" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q418809" start="27242" end="27248" title="Dreams (1990 film)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="27276" end="27290" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="27337" end="27351" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q651722" start="27363" end="27372" title="Quiz Show (film)" label="Quiz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547390" start="27814" end="27831" title="Mad Dog and Glory" label="Mad Dog and Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268296" start="27845" end="27853" title="Clockers (film)" label="Clockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q304488" start="27898" end="27910" title="The Grifters (film)" label="The Grifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126445" start="27924" end="27941" title="Naked in New York" label="Naked in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q584662" start="27955" end="27972" title="Grace of My Heart" label="Grace of My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163526" start="27986" end="28004" title="Search and Destroy (1995 film)" label="Search and Destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220655" start="28018" end="28035" title="The Hi-Lo Country" label="The Hi-Lo Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685900" start="28077" end="28097" title="Con gli occhi chiusi" label="Con gli occhi chiusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125442" start="28144" end="28164" title="The Age of Innocence (1993 film)" label="The Age of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q276032" start="28247" end="28260" title="Edith Wharton" label="Edith Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045464" start="28261" end="28266" title="The Age of Innocence" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="28402" end="28417" title="box office bomb" label="box office bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13888" start="29242" end="29258" title="Luchino Visconti" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q649600" start="29272" end="29277" title="Senso (film)" label="Senso"/>
<link wikidata="Q596623" start="29298" end="29311" title="The Leopard (1963 film)" label="Il Gattopardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="29355" end="29367" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q628664" start="29381" end="29406" title="The Magnificent Ambersons (film)" label="The Magnificent Ambersons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29454" end="29487" title="La prise de pouvoir par Louis XIV" label="La prise de pouvoir par Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="30163" end="30179" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220910" start="30319" end="30325" title="Casino (1995 film)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="30982" end="30994" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="31017" end="31043" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354637" start="31231" end="31294" title="A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies" label="A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60858" start="31921" end="31933" title="Douglas Sirk" label="Douglas Sirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q51535" start="31954" end="31971" title="Vincente Minnelli" label="Vincente Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q944291" start="32502" end="32508" title="Kundun" label="Kundun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="32591" end="32625" title="Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama" label="Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="32631" end="32660" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="32679" end="32684" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q546808" start="32965" end="32972" title="tableau vivant" label="tableau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323594" start="33054" end="33074" title="Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures" label="Buena Vista Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q599013" start="33748" end="33769" title="Bringing Out the Dead" label="Bringing Out the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="34326" end="34338" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q310315" start="34340" end="34351" title="Ving Rhames" label="Ving Rhames"/>
<link wikidata="Q215072" start="34353" end="34365" title="John Goodman" label="John Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q349852" start="34367" end="34379" title="Tom Sizemore" label="Tom Sizemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q215976" start="34385" end="34402" title="Patricia Arquette" label="Patricia Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q727328" start="34465" end="34487" title="Honorary Academy Award" label="Honorary Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q536749" start="34531" end="34550" title="70th Academy Awards" label="70th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765" start="34596" end="34609" title="Stanley Donen" label="Stanley Donen"/>
<link wikidata="Q263239" start="34748" end="34767" title="71st Academy Awards" label="71st Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q72717" start="34827" end="34837" title="Elia Kazan" label="Elia Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="34926" end="34945" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="Hollywood blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188018" start="35002" end="35012" title="Nick Nolte" label="Nick Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="35017" end="35026" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="35100" end="35113" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="35115" end="35127" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q544465" start="35129" end="35140" title="Kathy Bates" label="Kathy Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q103157" start="35146" end="35158" title="Kurt Russell" label="Kurt Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550265" start="35361" end="35379" title="My Voyage to Italy" label="My Voyage to Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154581" start="35461" end="35478" title="Gangs of New York" label="Gangs of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q728399" start="35627" end="35636" title="Cinecittà" label="Cinecittà"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="36070" end="36087" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="36235" end="36248" title="Miramax" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q531599" start="36254" end="36270" title="Harvey Weinstein" label="Harvey Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642214" start="36485" end="36495" title="exposition (literary technique)" label="exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="36521" end="36531" title="flashback (literary technique)" label="flashbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="36724" end="36739" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943319" start="37455" end="37467" title="Oscar season" label="Oscar season"/>
<link wikidata="Q480981" start="37834" end="37843" title="The Blues (film)" label="The Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="38022" end="38036" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q710131" start="38038" end="38049" title="Mike Figgis" label="Mike Figgis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300341" start="38270" end="38289" title="You Can Count on Me" label="You Can Count on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q968840" start="38309" end="38325" title="Kenneth Lonergan" label="Kenneth Lonergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q609797" start="38385" end="38393" title="Lymelife" label="Lymelife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262580" start="38413" end="38427" title="Derick Martini" label="Derick Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q755171" start="38439" end="38457" title="The Young Victoria" label="The Young Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q500611" start="38477" end="38493" title="Jean-Marc Vallée" label="Jean-Marc Vallée"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084821" start="38525" end="38544" title="Sikelia Productions" label="Sikelia Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15735681" start="38564" end="38586" title="Emma Tillinger Koskoff" label="Emma Tillinger Koskoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749426" start="38667" end="38684" title="The Soul of a Man" label="The Soul of a Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q465139" start="38768" end="38781" title="Antoine Fuqua" label="Antoine Fuqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="38811" end="38822" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="38861" end="38867" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="38913" end="38926" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="39145" end="39164" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011509" start="39176" end="39201" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama" label="Best Motion Picture-Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="39203" end="39216" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q849124" start="39218" end="39233" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay" label="Best Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="39239" end="39270" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actor-Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q504962" start="39459" end="39478" title="77th Academy Awards" label="77th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q184255" start="39813" end="39832" title="Million Dollar Baby" label="Million Dollar Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760695" start="39877" end="39894" title="No Direction Home" label="No Direction Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357365" start="40172" end="40200" title="Electric Dylan controversy" label="controversial transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="40473" end="40476" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="40483" end="40499" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="40553" end="40560" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788867" start="40567" end="40572" title="Arena (UK TV series)" label="Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="40686" end="40699" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992254" start="40708" end="40751" title="Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video" label="Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="40786" end="40806" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345783" start="40822" end="40880" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Documentary/Nonfiction Program" label="Outstanding Directing for a Documentary/Nonfiction Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q799902" start="40898" end="40908" title="Baghdad ER" label="Baghdad ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="40989" end="41001" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q714057" start="41051" end="41067" title="Infernal Affairs" label="Infernal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q715330" start="41099" end="41109" title="Andrew Lau" label="Andrew Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707232" start="41114" end="41122" title="Alan Mak (director)" label="Alan Mak"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="41235" end="41245" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="41247" end="41261" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="41263" end="41276" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q184572" start="41282" end="41294" title="Martin Sheen" label="Martin Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q210364" start="41808" end="41822" title="Shutter Island (film)" label="Shutter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227533" start="41963" end="41989" title="Directors Guild of America" label="Directors Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="42240" end="42260" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="42262" end="42274" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="42279" end="42295" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q432102" start="42528" end="42541" title="Shine a Light (film)" label="Shine a Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="42557" end="42570" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="42576" end="42594" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q264186" start="42636" end="42650" title="Beacon Theatre (New York City)" label="Beacon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148711" start="42836" end="42854" title="Paramount Classics" label="Paramount Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="42953" end="42962" title="Berlinale" label="Berlinale"/>
<link wikidata="Q216051" start="43079" end="43092" title="Charlie Watts" label="Charlie Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="43237" end="43247" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="43426" end="43440" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968672" start="43523" end="43543" title="Roman Polanski sexual abuse case" label="sexual abuse charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="43854" end="43867" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Daily Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q311744" start="44080" end="44093" title="Dennis Lehane" label="Dennis Lehane"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="44104" end="44117" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="44158" end="44170" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="44172" end="44185" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q173158" start="44187" end="44199" title="Ben Kingsley" label="Ben Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q156796" start="44205" end="44222" title="Michelle Williams (actress)" label="Michelle Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="44451" end="44474" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54834484" start="44523" end="44545" title="David Lynch Foundation" label="David Lynch Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="44606" end="44635" title="posttraumatic stress disorder" label="posttraumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833859" start="44644" end="44669" title="Transcendental Meditation technique" label="Transcendental Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="44774" end="44780" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874465" start="44825" end="44839" title="Bleu de Chanel" label="Bleu de Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q497770" start="44869" end="44883" title="Gaspard Ulliel" label="Gaspard Ulliel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065009" start="45008" end="45027" title="Pilot (Boardwalk Empire)" label="the series premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q585758" start="45038" end="45054" title="Boardwalk Empire" label="Boardwalk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104061" start="45092" end="45105" title="Steve Buscemi" label="Steve Buscemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352540" start="45110" end="45122" title="Michael Pitt" label="Michael Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q591945" start="45245" end="45259" title="Terence Winter" label="Terence Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="45281" end="45293" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45626" end="45671" title="George Harrison: Living in the Material World" label="George Harrison: Living in the Material World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="45713" end="45720" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="45734" end="45749" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="45791" end="45794" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q206576" start="45856" end="45860" title="Hugo (film)" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="45872" end="45874" title="3D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q319221" start="45875" end="45884" title="Adventure film" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="45885" end="45895" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q913061" start="45905" end="45919" title="Brian Selznick" label="Brian Selznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q140036" start="45939" end="45967" title="The Invention of Hugo Cabret" label="The Invention of Hugo Cabret"/>
<link wikidata="Q312524" start="45990" end="46005" title="Asa Butterfield" label="Asa Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509" start="46007" end="46025" title="Chloë Grace Moretz" label="Chloë Grace Moretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29055" start="46041" end="46058" title="Sacha Baron Cohen" label="Sacha Baron Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="46060" end="46072" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q230308" start="46074" end="46088" title="Emily Mortimer" label="Emily Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="46090" end="46105" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="46111" end="46119" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="46195" end="46213" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28556" start="46328" end="46347" title="Michel Hazanavicius" label="Michel Hazanavicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q171861" start="46360" end="46382" title="The Artist (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Artist&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="46471" end="46476" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46491" end="46528" title="Hugo (film)#Accolades" label="numerous other awards and nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="46573" end="46575" title="3-D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="46675" end="46698" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="46721" end="46733" title="Biographical film" label="biographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="46734" end="46746" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183674" start="46756" end="46770" title="Jordan Belfort" label="Jordan Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q313388" start="46901" end="46911" title="Jonah Hill" label="Jonah Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q188955" start="46913" end="46932" title="Matthew McConaughey" label="Matthew McConaughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570975" start="47228" end="47244" title="securities fraud" label="securities fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268220" start="47320" end="47333" title="pump and dump" label="pump and dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="47374" end="47417" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actor-Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139147" start="47425" end="47449" title="71st Golden Globe Awards" label="2014 Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q670282" start="47483" end="47520" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Best Motion Picture-Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="47740" end="47763" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="47862" end="47865" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="48017" end="48041" title="New York Review of Books" label="New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155624" start="48062" end="48082" title="The 50 Year Argument" label="The 50 Year Argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="48131" end="48165" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492660" start="48217" end="48235" title="Sheffield Doc/Fest" label="Sheffield Doc/Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="48261" end="48265" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q617729" start="48271" end="48280" title="Jerusalem Film Festival" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402350" start="48358" end="48367" title="Telluride Film Festival" label="Telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="48416" end="48423" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019684" start="48428" end="48463" title="Calgary International Film Festival" label="Calgary International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25648" start="48474" end="48496" title="New York Film Festival" label="New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q20743300" start="48576" end="48581" title="Vinyl (TV series)" label="Vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542223" start="48618" end="48632" title="George Mastras" label="George Mastras"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="48639" end="48650" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="48676" end="48686" title="showrunner" label="showrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q428819" start="48705" end="48720" title="Bobby Cannavale" label="Bobby Cannavale"/>
<link wikidata="Q220836" start="49043" end="49053" title="Ray Romano" label="Ray Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q200355" start="49055" end="49067" title="Olivia Wilde" label="Olivia Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q234434" start="49069" end="49080" title="Juno Temple" label="Juno Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q504455" start="49082" end="49098" title="Andrew Dice Clay" label="Andrew Dice Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817144" start="49100" end="49112" title="Ato Essandoh" label="Ato Essandoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q368913" start="49114" end="49125" title="Max Casella" label="Max Casella"/>
<link wikidata="Q16588678" start="49321" end="49348" title="The Third Side of the River" label="The Third Side of the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14775040" start="49419" end="49447" title="Revenge of the Green Dragons" label="Revenge of the Green Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18644475" start="49575" end="49589" title="Bleed for This" label="Bleed for This"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649227" start="49606" end="49615" title="Free Fire (film)" label="Free Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21186592" start="49648" end="49660" title="The Audition (2015 film)" label="The Audition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722530" start="49733" end="49744" title="Studio City (Macau)" label="Studio City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="49748" end="49753" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786524" start="49758" end="49772" title="City of Dreams Manila" label="City of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="49776" end="49795" title="Manila, Philippines" label="Manila, Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q316217" start="50309" end="50321" title="Shūsaku Endō" label="Shūsaku Endō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960523" start="50341" end="50348" title="Silence (Endō novel)" label="Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="50398" end="50404" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811634" start="50602" end="50609" title="Silence (2016 film)" label="Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17275678" start="50619" end="50637" title="Emmett/Furla/Oasis Films" label="Emmett/Furla Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891" start="50804" end="50819" title="Andrew Garfield" label="Andrew Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="50821" end="50832" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="50838" end="50849" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q333015" start="50984" end="50997" title="jus sanguinis" label="jus sanguinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092191" start="51165" end="51186" title="Rolling Thunder Revue" label="Rolling Thunder Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="51209" end="51216" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51230" end="51289" title="Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese" label="Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29057443" start="51994" end="52006" title="The Irishman" label="The Irishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q67923105" start="52038" end="52062" title="I Heard You Paint Houses" label="I Heard You Paint Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q67987438" start="52072" end="52086" title="Charles Brandt" label="Charles Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="52150" end="52159" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q66827439" start="52200" end="52227" title="57th New York Film Festival" label="57th New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="52432" end="52445" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="52473" end="52485" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="52487" end="52500" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="52502" end="52525" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="52531" end="52552" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="52630" end="52637" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764029" start="52663" end="52687" title="Pretend It&amp;#x27;s a City" label="Pretend It&amp;#x27;s a City"/>
<link wikidata="Q32709" start="52728" end="52741" title="Fran Lebowitz" label="Fran Lebowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="52811" end="52824" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="52871" end="52878" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257627" start="52965" end="52980" title="Public Speaking (film)" label="Public Speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="53016" end="53019" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q370155" start="53212" end="53226" title="David Johansen" label="David Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q66316924" start="53431" end="53457" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (film)" label="Killers of the Flower Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309957" start="53490" end="53511" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (book)" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354395" start="53515" end="53526" title="David Grann" label="David Grann"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349951" start="53543" end="53592" title="Martin Scorsese and Leonardo DiCaprio" label="team up with Leonardo DiCaprio for the sixth time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776558" start="53597" end="53630" title="Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro for the tenth time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341403" start="53691" end="53705" title="Rodrigo Prieto" label="Rodrigo Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="53837" end="53854" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="54117" end="54124" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="54128" end="54138" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="54171" end="54189" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="54356" end="54365" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q115484744" start="54434" end="54459" title="2023 Cannes Film Festival" label="76th Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q27450671" start="54918" end="54932" title="Lily Gladstone" label="Lily Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874465" start="54978" end="54992" title="Bleu de Chanel" label="Bleu de Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877770" start="55002" end="55019" title="Timothée Chalamet" label="Timothée Chalamet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55075" end="55127" title="Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger" label="Made in England: The Films of Powell and Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="55179" end="55186" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="55382" end="55416" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q693730" start="55460" end="55464" title="MUBI" label="MUBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="55577" end="55590" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="55595" end="55608" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q313388" start="55619" end="55629" title="Jonah Hill" label="Jonah Hill"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55744" end="55753" title="The Wager: A Tale of Shipwreck, Mutiny and Murder" label="The Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570460" start="55764" end="55777" title="Apple Studios (production company)" label="Apple Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="55847" end="55859" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q63258127" start="56079" end="56089" title="Kent Jones (critic)" label="Kent Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q316217" start="56104" end="56116" title="Shūsaku Endō" label="Shūsaku Endō"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="56192" end="56194" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q253926" start="56264" end="56282" title="Marilynne Robinson" label="Marilynne Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636457" start="56296" end="56300" title="Home (Robinson novel)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q670296" start="56312" end="56322" title="Todd Field" label="Todd Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="56420" end="56426" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="56462" end="56476" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="Dwayne Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="56478" end="56495" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q193517" start="56501" end="56512" title="Emily Blunt" label="Emily Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="56626" end="56636" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="56641" end="56653" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026784" start="56665" end="56676" title="Nick Bilton" label="Nick Bilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62547" start="57063" end="57079" title="Michael Ballhaus" label="Michael Ballhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q364017" start="57081" end="57098" title="Robert Richardson (cinematographer)" label="Robert Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341403" start="57104" end="57118" title="Rodrigo Prieto" label="Rodrigo Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="57198" end="57209" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q663012" start="57346" end="57359" title="freeze frame shot" label="freeze frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q175142" start="57754" end="57769" title="Cybill Shepherd" label="Cybill Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q242732" start="57798" end="57812" title="Cathy Moriarty" label="Cathy Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881685" start="58142" end="58145" title="MOS (filmmaking)" label="MOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="58370" end="58381" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008351" start="58704" end="58713" title="Rio Bravo (film)" label="Rio Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470329" start="58727" end="58750" title="The Great Train Robbery (1903 film)" label="The Great Train Robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045165" start="58764" end="58769" title="Shane (film)" label="Shane"/>
<link wikidata="Q276769" start="58783" end="58796" title="The Searchers" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625517" start="58814" end="58830" title="The Oklahoma Kid" label="The Oklahoma Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q253783" start="58939" end="58952" title="Gimme Shelter" label="Gimme Shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189460" start="59850" end="59862" title="large format" label="large format"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795034" start="60329" end="60351" title="In the Pope&amp;#x27;s Eye" label="In the Pope&amp;#x27;s Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="60449" end="60460" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q628939" start="60490" end="60495" title="Guilt (emotion)" label="guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="61875" end="61885" title="dark humor" label="dark humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19539028" start="62040" end="62053" title="Richard Brody" label="Richard Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="62072" end="62086" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q973065" start="63664" end="63675" title="Victor Argo" label="Victor Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783517" start="63700" end="63713" title="Harry Northup" label="Harry Northup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13717403" start="63719" end="63734" title="J. C. MacKenzie" label="J. C. MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q269669" start="63759" end="63774" title="Illeana Douglas" label="Illeana Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q463407" start="63795" end="63808" title="Frank Vincent" label="Frank Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q746520" start="63814" end="63826" title="Barry Primus" label="Barry Primus"/>
<link wikidata="Q522933" start="63836" end="63847" title="Verna Bloom" label="Verna Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q170572" start="63988" end="64000" title="Alec Baldwin" label="Alec Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209753" start="64040" end="64051" title="Dick Miller" label="Dick Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138674" start="64082" end="64095" title="Jesse Plemons" label="Jesse Plemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="64097" end="64111" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q187038" start="64113" end="64128" title="David Carradine" label="David Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334725" start="64147" end="64161" title="Kevin Corrigan" label="Kevin Corrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q720777" start="64163" end="64175" title="Jake Hoffman (actor)" label="Jake Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369720" start="64177" end="64189" title="Frank Sivero" label="Frank Sivero"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="64191" end="64203" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188018" start="64208" end="64218" title="Nick Nolte" label="Nick Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q441713" start="64287" end="64305" title="Catherine Scorsese" label="Catherine Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q463119" start="64450" end="64462" title="Marcia Lucas" label="Marcia Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62547" start="64504" end="64520" title="Michael Ballhaus" label="Michael Ballhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q364017" start="64522" end="64539" title="Robert Richardson (cinematographer)" label="Robert Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341403" start="64561" end="64575" title="Rodrigo Prieto" label="Rodrigo Prieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q384004" start="64649" end="64659" title="John Logan (writer)" label="John Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q291141" start="64664" end="64679" title="Steven Zaillian" label="Steven Zaillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q289952" start="64698" end="64710" title="Sandy Powell (costume designer)" label="Sandy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q939842" start="64733" end="64747" title="Dante Ferretti" label="Dante Ferretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q117249" start="64777" end="64793" title="Robbie Robertson" label="Robbie Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207773" start="64809" end="64821" title="Howard Shore" label="Howard Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q111436" start="64826" end="64841" title="Elmer Bernstein" label="Elmer Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q536884" start="64993" end="65002" title="Saul Bass" label="Saul Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412539" start="65479" end="65492" title="Julia Cameron" label="Julia Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41732108" start="65516" end="65541" title="Domenica Cameron-Scorsese" label="Domenica Cameron-Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125442" start="65576" end="65596" title="The Age of Innocence (1993 film)" label="The Age of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q203840" start="65983" end="66002" title="Isabella Rossellini" label="Isabella Rossellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703787" start="66062" end="66072" title="Dawn Steel" label="Dawn Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="66099" end="66108" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076915" start="66123" end="66141" title="ShoWest Convention" label="ShoWest Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="66258" end="66270" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q646031" start="66291" end="66328" title="The Last Temptation of Christ (film)" label="&amp;quot;Last Temptation of Christ&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="66529" end="66549" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122281" start="66562" end="66592" title="The King of Comedy (film)" label="&amp;quot;The King of Comedy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="66624" end="66631" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="66723" end="66753" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="&amp;quot;Lawrence of Arabia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="66811" end="66828" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141296" start="66867" end="66882" title="Barbara De Fina" label="Barbara De Fina"/>
<link wikidata="Q269669" start="66981" end="66996" title="Illeana Douglas" label="Illeana Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q66091313" start="67096" end="67105" title="Francesca Scorsese" label="Francesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="67139" end="67151" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q206576" start="67165" end="67169" title="Hugo (film)" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="67187" end="67198" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="67232" end="67235" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q918390" start="67236" end="67239" title="Sky Group" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q85115721" start="67264" end="67281" title="We Are Who We Are" label="We Are Who We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="67347" end="67355" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q510345" start="67367" end="67377" title="Peace dove" label="white dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q740425" start="67389" end="67408" title="75th Academy Awards" label="75th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="67434" end="67447" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="67505" end="67519" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057207" start="67780" end="67799" title="Operation Fortitude" label="Operation Fortitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069127" start="67952" end="67967" title="lapsed Catholic" label="lapsed Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="68022" end="68036" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="68536" end="68553" title="film preservation" label="film preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520874" start="68603" end="68622" title="The Film Foundation" label="The Film Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="68626" end="68636" title="Nonprofit organization" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="68775" end="68786" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="68788" end="68801" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="68803" end="68823" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="68825" end="68839" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="68841" end="68856" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="68858" end="68870" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51522" start="68872" end="68886" title="Sydney Pollack" label="Sydney Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="68888" end="68902" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="68908" end="68924" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25132" start="69001" end="69021" title="Paul Thomas Anderson" label="Paul Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="69023" end="69035" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263486" start="69037" end="69050" title="Curtis Hanson" label="Curtis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="69052" end="69065" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q160726" start="69067" end="69074" title="Ang Lee" label="Ang Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q313566" start="69079" end="69094" title="Alexander Payne" label="Alexander Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="69117" end="69134" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="69181" end="69190" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="69192" end="69205" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q219124" start="69207" end="69225" title="Guillermo del Toro" label="Guillermo del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821227" start="69227" end="69240" title="Barry Jenkins" label="Barry Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269591" start="69242" end="69254" title="Lynne Ramsay" label="Lynne Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205847" start="69256" end="69267" title="Joanna Hogg" label="Joanna Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34816" start="69272" end="69287" title="Kathryn Bigelow" label="Kathryn Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="69537" end="69551" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q55230" start="69557" end="69575" title="Emeric Pressburger" label="Emeric Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q625780" start="69589" end="69602" title="The Red Shoes (1948 film)" label="The Red Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="69703" end="69720" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="TCM Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="69890" end="69911" title="The Criterion Channel" label="The Criterion Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54864392" start="70006" end="70015" title="Ari Aster" label="Ari Aster"/>
<link wikidata="Q188492" start="70245" end="70260" title="Seth MacFarlane" label="Seth MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="70336" end="70366" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="2024 TCM Classic Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864025" start="70436" end="70468" title="UCLA Film and Television Archive" label="UCLA Film and Television Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520874" start="70473" end="70492" title="The Film Foundation" label="The Film Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="70498" end="70525" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364276" start="70597" end="70617" title="World Cinema Project" label="World Cinema Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="70827" end="70847" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="70915" end="70918" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="70923" end="70930" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="70973" end="70994" title="Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314966" start="71021" end="71036" title="Ousmane Sembène" label="Ousmane Sembène"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211102" start="71050" end="71060" title="Black Girl (1966 film)" label="Black Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232197" start="71079" end="71099" title="Djibril Diop Mambéty" label="Djibril Diop Mambéty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310901" start="71113" end="71124" title="Touki Bouki" label="Touki Bouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="71144" end="71164" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="71206" end="71209" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="71214" end="71221" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310901" start="71330" end="71341" title="Touki Bouki" label="Touki Bouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235241" start="71362" end="71367" title="Redes (film)" label="Redes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809909" start="71388" end="71408" title="Titash Ekti Nadir Naam" label="A River Called Titas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542380" start="71429" end="71439" title="Dry Summer" label="Dry Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537467" start="71460" end="71467" title="Trances (film)" label="Trances"/>
<link wikidata="Q49729" start="71491" end="71504" title="The Housemaid (1960 film)" label="The Housemaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q950142" start="71567" end="71574" title="Insiang" label="Insiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331723" start="71595" end="71620" title="Mysterious Object at Noon" label="Mysterious Object at Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549483" start="71669" end="71675" title="Limite" label="Limite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210090" start="71696" end="71713" title="Law of the Border" label="Law of the Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514053" start="71738" end="71750" title="Taipei Story" label="Taipei Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269760" start="71815" end="71820" title="Lucía" label="Lucía"/>
<link wikidata="Q9189763" start="71841" end="71857" title="Lewat Djam Malam" label="After the Curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q736916" start="71878" end="71884" title="Pixote" label="Pixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813785" start="71905" end="71915" title="Two Monks" label="Dos monjes"/>
<link wikidata="Q515099" start="71936" end="71944" title="Soleil O" label="Soleil Ô"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945989" start="71969" end="71977" title="Downpour (film)" label="Downpour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021218" start="72041" end="72051" title="Sambizanga" label="Sambizanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469893" start="72072" end="72096" title="Prisioneros de la tierra" label="Prisioneros de la tierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867554" start="72117" end="72134" title="Chess of the Wind" label="Chess of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283244" start="72155" end="72164" title="Muna Moto" label="Muna Moto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354350" start="72233" end="72240" title="Kalpana (1948 film)" label="Kalpana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520874" start="72439" end="72458" title="The Film Foundation" label="The Film Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="72460" end="72466" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092493" start="72468" end="72487" title="Cineteca di Bologna" label="Cineteca di Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16637656" start="72497" end="72533" title="Pan African Federation of Filmmakers" label="Pan African Federation of Filmmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129468" start="73554" end="73579" title="Pan African Film Festival" label="Pan African Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="73583" end="73594" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q180886" start="73623" end="73632" title="Med Hondo" label="Med Hondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q515099" start="73646" end="73654" title="Soleil Ô" label="Soleil Ô"/>
<link wikidata="Q921687" start="73669" end="73692" title="Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina" label="Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713929" start="73706" end="73736" title="Chronique des années de braise" label="Chronique des années de braise"/>
<link wikidata="Q56877164" start="73751" end="73765" title="Timité Bassori" label="Timité Bassori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169882" start="73817" end="73842" title="Jean-Pierre Dikongue-Pipa" label="Jean-Pierre Dikongue-Pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283244" start="73856" end="73865" title="Muna Moto" label="Muna Moto"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="73963" end="73978" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="73980" end="73992" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="73998" end="74012" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="74029" end="74040" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q465139" start="74226" end="74239" title="Antoine Fuqua" label="Antoine Fuqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="74241" end="74252" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q968840" start="74254" end="74270" title="Kenneth Lonergan" label="Kenneth Lonergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55258" start="74272" end="74286" title="Stephen Frears" label="Stephen Frears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838329" start="74288" end="74302" title="Allison Anders" label="Allison Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="74304" end="74313" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q522382" start="74319" end="74334" title="John McNaughton" label="John McNaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089466" start="74393" end="74408" title="Safdie Brothers" label="Safdie Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205847" start="74410" end="74421" title="Joanna Hogg" label="Joanna Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q537284" start="74423" end="74439" title="Kornél Mundruczó" label="Kornél Mundruczó"/>
<link wikidata="Q18022491" start="74441" end="74457" title="Josephine Decker" label="Josephine Decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q96219240" start="74459" end="74477" title="Danielle Lessovitz" label="Danielle Lessovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q510194" start="74479" end="74495" title="Alice Rohrwacher" label="Alice Rohrwacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q25219918" start="74497" end="74513" title="Jonas Carpignano" label="Jonas Carpignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="74647" end="74660" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="74677" end="74688" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="74693" end="74702" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="74737" end="74749" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q495980" start="74751" end="74763" title="Bong Joon-ho" label="Bong Joon-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q271967" start="74765" end="74777" title="Greta Gerwig" label="Greta Gerwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q54864392" start="74779" end="74788" title="Ari Aster" label="Ari Aster"/>
<link wikidata="Q436861" start="74790" end="74805" title="Kelly Reichardt" label="Kelly Reichardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q238315" start="74807" end="74819" title="Claire Denis" label="Claire Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459349" start="74821" end="74834" title="Noah Baumbach" label="Noah Baumbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q25132" start="74836" end="74856" title="Paul Thomas Anderson" label="Paul Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="74858" end="74875" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="74881" end="74894" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34816" start="74900" end="74915" title="Kathryn Bigelow" label="Kathryn Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311296" start="74961" end="74983" title="Pickup on South Street" label="Pickup on South Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508130" start="75026" end="75040" title="The Band Wagon" label="The Band Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="75117" end="75134" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="" start="75384" end="75405" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018" start="75433" end="75435" title="8½" label="8½"/>
<link wikidata="Q722281" start="75464" end="75482" title="Ashes and Diamonds (film)" label="Ashes and Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="75512" end="75524" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q596623" start="75550" end="75561" title="The Leopard (1963 film)" label="The Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764086" start="75590" end="75595" title="Paisan" label="Paisà"/>
<link wikidata="Q625780" start="75624" end="75637" title="The Red Shoes (1948 film)" label="The Red Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q919673" start="75663" end="75672" title="The River (1951 film)" label="The River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783832" start="75698" end="75716" title="Salvatore Giuliano (film)" label="Salvatore Giuliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q276769" start="75745" end="75758" title="The Searchers" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076605" start="75784" end="75790" title="Ugetsu" label="Ugetsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="75819" end="75826" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159262" start="76009" end="76034" title="Diary of a Country Priest" label="Diary of a Country Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q152105" start="76064" end="76069" title="Ikiru" label="Ikiru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352630" start="76098" end="76103" title="Ordet" label="Ordet"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="76154" end="76165" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="76183" end="76194" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q106946713" start="76240" end="76258" title="Siskel &amp;amp; Ebert" label="Siskel &amp;amp; Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456917" start="76370" end="76385" title="The Horse Thief" label="The Horse Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q221491" start="76413" end="76430" title="The Thin Red Line (1998 film)" label="The Thin Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849922" start="76455" end="76470" title="A Borrowed Life" label="A Borrowed Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q209481" start="76499" end="76513" title="Eyes Wide Shut" label="Eyes Wide Shut"/>
<link wikidata="Q798734" start="76541" end="76555" title="Bad Lieutenant" label="Bad Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q538412" start="76580" end="76598" title="Breaking the Waves" label="Breaking the Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q514565" start="76631" end="76644" title="Bottle Rocket" label="Bottle Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q839133" start="76669" end="76674" title="Crash (1996 film)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q222720" start="76703" end="76708" title="Fargo (1996 film)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q923925" start="76733" end="76742" title="Malcolm X (1992 film)" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q42198" start="76770" end="76774" title="Heat (1995 film)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76848" end="76858" title="Colin Levy" label="Colin Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q513632" start="77197" end="77212" title="Cédric Klapisch" label="Cédric Klapisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="77590" end="77621" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q292044" start="77654" end="77680" title="AFI Life Achievement Award" label="AFI Life Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="77906" end="77949" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="the tenth-anniversary edition of their list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="78154" end="78229" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Thrills" label="their list of the most &amp;quot;heart-pounding movies&amp;quot; in American cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="78395" end="78411" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542334" start="78486" end="78511" title="48th Annual Grammy Awards" label="48th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992254" start="78538" end="78581" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Film" label="Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708565" start="78618" end="78629" title="Lynda Myles (British producer)" label="Lynda Myles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284745" start="78687" end="78724" title="Edinburgh International Film Festival" label="Edinburgh International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="78776" end="78780" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="78940" end="78950" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380767" start="79226" end="79238" title="Jack Valenti" label="Jack Valenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="79630" end="79649" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="79774" end="79795" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q599107" start="80007" end="80027" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="80186" end="80206" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q249397" start="80309" end="80333" title="67th Golden Globe Awards" label="67th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q640353" start="80369" end="80404" title="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award" label="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q259726" start="80436" end="80462" title="63rd Primetime Emmy Awards" label="63rd Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q583972" start="80481" end="80546" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065009" start="80563" end="80582" title="Boardwalk Empire (episode)" label="the series premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458675" start="80674" end="80702" title="National Film School in Lodz" label="National Film School in Lodz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495650" start="80890" end="80902" title="King Missile" label="King Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776552" start="80915" end="80930" title="Martin Scorsese (song)" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q918710" start="80980" end="81012" title="65th British Academy Film Awards" label="65th British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="81048" end="81078" title="BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award" label="BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81120" end="81131" title="64th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards#Directing" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="81324" end="81361" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175526" start="81388" end="81405" title="Jefferson Lecture" label="Jefferson Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="81479" end="81489" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="81588" end="81634" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702885" start="81746" end="81792" title="Medal for Merit to Culture – Gloria Artis" label="Gold Medal for Merit to Culture – Gloria Artis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="81964" end="81975" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="81994" end="82007" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q72717" start="82009" end="82019" title="Elia Kazan" label="Elia Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="82037" end="82047" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="82083" end="82100" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="82124" end="82154" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="82182" end="82200" title="Honorary degree" label="Honorary Doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="82210" end="82230" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="82422" end="82441" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="82466" end="82488" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219124" start="82636" end="82654" title="Guillermo del Toro" label="Guillermo del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073730" start="82720" end="82741" title="Character arc" label="character development"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="82829" end="82839" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="82889" end="82925" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q62721520" start="82936" end="82940" title="1917 (2019 film)" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q495980" start="83165" end="83177" title="Bong Joon-ho" label="Bong Joon-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="83217" end="83248" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q61448040" start="83259" end="83267" title="Parasite (2019 film)" label="Parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="83578" end="83590" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813152" start="83604" end="83618" title="Mellody Hobson" label="Mellody Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q114000963" start="83810" end="83852" title="Martin Scorsese&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects" label="Martin Scorsese&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q18709181" start="83934" end="83944" title="Letterboxd" label="Letterboxd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18996" wikidata="Q841335" url="?curid=18996" title="Mean Streets">
<text>Mean Streets is a 1973 American crime drama film directed by Martin Scorsese, co-written by Scorsese and Mardik Martin, and starring Robert De Niro and Harvey Keitel. It was produced by Warner Bros. The film premiered at the New York Film Festival on October 2, 1973, and was released on October14. De Niro won the National Society of Film Critics and the New York Film Critics Circle award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as &quot;Johnny Boy&quot; Civello.

The film was the first of several collaborations between Scorsese and De Niro. It was also Scorsese&#x27;s first critical and commercial success. In 1997, &quot;Mean Streets&quot; was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress, who deemed it &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

==Plot==
Charlie Cappa, a young Italian-American in the Little Italy neighborhood of New York City, is hampered by his feeling of responsibility toward his reckless younger friend John &quot;Johnny Boy&quot; Civello, a small-time gambler and degenerate who refuses to work and owes money to many loan sharks. Charlie is also having a secret affair with Johnny&#x27;s cousin Teresa, who has epilepsy and is ostracized because of her condition — especially by Charlie&#x27;s Uncle Giovanni, a powerful mafioso, and is told to stay away from her. Giovanni also wants Charlie to distance himself from Johnny, saying &quot;honorable men go with honorable men.&quot;

Charlie is torn between his devout Catholicism and his illicit Mafia work for Giovanni. Johnny becomes increasingly self-destructive and disrespectful of his Mafia-connected creditors. Failing to receive redemption in the Church, Charlie seeks it through sacrificing himself on Johnny&#x27;s behalf. At Tony&#x27;s bar, a loan shark and friend named Michael comes looking for Johnny again to pay up: he has been doing so for a few days and is increasingly getting frustrated, thinking Johnny is taking advantage of him and that he is not going to pay up, with Charlie promising to convince Johnny. To his surprise, Johnny insults him and tells him he is not going to pay back the money. Michael lunges at Johnny, who pulls a gun. After a tense standoff, Michael walks away and Charlie convinces Johnny that they should leave town for a brief period. Teresa insists on coming with them. Charlie borrows a car and they drive off, leaving the neighborhood without incident.

A car that has been following them suddenly pulls up, with Michael at the wheel and his henchman, Jimmy Shorts, in the backseat. Jimmy fires several shots at Charlie&#x27;s car, hitting Johnny in the neck and Charlie in the arm, causing Charlie to crash the car into a fire hydrant. Teresa is injured in the crash, Johnny is seen in an alleyway staggering toward a white light which is revealed to be a police car, and Charlie gets out of the crashed vehicle and kneels in the spurting water from the hydrant, dazed and bleeding. Paramedics take Teresa and Charlie away while Johnny&#x27;s fate remains unknown.

==Cast==
* Robert De Niro as John &quot;Johnny Boy&quot; Civello
* Harvey Keitel as Charlie Cappa
* David Proval as Tony DeVienazo
* Amy Robinson as Teresa Ronchelli
* Victor Argo as Mario
* Richard Romanus as Michael Longo
* Cesare Danova as Giovanni Cappa
* George Memmoli as Joey 
* Jeannie Bell as Diane
* Harry Northup as Soldier
* David Carradine as Drunk
* Martin Scorsese as Jimmy Shorts

==Production==
Apart from his first actual feature, &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot;, and a directing project given to him by early independent film maker Roger Corman, &quot;Boxcar Bertha&quot;, this was Scorsese&#x27;s first feature film of his own design. Director John Cassavetes told him after he completed &quot;Boxcar Bertha&quot;: &quot;You&#x27;ve just spent a year of your life making a piece of shit.&quot; This inspired Scorsese to make a film about his own experiences. Cassavetes told Scorsese he should do something like &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking at My Door&quot;, which Cassavetes had liked. &quot;Mean Streets&quot; was based on events Scorsese saw almost regularly while growing up in New York City&#x27;s Little Italy.

The screenplay began as a continuation of the characters in &quot;Who&#x27;s That Knocking&quot;. Scorsese changed the title from &quot;Season of the Witch&quot; to &quot;Mean Streets&quot;, a reference to Raymond Chandler&#x27;s essay &quot;The Simple Art of Murder&quot;, where Chandler writes: &quot;But down these mean streets a man must go who is not himself mean, who is neither tarnished nor afraid.&quot; Scorsese sent the script to Corman, who agreed to back the film if all the characters were black. Scorsese was anxious to make the film so he considered this option, but actress Verna Bloom arranged a meeting with potential financial backer Jonathan Taplin, the road manager for The Band. Taplin liked the script and was willing to raise the $300,000 Scorsese wanted if Corman promised, in writing, to distribute the film. The blaxploitation suggestion came to nothing when funding from Warner Bros. allowed him to make the film with Italian-American characters.

Mean Streets was filmed from April 1973 to June 1973.

==Reception==

&quot;Mean Streets&quot; received immense critical acclaim. Pauline Kael was among the enthusiastic critics, calling it &quot;a true original, and a triumph of personal filmmaking&quot; and &quot;dizzyingly sensual&quot;. Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; reflected that &quot;no matter how bleak the milieu, no matter how heartbreaking the narrative, some films are so thoroughly, beautifully realized they have a kind of tonic effect that has no relation to the subject matter&quot;. &quot;Time Out&quot; magazine called it &quot;one of the best American films of the decade&quot;. David Denby, writing for &quot;Sight and Sound&quot;, praised the film&#x27;s acting, saying that Scorsese had used improvisation &quot;better than anyone in American movies so far.&quot; He concluded by saying that: &quot;Scorsese&#x27;s impulse to express all he feels about life in every scene (a cannier, more prudent director wouldn&#x27;t have started his film with that great De Niro monologue), and thus to wrench his audience upwards into a new state of consciousness with one prolonged and devastating gesture, infinitely hurting and infinitely tender. &quot;Mean Streets&quot; comes close enough to this feverish ideal to warrant our love and much of our respect.&quot;

Retrospectively, Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; inducted &quot;Mean Streets&quot; on his Great Movies list and wrote: &quot;In countless ways, right down to the detail of modern TV crime shows, &quot;Mean Streets&quot; is one of the source points of modern movies.&quot; In 2013, the staff of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; voted the film the seventh greatest of all time. In 2015, it was ranked 93rd on the BBC&#x27;s list of the 100 greatest American films. James Gandolfini, when asked on &quot;Inside the Actors Studio&quot; (season 11, episode two) which films most influenced him, cited &quot;Mean Streets&quot;, saying &quot;I saw that ten times in a row.&quot; Likewise, director Kathryn Bigelow said that &quot;Mean Streets&quot; was one of her five favorite movies. In an interview with &quot;GQ&quot;, Spike Lee named &quot;Mean Streets&quot; as one of his influences, along with &quot;On The Waterfront&quot;. In 2011, &quot;Empire&quot; listed the film as #1 on its &quot;50 Greatest American Independent Films&quot; list.
In 2022, the film appeared on &quot;&quot;Variety&quot;&#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of All Time&quot; list.

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 92% based on 77 reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10. The website&#x27;s critics consensus reads: &quot;&quot;Mean Streets&quot; is a powerful tale of urban sin and guilt that marks Scorsese&#x27;s arrival as an important cinematic voice and features electrifying performances from Harvey Keitel and Robert De Niro.&quot; According to Metacritic, which assigned a weighted average of 96 out of 100 based on eleven critics, the film received &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

==Home media==
&quot;Mean Streets&quot; was released on VHS and Betamax in 1985. The film debuted as a letterboxed LaserDisc on October 7, 1991, in the US. It was released on Blu-ray on April 6, 2011, in France, and in America on July 17, 2012. The home media releases use the original mono audio track, rather than a modern surround sound mix as is common even for films that originally had mono audio. A May 18, 2015 release in the UK altered the color timing, and included a lossless stereo audio track. The film received a 4K Ultra HD and Blu-ray release from The Criterion Collection on November 21, 2023. Second Sight is releasing the 4K restoration on 4K Ultra HD in the UK.

==Soundtrack==
Scorsese used mainly vintage pop songs as the movie soundtrack, a revolutionary move at the time. The use of the song &quot;Be My Baby&quot; by the Ronettes, at the start of the film is considered one of the most memorable moments of Scorsese&#x27;s career, and according to critic Owen Gleiberman, &quot;arguably the single greatest use of a pop song in Hollywood history&quot;.

Other songs that appear on the film are:

* &quot;Tell Me&quot; by The Rolling Stones
* &quot;I Looked Away&quot; by Eric Clapton
* &quot;Jumpin&#x27; Jack Flash&quot; by The Rolling Stones
* &quot;Desiree&quot; by The Charts
* &quot;I Met Him On A Sunday&quot; by The Shirelles
* &quot;Florence&quot; by The Paragons
* &quot;Those Oldies But Goodies&quot; by Little Caesar and The Romans
* &quot;Please Mr. Postman&quot; by The Marvelettes
* &quot;You&quot; by The Aquatones
* &quot;It&#x27;s In His Kiss&quot; by Betty Everett
* &quot;I Love You So&quot; by The Chantels
* &quot;Ship Of Love&quot; by The Nutmegs
* &quot;Rubber Biscuit&quot; by The Chips
* &quot;Pledging My Love&quot; by Johnny Ace
* &quot;Baby Oh Baby&quot; by The Shells
* &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Monkey&quot; by The Miracles
* &quot;Stepping Out&quot; by Cream

No official release of the soundtrack has been published.

==See also==
* &quot;Goncharov&quot; - Internet meme originating in the early 2020s about a fictional Scorsese film made in 1973
* List of American films of 1973
* List of cult films

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="32" end="48" title="crime drama film" label="crime drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="61" end="76" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758676" start="105" end="118" title="Mardik Martin" label="Mardik Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="133" end="147" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="152" end="165" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="186" end="198" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q25648" start="225" end="247" title="New York Film Festival" label="New York Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="315" end="347" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="National Society of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q226003" start="356" end="384" title="New York Film Critics Circle" label="New York Film Critics Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776558" start="500" end="543" title="Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro" label="collaborations between Scorsese and De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="697" end="719" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="727" end="746" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q201462" start="887" end="899" title="Little Italy, Manhattan" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="1127" end="1137" title="loan shark" label="loan shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="1221" end="1229" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="1331" end="1338" title="American Mafia" label="mafioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726783" start="1449" end="1462" title="Made man" label="honorable men"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1528" end="1539" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="3089" end="3103" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="3145" end="3158" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176208" start="3178" end="3190" title="David Proval" label="David Proval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614747" start="3211" end="3223" title="Amy Robinson" label="Amy Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q973065" start="3246" end="3257" title="Victor Argo" label="Victor Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q139765" start="3269" end="3284" title="Richard Romanus" label="Richard Romanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q345781" start="3304" end="3317" title="Cesare Danova" label="Cesare Danova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760598" start="3338" end="3352" title="George Memmoli" label="George Memmoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807747" start="3364" end="3376" title="Jean Bell" label="Jeannie Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783517" start="3388" end="3401" title="Harry Northup" label="Harry Northup"/>
<link wikidata="Q187038" start="3415" end="3430" title="David Carradine" label="David Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="3442" end="3457" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575227" start="3533" end="3568" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Knocking at My Door" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Knocking at My Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="3645" end="3657" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212396" start="3665" end="3678" title="Boxcar Bertha" label="Boxcar Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="3758" end="3773" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201462" start="4219" end="4231" title="Little Italy, Manhattan" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="4440" end="4456" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764340" start="4476" end="4500" title="The Simple Art of Murder" label="The Simple Art of Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="4738" end="4743" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q522933" start="4825" end="4836" title="Verna Bloom" label="Verna Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440196" start="4888" end="4903" title="Jonathan Taplin" label="Jonathan Taplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="4926" end="4934" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q883179" start="5074" end="5088" title="blaxploitation" label="blaxploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="5134" end="5146" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="5341" end="5353" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="5503" end="5516" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174197" start="5879" end="5890" title="David Denby" label="David Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="5910" end="5925" title="Sight and Sound" label="Sight and Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="6578" end="6589" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q20001903" start="6668" end="6685" title="The Great Movies" label="Great Movies list"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="7041" end="7057" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144268" start="7079" end="7103" title="Inside the Actors Studio" label="Inside the Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34816" start="7269" end="7284" title="Kathryn Bigelow" label="Kathryn Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="7378" end="7392" title="GQ Magazine" label="&amp;quot;GQ&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="7394" end="7403" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q211372" start="7478" end="7495" title="On The Waterfront" label="On The Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="7512" end="7530" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Empire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="7727" end="7742" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="8121" end="8131" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="8315" end="8318" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="8323" end="8330" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539855" start="8362" end="8373" title="Letterboxing (filming)" label="letterboxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="8374" end="8383" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="8434" end="8441" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="8545" end="8549" title="monaural" label="mono"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="8584" end="8598" title="surround sound" label="surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="8737" end="8745" title="Lossless Audio" label="lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="8746" end="8752" title="Stereophonic sound" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="8786" end="8797" title="4K Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="4K Ultra HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="8823" end="8847" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q812819" start="9081" end="9091" title="Be My Baby" label="Be My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q530886" start="9101" end="9113" title="the Ronettes" label="the Ronettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="9239" end="9254" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q248887" start="9388" end="9395" title="Tell Me (Rolling Stones song)" label="Tell Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="9405" end="9423" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q843511" start="9432" end="9445" title="I Looked Away" label="I Looked Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="9455" end="9467" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477141" start="9476" end="9499" title="Jumpin&amp;#x27; Jack Flash" label="Jumpin&amp;#x27; Jack Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722222" start="9553" end="9563" title="The Charts (American group)" label="The Charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353426" start="9603" end="9616" title="The Shirelles" label="The Shirelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025511" start="9643" end="9655" title="Winley Records" label="The Paragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079348" start="9664" end="9688" title="Those Oldies but Goodies (Remind Me of You)" label="Those Oldies But Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649407" start="9698" end="9726" title="Little Caesar &amp;amp; the Romans" label="Little Caesar and The Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q778055" start="9735" end="9753" title="Please Mr. Postman" label="Please Mr. Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542338" start="9763" end="9778" title="The Marvelettes" label="The Marvelettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714118" start="9800" end="9813" title="The Aquatones" label="The Aquatones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733033" start="9822" end="9843" title="The Shoop Shoop Song (It&amp;#x27;s in His Kiss)" label="It&amp;#x27;s In His Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q259206" start="9853" end="9866" title="Betty Everett" label="Betty Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q615186" start="9898" end="9910" title="The Chantels" label="The Chantels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754528" start="9941" end="9952" title="The Nutmegs" label="The Nutmegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375797" start="9961" end="9975" title="Rubber Biscuit" label="Rubber Biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722599" start="9985" end="9994" title="The Chips" label="The Chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204441" start="10003" end="10019" title="Pledging My Love" label="Pledging My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273345" start="10029" end="10039" title="Johnny Ace" label="Johnny Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763758" start="10070" end="10080" title="The Shells" label="The Shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838557" start="10089" end="10109" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Monkey (song)" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761222" start="10119" end="10131" title="The Miracles" label="The Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611093" start="10140" end="10152" title="Steppin&amp;#x27; Out (instrumental)" label="Stepping Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="10162" end="10167" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q115359828" start="10249" end="10258" title="Goncharov (meme)" label="Goncharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="10267" end="10280" title="Internet meme" label="Internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561533" start="10359" end="10389" title="List of American films of 1973" label="List of American films of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="10392" end="10410" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18997" wikidata="Q314990" url="?curid=18997" title="Marcel Achard">
<text>Marcel Achard (5 July 1899 – 4 September 1974) was a French playwright and screenwriter whose popular sentimental comedies maintained his position as a highly recognizable name in his country&#x27;s theatrical and literary circles for five decades. He was elected to the Académie française in 1959.

==Themes and variations within a philosophical outlook==
A native of the Rhône département&#x27;s Urban Community of Lyon, France&#x27;s second largest metropolitan area, Marcel-Auguste Ferréol was born in Sainte-Foy-lès-Lyon, one of the city&#x27;s suburbs, and adopted his pen name at the start of his writing career in the early 1920s. Able to absorb knowledge quickly, he became, in 1916, in the midst of World War I, a village schoolteacher at the age of 17. In 1919, a few months after the end of the war, the 20-year-old aspiring writer arrived in Paris and found jobs as a prompter at the Théâtre du Vieux-Colombier and as a journalist for various publications, including the major daily newspaper, &quot;Le Figaro&quot;.

Marcel Achard wrote his first play in 1922 and had a major success the following year when renowned actor-director Charles Dullin staged his play &quot;Voulez-vous jouer avec moâ?&quot; [&quot;Would You Like to Play with Me?&quot;], a sensitively delicate comedy about circus and its clowns, casting the playwright in a small part, as one of the clowns. The production set a pattern for the remainder of his theatrical output, most of which can be considered as 20th century reworkings of stock characters and situations from the Italian traditional Commedia dell&#x27;arte. The personages of Pierrot and Columbine are transported into modern-day settings and inserted into an occasionally mawkish or nostalgic love plot with equal doses of laughter mingled with pain and regret.

These themes were expanded upon in two of his most popular plays of the period—1929&#x27;s &quot;Jean de la Lune&quot; [&quot;John of the Moon&quot; a/k/a &quot;The Dreamer&quot;] and 1932&#x27;s &quot;Domino&quot;. &quot;Jean&quot; showed how the unwavering trust of Jef, the faithful Pierrot prototype, transforms his scandalously adulterous wife into his idealized image of her, while &quot;Domino&quot; presented another unfaithful wife who pays a gigolo to make a pretense of courting her so as to distract her husband from her real lover, but the gigolo manages to act his character with such pretend sincerity that she winds up falling in love with this fictional persona.

The distinctive quality of Achard&#x27;s plays was their dreamlike mood of sentimental melancholy, underscored by the very titles which were primarily taken from popular bittersweet songs of the day. 1924&#x27;s &quot;Marlbrough s&#x27;en va-t-en guerre&quot; [&quot;Marlborough Gets Himself Off to War&quot;], 1935&#x27;s &quot;Noix de coco&quot; [&quot;Coconuts&quot;], 1946&#x27;s &quot;Auprès de ma blonde&quot; [&quot;Close to My Girlfriend&quot;] and &quot;Savez-vous planter les choux?&quot; [&quot;Do You Know How to Plant Cabbage?&quot;] and 1948&#x27;s &quot;Nous irons à Valparaiso&quot; [&quot;We&#x27;re Going to Valparaiso&quot;] are among some examples of this specific style.

==Career peak in the interwar period==
Achard&#x27;s greatest successes and popularity were in the period between the two World Wars when contemporary critics favorably compared him to some of his renowned French predecessors such as Pierre de Marivaux and Alfred de Musset. Postwar pundits were not as kind, pointing out the rather narrow scope of human psyche that he represented and deprecatingly referring to him as a &quot;spécialiste de l&#x27;amour&quot; [&quot;love specialist&quot;] for the sickly-sweet characteristics of his poetic imagination.

The critics focused, of course, on Achard&#x27;s most popular plays, disregarding the fact that the reason Achard continued to write them is precisely because they met with such unvarying success. His less-well known works, however, show innovative techniques and original themes. 1929&#x27;s &quot;La Belle Marinière&quot; [&quot;The Beautiful Lady of the Canals&quot; a/k/a &quot;The Beautiful Bargewoman&quot;] still has some of the excessively-poetic dialogue, but is overall a realistic play about a love triangle involving a bargeman, his wife and his best friend and companion. Similarly, 1933&#x27;s &quot;La femme en blanc&quot; [&quot;The Woman in White&quot;] uses a then-new technique of recreating for the audience events as they are being described by the play&#x27;s characters. In 1938&#x27;s &quot;Le corsaire&quot; [&quot;The Privateer&quot;], a &quot;play-in-a-play&quot; device, pioneered by Luigi Pirandello, depicts film actors portraying the life of a long-ago pirate, finding themselves caught in an endless loop of similarities. The same year saw the production of his most controversial play, &quot;Adam&quot;, which strove to give insight into the conflicted emotions of an unhappy homosexual. Although the very subject matter caused it to be considered scandalous at the time, its brief revival three decades later, in the open and radicalized culture of the late 1960s, when the author was approaching his 70th birthday, found the once-ahead-of-its-time work judged as a tame and dated period piece below Achard&#x27;s usual literary standard.

==Successful postwar plays==
After World War II, despite the criticism, Achard&#x27;s literary output continued unabated. Among his most successful later plays were 1952&#x27;s &quot;Les compagnons de la Marjolaine&quot; [&quot;The Companions of Marjoram&quot;] and 1955&#x27;s &quot;Le mal d&#x27;amour&quot; [&quot;Love Sickness&quot;]. The greatest popularity, however, was achieved by a 1957 comedy about a testy, ill-tempered character nicknamed &quot;Patate&quot; [&quot;Spud&quot;] and a 1962 comic mystery &quot;L&#x27;Idiote&quot; [&quot;The Idiot&quot;], best known in America as the basis for the play and film &quot;A Shot in the Dark&quot;.

Four of Achard&#x27;s plays also had Broadway runs. &quot;Domino&quot;, adapted by actress-writer Grace George, opened at the Playhouse Theatre on 16 August 1932 and closed after seven performances. The title role went to Rod La Rocque, a top star of the silent cinema, whose career was on the wane following the advent of the talkies, and the lead actress was Jessie Royce Landis. Seventeen years later, a much better run was enjoyed by &quot;Auprès de ma blonde&quot;, which was reworked by S. N. Behrman into &quot;I Know My Love&quot;. It opened at the Shubert Theatre on 2 November 1949 and ran for 247 performances, closing on 3 June 1950. It was directed by and starred Alfred Lunt and his leading lady was, as always, his wife, Lynn Fontanne. Nine years after that premiere, however, &quot;Patate&quot;, which played to sold-out theaters in Paris, could not translate its elusive charm to American audiences and repeated the seven-performance fiasco of the previous single-name character, &quot;Domino&quot;. The fellow whose nickname made up the title was played by Tom Ewell, and the female lead, Susan Oliver, won the Theatre World Award for her performance, while the Irwin Shaw adaptation opened at Henry Miller&#x27;s Theatre on 28 October 1958 and closed on November 1. Ultimately, it would be &quot;A Shot in the Dark&quot;, three years later, which would boast the longest run. Adapted by Harry Kurnitz and directed by Harold Clurman, it racked up an impressive 389 performances, opening at the Booth Theatre on 18 October 1961 and closing on 22 September 1962. The stars were Julie Harris, Walter Matthau and William Shatner.

Achard&#x27;s numerous screenplays, frequently centering on relatively recent historical events and personalities, include 1936&#x27;s &quot;Mayerling&quot;, 1938&#x27;s &quot;Orage&quot; and 1942&#x27;s &quot;Félicie Nanteuil&quot;. He presided over the Cannes Film Festival in 1958 and 1959 and had a similar role at the Venice Film Festival in 1960. It was also in 1959 that he was finally, at the age of 60, elected to the Académie française.

==Death==
Marcel Achard died of diabetes in his Paris home two months after his 75th birthday. He was survived by his wife, Lily.

==Filmography==
*&quot;Jean de la Lune&quot;, directed by Jean Choux (France, 1931, based on the play &quot;Jean de la Lune&quot;) 
*&quot;Mistigri&quot;, directed by Harry Lachman (France, 1931, based on the play &quot;Mistigri&quot;) 
*&quot;The Beautiful Sailor&quot;, directed by Harry Lachman (France, 1932, based on the play &quot;La Belle Marinière&quot;) 
*&quot;Cocoanut&quot;, directed by Jean Boyer (France, 1939, based on the play &quot;Noix de coco&quot;) 
* &quot;The Strange Monsieur Victor&quot; (1938)
*&quot;&quot;, directed by Schamyl Bauman (Sweden, 1939, based on the play &quot;Pétrus&quot;) 
*&quot;Domino&quot;, directed by Roger Richebé (France, 1943, based on the play &quot;Domino&quot;) 
* &quot;Pétrus&quot;, directed by Marc Allégret (France, 1946, based on the play &quot;Pétrus&quot;) 
*&quot;Jean de la Lune&quot;, directed by Marcel Achard (France, 1949, based on the play &quot;Jean de la Lune&quot;) 
*&quot;A Shot in the Dark&quot;, directed by Blake Edwards (1964, based on the play &quot;L&#x27;Idiote&quot;) 
*&quot;Patate&quot;, directed by Robert Thomas (France, 1964, based on the play &quot;Patate&quot;) 

== Citations ==
== References ==
* (obituary)
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314990" start="0" end="13" title="Marcel Achard" label="Marcel Achard"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="271" end="289" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q46130" start="373" end="390" title="Rhône (département)" label="Rhône département"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874" start="398" end="421" title="Urban Community of Lyon" label="Urban Community of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q387460" start="506" end="525" title="Sainte-Foy-lès-Lyon" label="Sainte-Foy-lès-Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="575" end="583" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="709" end="720" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="855" end="860" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711343" start="897" end="923" title="Théâtre du Vieux-Colombier" label="Théâtre du Vieux-Colombier"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="1013" end="1022" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q455943" start="1146" end="1160" title="Charles Dullin" label="Charles Dullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q636497" start="1520" end="1535" title="stock character" label="stock character"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="1581" end="1604" title="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309" start="1624" end="1631" title="Pierrot" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17302" start="1636" end="1645" title="Columbina" label="Columbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309" start="2098" end="2105" title="Pierrot" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="2760" end="2771" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871833" start="2883" end="2902" title="Auprès de ma blonde" label="Auprès de ma blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="3119" end="3129" title="Valparaiso" label="Valparaiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q49478" start="3420" end="3438" title="Pierre de Marivaux" label="Pierre de Marivaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q179680" start="3443" end="3459" title="Alfred de Musset" label="Alfred de Musset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403" start="4655" end="4671" title="Luigi Pirandello" label="Luigi Pirandello"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="4952" end="4962" title="homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5352" end="5364" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203979" start="5837" end="5850" title="L&amp;#x27;Idiote" label="L&amp;#x27;Idiote"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5896" end="5903" title="United States" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143501" start="5945" end="5963" title="A Shot in the Dark (1964 film)" label="A Shot in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6009" end="6017" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203366" start="6098" end="6115" title="Playhouse Theatre" label="Playhouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696164" start="6194" end="6207" title="Rod La Rocque" label="Rod La Rocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="6227" end="6240" title="silent cinema" label="silent cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q541270" start="6333" end="6352" title="Jessie Royce Landis" label="Jessie Royce Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911096" start="6465" end="6478" title="S. N. Behrman" label="S. N. Behrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797756" start="6529" end="6544" title="Shubert Theatre (Broadway)" label="Shubert Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246683" start="6649" end="6660" title="Alfred Lunt" label="Alfred Lunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q242484" start="6708" end="6721" title="Lynn Fontanne" label="Lynn Fontanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="7006" end="7014" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q427388" start="7047" end="7056" title="Tom Ewell" label="Tom Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q273180" start="7079" end="7091" title="Susan Oliver" label="Susan Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131356" start="7101" end="7120" title="Theatre World Award" label="Theatre World Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q315380" start="7152" end="7162" title="Irwin Shaw" label="Irwin Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610570" start="7184" end="7211" title="Henry Miller&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Henry Miller&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783427" start="7408" end="7422" title="Harold Clurman" label="Harold Clurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527434" start="7484" end="7497" title="Booth Theatre" label="Booth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q236708" start="7566" end="7578" title="Julie Harris (American actress)" label="Julie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q202172" start="7580" end="7594" title="Walter Matthau" label="Walter Matthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="7599" end="7614" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607724" start="7758" end="7767" title="Mayerling (1936 film)" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354995" start="7793" end="7798" title="Orage (film)" label="Orage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092275" start="7827" end="7843" title="Félicie Nanteuil" label="Félicie Nanteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="7872" end="7892" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="7940" end="7960" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="8044" end="8062" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="8097" end="8105" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087649" start="8254" end="8264" title="Jean Choux" label="Jean Choux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316981" start="8335" end="8343" title="Mistigri (film)" label="Mistigri"/>
<link wikidata="Q389234" start="8363" end="8376" title="Harry Lachman" label="Harry Lachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206572" start="8440" end="8460" title="The Beautiful Sailor" label="The Beautiful Sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389234" start="8480" end="8493" title="Harry Lachman" label="Harry Lachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342785" start="8567" end="8575" title="Cocoanut (film)" label="Cocoanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685395" start="8595" end="8605" title="Jean Boyer (director)" label="Jean Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205531" start="8674" end="8701" title="The Strange Monsieur Victor" label="The Strange Monsieur Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565890" start="8742" end="8756" title="Schamyl Bauman" label="Schamyl Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035570" start="8818" end="8824" title="Domino (1943 film)" label="Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439408" start="8844" end="8857" title="Roger Richebé" label="Roger Richebé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412090" start="8920" end="8926" title="Pétrus (film)" label="Pétrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284911" start="8946" end="8959" title="Marc Allégret" label="Marc Allégret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143501" start="9140" end="9158" title="A Shot in the Dark (1964 film)" label="A Shot in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q56093" start="9178" end="9191" title="Blake Edwards" label="Blake Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q704975" start="9278" end="9291" title="Robert Thomas (director)" label="Robert Thomas"/>
</links>
</doc>
