<doc id="19241" wikidata="Q528560" url="?curid=19241" title="History of Moldova">
<text>The history of Moldova spans prehistoric cultures, ancient and medieval empires, and periods of foreign rule and modern independence.

Evidence of human habitation dates back 800,000–1.2 million years, with significant developments in agriculture, pottery, and settlement during the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. In antiquity, Moldova&#x27;s location made it a crossroads for invasions by the Scythians, Goths, Huns, and other tribes, followed by periods of Roman and Byzantine control. The medieval Principality of Moldavia emerged in the 1350s, and was the medieval precursor of modern Moldova and Romania. It reached prominence under rulers like Stephen the Great before becoming a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire from 1538, until the 19th century.

In 1812, following one of several Russian–Turkish wars, the eastern half of the principality, Bessarabia, was annexed by the Russian Empire, marking the beginning of Russian influence in the region. In 1918, Bessarabia briefly became independent as the Moldavian Democratic Republic and, following the decision of the Parliament (Sfatul Țării), united with Romania. During the Second World War it was occupied by the Soviet Union which reclaimed it from Romania. It joined the Union in 1940 as the Moldavian SSR. During this period, policies of Russification and economic transformation deeply affected the region.

The dissolution of the USSR in 1991 led to declared independence, followed by the Transnistria War in 1992, a conflict that left the Transnistrian region as a de facto independent state. Moldova continues to navigate a complex relationship between pro-Western and pro-Russian factions. In recent years, it has pursued closer ties with the European Union, submitting a formal membership application in 2022.

==Prehistory==
In 2010, Oldowan flint tools were discovered at Dubasari on the lower Dniester that are 800,000–1.2 million years old demonstrating that early humans were present in Moldova during the early paleolithic. During prehistoric times there was a succession of cultures that flourished in the land of present-day Moldova from the end of the ice age up through the Neolithic Age, the Copper Age, the Bronze Age, and the beginning of the Iron Age, when historical records begin to be made about the people who lived in these lands. These cultures included the Linear Pottery culture (ca. 5500–4500 BC), the Cucuteni–Trypillian culture (ca. 5500–2750 BC), and the Yamna culture (ca. 3600–2300 BC). During this period of time many innovations and advancements were made, including the practice of agriculture, animal husbandry, kiln-fired pottery, weaving, and the formation of large settlements and towns. Indeed, during the Cucuteni–Trypillian Culture, some of the settlements in this area were larger than anywhere on Earth at the time, and they predate even the earliest towns of Sumer in the Mesopotamia. The area, stretching from the Dnieper River in the east to the Iron Gate of the Danube in the west (which included the land now in Moldova), had a civilization as highly advanced as anywhere else on Earth during the Neolithic period.

The question as to why this area did not remain at the forefront of technological and social development lies in the subsequent history of its geographical location. At the end of the mostly peaceful Neolithic period, this area became a highway for invaders from the east moving into Europe. By the time the historical written record begins to cover this area, it has already seen a number of invasions sweep over it, leaving social and political upheaval in their wake. This trend was to continue on a fairly regular basis up until the 20th century. With so much destruction, it was difficult for the residents of this area to recover from each successive invasion before encountering the next.

==Antiquity and early Middle Ages==
In recorded antiquity Moldova&#x27;s territory was inhabited by several tribes, mainly by Akatziri, and at different periods also by Bastarnae, Scythians and Sarmatians. Between the 1st and 7th centuries AD, the south was intermittently under the Roman, then Byzantine Empires. Due to its strategic location on a route between Asia and Europe, Moldova was repeatedly invaded by, among others, the Goths, Huns, Avars, Magyars, Pechenegs, Cumans, and the Mongols. Csaba&#x27;s Khalyzian wife, mother of Ed and Edumen, was from the area. Although the First Bulgarian Empire ruled parts of Moldavia between the reign of Krum to Presian I, the territory of Moldova itself was never conquered by them. The Bulanids ruled the area from the 8th century to the 10th century. Constantine Porphyrogenitus in De Administrando Imperio refers to the territory specifically as Atelkuzu (Ατελκουζου), the Black Cuman land of the Khalyzians and Pechenegs. It was part of the Principality of Halych in the 12th and 13th centuries before falling to the Golden Horde in 1241 until the early 14th century. The colonists of the Genoa Republic also left a trace in this region. The Hypatian Chronicle mentioned the name of the Bolokhoveni (the 13th century) a purportedly Romanian population connected to Voloch, the East Slavic exonym of the Romanians. Alexandru V. Boldur identified the Bolohoveni as Romanians.

==Principality of Moldavia==

The medieval Principality of Moldavia was established in 1359 and covered the so-called Carpathian–Danube–Dniester area, stretching from Transylvania in the west to the Dniester River in the east. Its territory comprised the present-day territory of the Republic of Moldova, the eastern 8 of the 41 counties of Romania (a region still called &quot;Moldova&quot; by the local population), the Chernivtsi oblast and Budjak region of Ukraine. Its nucleus was in the northwestern part, the &quot;Țara de Sus&quot; (&quot;Upper Land&quot;), part of which later became known as Bukovina. The name of the principality originates from the Moldova River.

The foundation of Moldavia is attributed to the Vlach (an old exonym for Romanian) noblemen Dragoş of Bedeu, from the Voivodeship of Maramureș, who had been ordered in 1343 (1285 after other sources) by the Hungarian king to establish a defense for the historic Kingdom of Hungary against the Tatars, and Bogdan I of Cuhea, another Romanian from Maramureș, who became the first independent prince of Moldavia, when he rejected Hungarian authority in 1359. Bogdan I left his lands from Maramureș with his army and part of the Romanian population, by crossing the mountains to the east, after entering in conflict with the Hungarian rulers. From the 14th century onward, Turkic documents would refer to Moldova as &quot;Kara-Boğdan&quot;, or &quot;Black Bogdan&quot;, thanks to the success of his dynasty.

Moldova also had rich political relations with Poland. In 1387, the great hospodar of Moldova, Peter I, paid a feudal tribute to the Polish king. For the next one hundred and fifty years, relations between Moldova and Poland were periodically friendly, and only occasional conflicts.

The greatest Moldavian personality was prince Stephen the Great, who ruled from 1457 to 1504. He fought the Hungarian Kingdom, the Polish Kingdom and the Ottoman Empire, with success, for the most part of his rule.

Stephen III was succeeded by increasingly weaker princes, and in 1538 Moldavia became a vassal of the Ottoman Empire, to which it owed a percentage of the internal revenue, that in time rose to 10%. Moldavia was forbidden to have foreign relations to the detriment of the Ottoman Empire (although at times the country managed to circumvent this interdiction), but was allowed internal autonomy, including sole authority over foreign trade. Turks were legally forbidden to own land or build religious establishments in Moldavia. Prince Vasile Lupu had secured the Moldavian throne in 1634 after a series of complicated intrigues, and managed to hold it for twenty years. Lupu was a capable administrator and a brilliant financier, and soon was the richest man in the Christian East. Judiciously placed gifts kept him on good terms with the Ottoman authorities.

In the 18th century, the territory of Moldavia often became a transit or war zone during conflicts between the Ottomans, Austrians, and Russians. In 1774, following a victory in a war against the Ottomans, Russia occupied Christian Moldavia, still a vassal of the Ottoman Empire at the time. In 1775, the Habsburg monarchy annexed ca 11% of the territory of Moldavia, which became known as Bukovina. By the Treaty of Bucharest following the Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812), Russia had annexed further 50% of its territory, which became known as Bessarabia.

==Part of the Russian Empire==

With the notable exception of Transnistria, the territory of today&#x27;s Republic of Moldova covers most of the historical region of Bessarabia. Until 1812, the term &quot;Bessarabia&quot; referred to the region between the Danube, Dniester, the Black Sea shores, and the Upper Trajan Wall, slightly larger than what today is called Budjak. By the Treaty of Bucharest of May 28, 1812 between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire — concluding the Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812) — the latter annexed the eastern half of the Principality of Moldavia. That region was then called &quot;Bessarabia&quot;.

Initially, after being annexed by the Russian Empire, Bessarabia enjoyed a period of local autonomy until 1828. Organized as an imperial district (&quot;oblast&quot;), it was governed by a &quot;provisional government&quot; with two departments: a civil administration and a religious administration, the former led by the aged Moldavian boyar Scarlat Sturdza, the latter – by the archbishop Gavriil Bănulescu-Bodoni. On top of these was the Russian military administration of Governor General Harting. However, already in 1813, the civil administration was handed to the Governor General. In 1818, reform-minded Russian tsar Alexander I passed a &quot;Settlement of the establishment of the region of Bessarabia&quot; which divided the legal power between the tsar-appointed Governor General (Bakhmetiev) and a 10-member &quot;High Council of the Region&quot; with 4 members appointed by the tsar and 6 elected by the local nobility. In lieu of the older 12 &quot;lands&quot;, the region was divided into 6, later 9 counties. In 1828 however, the conservative tsar Nikolai I abrogated the &quot;Settlement&quot; and passed a new regulation which endowed the Governor General with supreme power, with the regional council having only advisory functions and meeting twice a year. Article 63 of the regulation stated that all administrative personnel must know and perform their duties in Russian. Nevertheless, Romanian language would occasionally appear in documents up to 1854.

At the end of the Crimean War, in 1856, by the Treaty of Paris, the southern parts of Bessarabia (including a part of Budjak) were returned to Moldavia, which organized the territory into the districts of Cahul, Bolgrad and Ismail. Consequently, Russia lost access to the Danube river. In 1859, the Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia united and formed the Romanian United Principalities, a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire.

In 1870, the institution of zemstva was instated in the Bessarabian oblast. Cities, communes, counties, and the entire region would elect each a local council representing noblemen, merchants and peasants. They had substantial authority in economic and sanitary areas, including roads, posts, food, public safety and education. On the other hand, political (including justice courts of all levels) and cultural matters remained an exclusive domain of the Governor General and were used as a vehicle of Russification. With the accomplishment of these introductions, in 1871, Bessarabia was transformed into a governorate.

The defeat of the Ottoman Empire in the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878) and the subsequent signing of the Treaty of Berlin granted independence to Romania. Although the treaty of alliance between Romania and Russia specified that Russia would defend the territorial integrity of Romania and not claim any part of Romania at the end of the war, the southern part of Bessarabia was re-annexed to Russia. In exchange, Romania was given Dobruja, which was at the time part of the Ottoman Empire.

Public education was entrusted to the religious establishment of the region, which since 1821 had only Russian archbishops, and later also to the zemstvos. Dimitrie Sulima (Archbishop in 1821–1855), and Antonie Shokotov (1855–1871) allowed the parallel usage of both Romanian and Russian in church, and did not take any measures to infringe upon the linguistic specifics of the region. With the appointment of Pavel Lebedev (1871–1882), the situation changed radically, and the language of the locals was soon purged from the church. To prevent the printing of religious literature in Romanian, Lebedev closed down the printing press in Chișinău, collected from the region and burned the already printed books in Romanian (in the Cyrillic alphabet). The following archbishops Sergey Lapidevsky, Isakyi Polozensky, Neofit Novodchikov eased some of Lebedev&#x27;s measures to help quell the serious dissatisfaction of the population. The next Archbishop Iakov Pyatnitsky (1898–1904) discovered that his desire to popularize a Christian culture and a moral education faced a language barrier, and in 1900 convinced the Russian High Synod to allow the publication of religious pamphlets in Romanian, while his follower Archbishop Vladimir allowed the printing of books, and from 1908 even of a regular religious journal &quot;Luminătorul&quot; by Constantin Popovici and Gurie Grosu. The last Russian Archbishops, Serafim Chichyagov (1908–1914), Platon (1914–1915) and Anastasius (1915–1918) tried to preserve the privileged status of the Russian language in the church in Bessarabia, but did not introduce any new anti-Romanian measures. In 1918, after the installation of the Romanian administration in Bessarabia, Archbishop Anastasius refused to subordinate his eparchy to the Romanian Orthodox Church, and was forced into exile. The new authorities entrusted the archbishopric to the Bishop Nicodem de Huși from Romania, who appointed a local Archbishop Dionisie Erhan. Then the Clerical Congress on February 21, 1920, elected Gurie Botoșăneanu as the highest church official in Bessarabia, which afterwards was raised from Archbishop to Metropolitan.

Under the protection of Gavriil Bănulescu-Bodoni and Dimitrie Sulima a theological school and a seminary were opened in Chișinău, and public schools throughout the region: in the cities of Chișinău, Hotin, Cetatea Albă, Briceni, Bender, Bălți, Cahul, Soroca, Orhei, at the monasteries of Dobrușa and Hârjauca, and even in several villages (Rezeni, Mereni, Volcineț, Nisporeni, Hârtop). In 1835, the tsarist authorities declared a 7-year deadline to transfer the education from Romanian to Russian. Although the measure was implemented more gradually, since 1867, Romanian was purged entirely from the education. This had the effect of keeping the peasant population of Bessarabia backward, as witnessed by the fact that in 1912 Moldavians had a literacy rate of only 10.5%, lowest among all ethnic groups of the region (63% for Bessarabian Germans, 50% for Bessarabian Jews, 40% for Russians, 31% for Bessarabian Bulgarians), with a record low 1.7% literacy rate for Moldavian women. Of the 1709 primary schools in Bessarabia in 1912, none was in the language of the main ethnic group.
After 1812, the newly installed Russian authorities expelled the large Nogai Tatar population of Budjak (Little Tartary), and encouraged the settlement of Moldavians, Wallachians, Bulgarians, Ukrainians and others through various fiscal facilities and exemption from military service. The colonization was generated by the need to better exploit the resources of the land, and by the absence of serfdom in Bessarabia. German colonists from Switzerland (canton Lausanne), France, and Germany (Württemberg) settled in 27 localities (most newly settled) in Budjak, and by 1856 Bessarabian Germans were 42,216. Russian veterans of the 1828–1829 war with the Ottomans were settled in 10 localities in Budjak, and three other localities were settled by Cossacks from Dobrudja (which got there from the Dniepr region some 50 years earlier). Bessarabian Bulgarians and Gagauz arrived from modern eastern Bulgaria as early as the second half of the 18th century. In 1817, they numbered 482 families in 12 localities, in 1856 – 115,000 people in 43 localities. Ukrainians had arrived Bessarabia since before 1812, and already in the 1820s they made up one third of the population of the most northern Hotin county. In the following decades more Ukrainians settled throughout the northern part of Bessarabia from Galicia and Podolia. Jews from Galicia, Podolia and Poland also settled in Bessarabia in the 19th century, but mostly in the cities and fairs; in some of these they eventually became a plurality. In 1856, there were 78,751 Bessarabian Jews and according to the Imperial Russian census of 1897, the capital Kishinev had a Jewish population of 50,000, or 46%, out of a total of approximately 110,000. There was even an attempt by the Russian authorities to create 16 Jewish agricultural colonies, where 10,589 people would settle. However within less than 2 generations, most of them sold the land to the local Moldavians and moved to the cities and fairs. The various population movements saw an increase of the Slavic population to more than a fifth of the total population by 1920, while the proportion of the Moldovan population steadily decreased. In absence of any official records on ethnic distribution until the late 19th century, various figures for the ethnic proportions of the region have been advanced. Thus, in the 1920s Romanian historian Ion Nistor alleged that, at the beginning of the Russian administration, Moldavians represented 86% of the population. While according to official statistics speakers of Moldovan and Romanian accounted for 47.8% in 1897, some authors proposed figures as high as 70% for the beginning of the 20th century.

==Moldavian Democratic Republic and Union with Romania==

After the Russian Revolution of 1905, a Romanian nationalist movement started to develop in Bessarabia. While it received a setback in 1906–1907, the movement re-emerged even stronger in 1917.

To quell the chaos brought about by the Russian revolutions of February and October 1917, a national council, Sfatul Țării, was established in Bessarabia, with 120 members elected in county meetings of peasants, and by political and professional organizations from Bessarabia. On December 15, 1917, the Council proclaimed the Moldavian Democratic Republic, as part of the Russian Republic, then formed the government of Moldavia. With the approval of the Allies and the Russian White general Dmitry Shcherbachev, commander-in-chief of the Russian forces on the Romanian Front, on January 26, 1918, Romanian troops entered Bessarabia, ostensibly as a temporary measure to maintain security, which had deteriorated due to large numbers of deserters from the Russian Army. While Romanian historiography generally asserts the intervention was done on the request of Sfatul Țării, the presence of the Romanian army in Bessarabia was protested by some of the republic&#x27;s leaders, notably Ion Inculeț, president of &quot;Sfatul Țării&quot; and Pantelimon Erhan, head of the provisional Moldavian executive protesting against it. In particular they feared that big land owners-dominated Romanian Government could use the troops to prevent the envisaged Agrarian reform, a cornerstone priority of the Bessarabian government.

After this, the Council declared the independence of the Moldavian Democratic Republic on . Under pressure from the Romanian army, on , Sfatul Țării, by a vote of 86 to 3, with 36 abstentions, approved a conditional Union of Bessarabia with Romania. Conditions included territorial autonomy of Bessarabia, an agrarian reform, respect for human freedoms and general amnesty. Nevertheless, as early as the summer of 1918 the Romanian government began encroaching on the existing forms of local autonomy. Thus, the members of the zemstvos were appointed by royal decree, rather than being elected, as had been the case during the Russian rule. The province was subordinated to a royal-appointed General Commissar, and &quot;Sfatul Țării&quot; was relegated to a consultative position. Furthermore, the state of siege was declared throughout Bessarabia and censorship was instated. Under the pressure of the Romanian central government, worried about the growing dissatisfaction with its administration of the region and the strengthening of the autonomist current, the conditions were nominally dropped by the &quot;Sfatul Țării&quot; in December 1918. The vote was taken in the presence of only 44 of the 125 members, or, according to other sources, 48 of 160; lacking a quorum, the vote was judged to be illegitimate by some.

The union was recognized by Britain, France and Italy, but not by the Soviet government, which claimed the area as the Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic, and argued the union was made under conditions of Romanian military occupation by a Council that had not been elected by the people of Bessarabia in elections.

==Part of Greater Romania==

After 1918 Bessarabia was under Romanian jurisdiction for the next 22 years. This fact was recognized in the 1920 Treaty of Paris which, however, has never come into force since it was not ratified by Japan. The newly communist Russia did not recognize the Romanian rule over Bessarabia. The Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic was proclaimed on May 5, 1919, in Odessa as a &quot;Provisional Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Government in exile&quot; and established on May 11, 1919, in Tiraspol as an autonomous part of Russian SFSR. Furthermore, Russia and later, the Soviet Union, considered the region to be Soviet territory under foreign occupation and conducted numerous diplomatic attempts to reclaim it. No diplomatic relations existed between the two states until 1934. During that time, both countries subscribed to the principle of non-violent resolution of territorial disputes in the Kellogg-Briand Treaty of 1928 and the Treaty of London of July 1933. Meanwhile, the neighboring region of Transnistria, part of the Ukrainian SSR at the time, was formed into the Moldavian ASSR after the failure of the Tatarbunary Uprising in 1924.

The land reform, implemented by &quot;Sfatul Țării&quot; in 1918–1919, resulted in a rise of a middle class, as 87% of the region&#x27;s population lived in rural areas. The reform was however marred by the small size of the awarded plots, as well as by preferential allotment of land to politicians and administrative personnel who had supported the political goals of the Romanian government. Generally, urban development and industry were insignificant, and the region remained primarily an agrarian rural region throughout the interwar period. Certain improvements were achieved in the area of education, the literacy rate rising from 15.6% in 1897 to 37% by 1930; however, Bessarabia continued to lag behind the rest of the country, the national literacy rate being 60%. During the inter-war period, Romanian authorities also conducted a program of Romanianization that sought to assimilate ethnic minorities throughout the country. The enforcement of this policy was especially pervasive in Bessarabia due to its highly diverse population, and resulted in the closure of minority educational and cultural institutions.

On 1 January 1919 the Municipal Conservatory (the Academy of Music) was created in Chişinău, in 1927 – the Faculty of Theology, in 1934 the subsidiary of the Romanian Institute of social sciences, in 1939 – municipal picture gallery. The Agricultural State University of Moldova was founded in 1933 in Chișinău. The Museum of Fine Arts was founded in 1939 by the sculptor Alexandru Plămădeală. Gurie Grosu was the first Metropolitan of Bessarabia.

The first scheduled flights to Chișinău started on 24 June 1926, on the route Bucharest – Galați – Iași – Chișinău. The flights were operated by Compagnie Franco-Roumaine de Navigation Aérienne – CFRNA, later LARES.

The first society of the Romanian writers in Chișinău was formed in 1920, among the members were Mihail Sadoveanu, Ștefan Ciobanu, Tudor Pamfile, Nicolae Dunăreanu, N.N.Beldiceanu, Apostol D.Culea. &quot;Writer and Journalist Bessarabian Society&quot; took an institutionalized form in 1940. The First Congress of the Society elected as president Pan Halippa as Vice President Nicolae Spătaru, and as secretary general Nicolae Costenco.

Viața Basarabiei was founded in 1932 by Pan Halippa. Radio Basarabia was launched on 8 October 1939, as the second radio station of the Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company. The Capitoline Wolf was opened in 1926 and in 1928 the Stephen the Great Monument, by the sculptor Alexandru Plămădeală, was opened.

==World War II and Soviet era==
After the establishment of the Soviet Union in December 1922, the Soviet government moved in 1924 to establish the Moldavian Autonomous Oblast on the lands to the east of the Dniester River in the Ukrainian SSR. The capital of the oblast was Balta, situated in present-day Ukraine. Seven months later, the oblast was upgraded to the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (Moldavian ASSR or MASSR), even though its population was only 30% ethnic Romanian. The capital remained at Balta until 1929, when it was moved to Tiraspol.

In the secret protocol attached to the 1939 Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact defining the division of the spheres of influence in Eastern Europe, Nazi Germany declared it had no political interest in Bessarabia, in response to the Soviet Union&#x27;s expression of interest, thereby consigning Bessarabia to the Soviet &quot;sphere&quot;. On June 26, 1940, the Soviet government issued an ultimatum to the Romanian minister in Moscow, demanding Romania immediately cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina. Italy and Germany, which needed a stable Romania and access to its oil fields, urged King Carol II to do so. On June 28, Soviet troops crossed the Dniester and occupied Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region.

The Soviet republic created following annexation did not follow Bessarabia&#x27;s traditional border. The Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic (Moldavian SSR), established on August 2, 1940, consisted of six and a half counties of Bessarabia joined with the westernmost part of the already extant MASSR (an autonomous entity within the Ukrainian SSR). Various changes were made to its borders, which were finally settled by November 1940. Territories where ethnic Ukrainians formed a large portion of the population (parts of Northern Bukovina and parts of Hotin, Akkerman, and Izmail) went to Ukraine, while a small strip of Transnistria east of the Dniester with a significant (49% of inhabitants) Moldovan population was joined to the MSSR. The transfer of Bessarabia&#x27;s Black Sea and Danube frontage to Ukraine insured its control by a stable Soviet republic. This transfer, along with the division of Bessarabia, was also designed to discourage future Romanian claims and irredentism.

Under early Soviet rule, deportations of locals to the northern Urals, to Siberia, and Kazakhstan occurred regularly throughout the Stalinist period, with the largest ones on 12–13 June 1941, and 5–6 July 1949, accounting for 19,000 and 35,000 deportees respectively (from MSSR alone). In 1940–1941, ca. 90,000 inhabitants of the annexed territories were subject to political persecutions, such as arrests, deportations, or executions.

By participating in the 1941 Axis invasion of the Soviet Union, pro-German Romania seized the lost territories of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, as well as those of the former MASSR, and established its administration there. In occupied Transnistria, Romanian forces, working with the Germans, deported ca. 147,000 Jews from the territories of Bessarabia and Bukovina, of whom over 90,000 perished in ghettoes and concentration camps.

By April 1944, successful offensives of the Soviet Army occupied northern Moldavia and Transnistria, and by the end of August 1944 the entire territory was under Soviet control, with Soviet Army units entering Kishinev on 24 August 1944. The Paris peace treaty signed in February 1947 fixed the Romanian-Soviet border to the one established in June 1940.

The territory remained part of the Soviet Union after World War II as the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. Soviet Union created the universal educational system, brought high-tech industry and science. Most of these industries were built in Transnistria and around large cities, while in the rest of the republic agriculture was developed. By the late Soviet period, the urban intelligentsia and government officials were dominated mostly by ethnic Moldovans, while Russians and Ukrainians made up most of the technical and engineering specialists.

The conditions imposed during the reestablishment of Soviet rule became the basis of deep resentment toward Soviet authorities, manifested in numerous resistance movements to Soviet rule. In 1946, as a result of a severe drought and excessive delivery quota obligations and requisitions imposed by the Soviet government, the southwestern part of the USSR suffered from a major famine resulting in a minimum of 115,000 deaths among the peasants. During Leonid Brezhnev&#x27;s 1950–1952 tenure as the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Moldavia (CPM), he was ruthless compared to his predecessor Nicolae Coval in putting down numerous resistance groups, and issuing harsh sentences. During the Operation North, 723 families (2,617 persons) were deported from the Moldavian SSR, on the night of March 31 to April 1, 1951, members of Neoprotestant sects, mostly Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, qualified as religious elements considered a potential danger for the communist regime.

Most political and academic positions were given to members of non-Romanian ethnic groups (only 17.5% of the Moldavian SSR&#x27;s political leaders were ethnic Romanians in 1940).

Although Brezhnev and other CPM first secretaries were largely successful in suppressing Romanian irredentism in the 1950s–1980s, Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s administration facilitated the revival of the movement in the region. His policies of glasnost and perestroika created conditions in which nationalistic feelings could be openly expressed and in which the Soviet republics could consider reforms.

In the 1970s and 1980s Moldova received substantial investment from the budget of the USSR to develop industrial, scientific facilities, as well as housing. In 1971 the Council of Ministers of the USSR adopted a decision &quot;About the measures for further development of Kishinev city&quot; that secured more than one billion roubles of funds for Chisinau alone from the USSR budget. Subsequent decisions directed large amounts of funds and brought qualified specialists from all over the USSR to further develop the Moldavian SSR. Such an allocation of USSR assets was influenced by the fact that the-then leader of the Soviet Union, Leonid Brezhnev, was the First Secretary of the local Communist Party in the 1950s. These investments stopped in 1991 with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, when Moldova became independent.

==Independent Republic of Moldova==

===Perestroika and Glasnost===

In the climate of Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s perestroika and glasnost, national sentiment escalated in the Moldavian SSR in 1988. In 1989, the Popular Front of Moldova was formed as an association of independent cultural and political groups and gained official recognition. The Popular Front organized a number of large demonstrations, which led to the designation of Moldovan as the official language of the MSSR on August 31, 1989, and a return to the Latin alphabet.

However, opposition was growing to the increasingly exclusionary nationalist policies of the Popular Front, especially in Transnistria, where the Yedinstvo-Unitatea (Unity) Intermovement had been formed in 1988 by Slavic minorities, and in the south, where the organization Gagauz Halkı (&quot;Gagauz People&quot;), formed in November 1989, came to represent the Gagauz, a Turkic-speaking minority there.

The first democratic elections to the Moldavian SSR&#x27;s Supreme Soviet were held on February 25, 1990. Runoff elections were held in March. The Popular Front won a majority of the votes. After the elections, Mircea Snegur, a reformed communist, was elected chairman of the Supreme Soviet; in September he became president of the republic.

===Priority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new Treaty===

The reformist government that took over in May 1990 made many changes that did not please the minorities, including changing the republic&#x27;s name in June from the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic to the Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova and declaring it sovereign the following month. At the same time, Romanian tricolor with the Moldavian coat-of-arms was adopted as the state flag, and &quot;Deșteaptă-te române!&quot;, the Romanian anthem, became the anthem of the SSRM. During that period a Movement for unification of Romania and the Republic of Moldova became active in each country.

In August 1990, there was a refusal of the increasingly nationalist republican government to grant cultural and territorial autonomy to Gagauzia and Transnistria, two regions populated primarily by ethnic minorities. In response, the Gagauz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was declared in the south, in the city of Comrat. In September in Tiraspol, the main city on the east bank of the Dniester River, the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic (commonly called Transnistria) followed suit. The parliament of Moldova immediately declared these declarations null and void.

By mid-October 1990, Moldovan nationalist volunteers had been mobilized to be sent to Gagauzia (approximately 30,000 volunteers participated there) and Transnistria. However, negotiations in Moscow between the Gagauz and Transnistrian leadership, and the government of the Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova failed.

In May 1991, the country&#x27;s official name was changed to the Republic of Moldova (Republica Moldova). The name of the Supreme Soviet also was changed, to the Moldovan Parliament.
=== Soviet coup attempt, the Transition Period and the end of the Soviet Union ===

During the 1991 Soviet coup d&#x27;état attempt in Moscow against Mikhail Gorbachev, commanders of the Soviet Union&#x27;s Southwestern Theater of Military Operations attempted to impose a state of emergency in Moldova. They were overruled by the Moldovan government, which declared its support for Russian president Boris Yeltsin, who led the counter-coup in Moscow.

=== Independent country and the Commonwealth ===
On 27 August 1991, following the coup&#x27;s collapse, Moldova declared its independence from the Soviet Union.

Post-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.

The December elections of Stepan Topal and Igor Smirnov as presidents of Gagauzia and Transnistria respectively, and the official dissolution of the Soviet Union at the end of the year, had further increased tensions in Moldova.

===Transnistria===

Transnistria is the region east of the Dniester River, which includes a large proportion of predominantly Russophone ethnic Russians and Ukrainians (51%, as of 1989, with ethnic Moldovans forming a 40% minority). The headquarters of the Soviet 14th Guards Army was located in the regional capital Tiraspol. There, on September 2, 1990, local authorities proclaimed an independent Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. The motives behind this move were fear of the rise of nationalism in Moldova and the country&#x27;s expected reunification with Romania upon secession from the USSR. In the winter of 1991–1992 clashes occurred between Transnistrian forces and the Moldovan police. Between March 2 and July 26, 1992, the conflict escalated into a military engagement. Following Russian intervention of the 14th Guards Army into the conflict on the side of the separatists, the war was stopped and the Moscow Agreement on the principles of peace settlement of armed conflict in Trans-Dniester districts of the republic of Moldova was signed on 21 July 1992.

As of 2007, the Russian military remains in Transnistria, despite Russia having signed international agreements to withdraw, and against the will of Moldovan government. The government of Moldova continues to offer extensive autonomy to Transnistria, while the government of Transnistria demands independence. &quot;De jure&quot;, Transnistria is internationally recognized as part of Moldova, but &quot;de facto&quot;, the Moldovan government does not exercise any control over the territory.

=== Early years of independence (1991–2001) ===
On 8 December 1991, Mircea Snegur, an ex-communist reformer, ran an unopposed election for the presidency. On March 2, 1992, the country achieved formal recognition as an independent state at the United Nations.

In 1992, Moldova became involved in a brief conflict against local insurgents in Transnistria, who were aided by the Russian 14th Guards Army and Russian, Ukrainian and Don Cossack volunteers, which resulted in the failure of Moldova, supported by Romania, to regain control over the breakaway republic.

Starting 1993, Moldova began to distance itself from Romania. The 1994 Constitution of Moldova used the term &quot;Moldovan language&quot; instead of &quot;Romanian&quot; and changed the national anthem to &quot;Limba noastră&quot;.

On January 2, 1992, Moldova introduced a market economy, liberalizing prices, which resulted in huge inflation. From 1992 to 2001, the young country suffered its worst economic crisis, leaving most of the population below the poverty line. In 1993, a national currency, the Moldovan leu, was introduced to replace the Soviet rouble. The end of the planned economy also meant that industrial enterprises would have to buy supplies and sell their goods by themselves, and most of the management was unprepared for such a change. Moldova&#x27;s industry, especially machine building, became all but defunct, and unemployment skyrocketed. The economic fortunes of Moldova began to change in 2001; since then the country has seen a steady annual growth of between 5% and 10%. In the early 2000s, there was also a considerable growth of emigration of Moldovans looking for work (mostly illegally) in Italy, Portugal, Spain, Greece, Cyprus, Turkey, Russia and other countries. Remittances from Moldovans abroad account for almost 38% of Moldova&#x27;s GDP, the second-highest percentage in the world. Officially, Moldova&#x27;s annual GDP is on the order of $1,000 per capita; however, a significant part of the economy goes unregistered as a result of corruption.

The pro-nationalist governments of prime ministers Mircea Druc (May 25, 1990 – May 28, 1991), and Valeriu Muravschi (May 28, 1991 – July 1, 1992), were followed by a more moderate government of Andrei Sangheli, during which there was a decline of the pro-Romanian nationalist sentiment. After the 1994 elections, Moldovan Parliament adopted measures that distanced Moldova from Romania. The new Moldovan Constitution also provided for autonomy for Transnistria and Gagauzia. On December 23, 1994, the Parliament of Moldova adopted a &quot;Law on the Special Legal Status of Gagauzia&quot;, and in 1995 it was constituted.

After winning the presidential elections of 1996, on January 15, 1997, Petru Lucinschi, the former First Secretary of the Moldavian Communist Party in 1989–91, became the country&#x27;s second president. After the legislative elections on March 22, 1998, the Alliance for Democracy and Reform was formed by non-Communist parties. However, the term of the new government of Prime Minister Ion Ciubuc (January 24, 1997– February 1, 1999) was marked by chronic political instability, which prevented a coherent reform program. The 1998 financial crisis in Russia, Moldova&#x27;s main economic partner at the time, produced an economic crisis in the country. The standard of living plunged, with 75% of population living below the poverty line, while the economic disaster caused 600,000 people to emigrate.

New governments were formed by Ion Sturza (February 19 – November 9, 1999) and Dumitru Braghiş (December 21, 1999 – April 19, 2001). On July 21, 2000, the Parliament adopted an amendment to the Constitution that transformed Moldova from a presidential to a parliamentary republic, in which the president is elected by three fifths of the votes in the parliament, and no longer directly by the people.

=== Dominance of the Communists (2001–2009) ===
Only 3 of the 31 political parties won more than the 6% of the popular vote required to win seats in parliament in the February 25, 2001 elections. Winning 49.9% of the vote, the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova (reinstituted in 1993 after being outlawed in 1991), gained 71 of the 101 parliament seats, and elected Vladimir Voronin as the country&#x27;s third president on April 4, 2001. A new government was formed on April 19, 2001, by Vasile Tarlev. The country became the first post-Soviet state where a non-reformed communist party returned to power. In March–April 2002, the opposition Christian-Democratic People&#x27;s Party organized a mass protest in Chișinău against the plans of the government to fulfill its electoral promise and introduce Russian as the second state language along with its compulsory study in schools. The government annulled these plans.

The relationship between Moldova and Russia deteriorated in November 2003 over a Russian proposal for the solution of the Transnistria conflict, which Moldovan authorities refused to accept because it stipulated a 20-year Russian military presence in Moldova. The federalization plan for Moldova would have also turned Transnistria and Gagauzia into a blocking minority over all major policy matters of Moldova. As of 2006, approximately 1,200 of the 14th Army personnel remain stationed in Transnistria, guarding a large ammunitions depot at Colbasna. In recent years, negotiations between the Transnistrian and Moldovan leaders have been going on under the mediation of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Russia, and Ukraine; lately observers from the European Union and the United States have become involved, creating a 5+2 format.

In the wake of the November 2003 deadlock with Russia, a series of shifts in the external policy of Moldova occurred, targeted at rapprochement with the European Union. In the context of the EU&#x27;s expansion to the east, Moldova wants to sign the Stability and Association Agreement. It implemented its first three-year action plan within the framework of the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) of the EU.

In the March 2005 elections, the Party of the Communists (PCRM) won 46% of the vote, (56 of the 101 seats in the Parliament), the Democratic Moldova Block (BMD) won 28.5% of the vote (34 MPs), and the Christian Democratic People Party (PPCD) won 9.1% (11 MPs). On April 4, 2005, Vladimir Voronin was re-elected as country&#x27;s president, supported by a part of the opposition, and on April 8, Vasile Tarlev was again appointed head of government. On March 31, 2008, Vasile Tarlev was replaced by Zinaida Greceanîi as head of the government.

Following the parliamentary elections on April 5, 2009, the Communist Party won 49.48% of the votes, followed by the Liberal Party with 13.14% of the votes, the Liberal Democratic Party with 12.43% and the Alliance &quot;Moldova Noastră&quot; with 9.77%. The opposition leaders have protested against the outcome calling it fraudulent and demanded a repeated election. A preliminary report by OSCE observers called the vote generally free and fair. However, one member of the OSCE observation team expressed concerns over that conclusion and said that she and a number of other team members feel that there had been some manipulation, but they were unable to find any proof.

On April 6, 2009, several NGOs and opposition parties organized a protest in Chișinău, gathering a crowd of about 15,000 with the help of social network sites such as Twitter and Facebook. The protesters accused the Communist government of electoral fraud. Anti-communist and pro-Romanian slogans were widely used. The demonstration had spun out of control on April 7 and escalated into a riot when a part of the crowd attacked the presidential offices and broke into the parliament building, looting and setting its interior on fire. Police had regained control on the night of April 8, arresting and detaining several hundred protesters. Numerous detainees reported beatings by the police when released. The violence on both sides (demonstrators and police) was condemned by the OSCE and other international organizations. Three young people died during the day the protests took place. The opposition blamed police abuse for these deaths, while the government claimed they were either unrelated to the protests, or accidents. Government officials, including President Vladimir Voronin, called the rioting a coup d&#x27;état attempt and accused Romania of organizing it. The opposition accused the government of organizing the riots by introducing agents provocateurs among the protesters. The political climate in Moldova remained unstable. The parliament failed to elect a new president. For this reason, the parliament was dissolved and new general elections were held on July 29, 2009, with the Communists losing power to the Alliance for European Integration, a pro-European coalition.

=== Liberal Democrat and Socialist administrations ===
An attempt by the new ruling coalition to amend the constitution of Moldova via a referendum in 2010 in order to enable presidential election by popular vote failed due to lack of turnout. The parliamentary election in November 2010 had retained the status quo between the ruling coalition and the communist opposition. On 16 March 2012, parliament elected Nicolae Timofti as president by 62 votes out of 101, with the PCRM boycotting the election, putting an end to a political crisis that had lasted since April 2009. Moldova had no had full-time president, but three acting presidents, since Vladimir Voronin resigned in September 2009. In the November 2014 elections the pro-European parties maintained their majority in parliament.

In November 2016, pro-Russia candidate Igor Dodon won the presidential election, defeating his rival Maia Sandu. The 2019 parliamentary election resulted a vote split between pro-Western and pro-Russian forces. The opposition Socialists, who favor closer ties to Moscow, became the largest party with 35 out of 101 seats. The ruling Social Democratic Party, which wants closer integration with the EU, came second with 30 seats. Opposition bloc called ACUM, campaigning with anti-corruption agenda, was third with 26 seats. In 2019, from 7 June to 15 June, the Moldovan government went through a period of dual power in what is known as the 2019 Moldovan constitutional crisis. In November 2019, Ion Chicu became new Prime Minister, following the fall of the former government led by pro-Western Maia Sandu.

====COVID-19 pandemic====
In March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government called a &quot;national red code alert&quot; as the number of coronavirus cases in the country rose to six on 13 March 2020. Government &quot;banned all gatherings of over 50 people until 1 April 2020 and closed all schools and kindergartens in an attempt to curb the spread of the virus&quot;. Flights were banned to Spain, Italy, France, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Cyprus, Germany, Ireland, the U.K., Poland, Portugal and Romania. On 17 March, Parliament declared a state of emergency for at least 60 days, suspended all international flights and closed borders with neighbours Romania and Ukraine. Moldova reported 29 cases of the disease on 17 March 2020. The country reported its first death from the disease on 18 March 2020, when the total number of cases reached 30.

According to the World Health Organization, between 3 January 2020 and 28 June 2023, there have been 620,717 confirmed cases of COVID-19 with 12,124 deaths. , a total of 2,288,948 vaccine doses have been administered. Moldova is among the first countries in the WHO European Region to conduct a COVID-19 intra-action review (IAR) upon the request of Moldova&#x27;s Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Protection.

=== Presidency of Maia Sandu since 2020 ===
In the November 2020 presidential election, the pro-European opposition candidate Maia Sandu was elected as the new president of the republic, becoming the first female elected president of Moldova. Prime Minister Ion Chicu resigned a day before Sandu was sworn in. The parliament, dominated by pro-Russian Socialists, did not accept any Prime Minister candidate proposed by the new president.

On 28 April 2021, Sandu dissolved the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova after the Constitutional Court ended Moldova&#x27;s state of emergency which had been brought about by the coronavirus pandemic. Parliamentary elections took place on 11 July 2021. The snap parliamentary elections resulted in a landslide win for the pro-European Party of Action and Solidarity (PAS).
Since Maia Sandu was elected, the country has pursued the goal of full membership of the European Union by 2030 as well as deeper co-operation with NATO. This resulted in Moldova signing the membership application to join the EU on 3 March 2022 and on 23 June 2022, Moldova was officially granted candidate status by EU leaders.

Fighting corruption has been a major government initiative, one also essential to EU membership. On 8 June 2021, Sandu signed off on the creation of an extra-governmental corruption monitoring body after declaring the state&#x27;s own institutions &quot;too slow&quot;. The six-member panel of the &#x27;Anticorruption Independent Consultative Committee&#x27; will be co-chaired by United States diplomat James Wasserstrom, includes economists, jurists and journalists and is partially funded by the European Union and United States. This was followed by the Moldovan government suspending the Prosecutor General Alexandru Stoianoglo in relation to charges of corruption, former Moldovan Prime Minister Iurie Leanca was charged with abuse of power, the former President Igor Dodon was arrested by the Moldovan authorities on charges of corruption for the receipt of bribes.

Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine caused significant economic turmoil in Moldova throughout 2022, in particular due to its reliance at that time on Russian oil and gas, with annual inflation surging to 22% and growth falling from a post-COVID surge of 14% to 0.3%. In response to these shockwaves, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) put a total of €2bn (£1.74bn) into the Moldovan economy and helped it secure gas supplies, a fivefold increase over 2021. , Moldovan Prime Minister Dorin Recean confirmed that the country is 100% independent of Russian oil and natural gas. He stated that &quot;Moldova no longer consumes Russian gas, it is integrated in the European energy network both technically and commercially.&quot;

On 19 June 2023 the pro-Russian Șor Party was banned by the Constitutional Court of Moldova after months of pro-Russian protests seeking to destabilise the Moldovan government. The court declared the party unconstitutional, with court chairman Nicolae Roșca citing &quot;an article in the constitution stating that parties must through their activities uphold political pluralism, the rule of law and the territorial integrity of Moldova.&quot; The party was led by Ilan Shor, a fugitive businessman who fled to Israel in 2019 after being convicted of fraud and money-laundering and sentenced to 15 years in prison &quot;in absentia&quot;. President Sandu welcomed the court&#x27;s decision. On 26 June, Ilan Shor announced that he would create a new political party in order to contest the upcoming general election. On 31 July, the Moldovan parliament voted in favour of banning the leaders of the dissolved pro-Russian Șor Party – including Ilan Shor – from standing in elections for a period of five years. Leader and founder of the party, Ilan Șor, currently a fugitive of the state, has claimed he will contest the ban. A clone party, called &quot;ȘANSĂ&quot; or Chance party, led by journalist Alexei Lungu was established by Ilan Shor, however it was deregistered two days before the local elections amid claims of using illegal funds from Russia.

Moldovas&#x27;s pro-Western and pro-Russian factions became increasingly divided following Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. Moldova&#x27;s application for European Union membership was submitted on 3 March 2022. President Sandu championed the 2024 European Union membership referendum which was passed by a narrow margin amid widespread interference by the Russian government. In the November 2024 presidential election, President Maia Sandu was re-elected with 55% of the vote in the run-off.

==== Russia-related events since the invasion of neighbouring Ukraine ====

In February 2022 Sandu condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine, calling it &quot;a blatant breach of international law and of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.&quot;

Prime Minister Natalia Gavrilita stated on 28 February 2022 that Moldova should rapidly move to become a member of the European Union despite Russian objections.

According to Bloomberg, as the Russian invasion of Ukraine took place, the Moldovan government&#x27;s computer systems used for security operations along the Ukraine border came under attack from Russia. &quot;As the war progressed, pro-Russian social media accounts spread false claims designed to discredit the Moldovan government, and trolls bombarded Moldovan authorities with thousands of fake bomb threats. In August, hackers breached email servers used by the Moldovan president&#x27;s office; in November, hackers also published thousands of private messages they claimed to have stolen from Ana Revenco, Moldova&#x27;s minister of internal affairs, and Sergiu Litvinenco, who was then serving as minister of justice.&quot; A sustained campaign of cyberwarfare from Russia against Moldova has continued with the war, with &quot;denial-of-service attempts to flood Moldovan government websites with traffic and force them offline. There&#x27;s also been a sustained campaign of phishing emails targeting government accounts, with more than 1,300 received in early 2023.&quot;

According to the UNHCR, since 24 February 2022, more than 780,000 Ukrainian refugees were permitted to cross the border into Moldova. Of that number, some 107,000 chose to remain in Moldova, the rest seeking asylum further afield.

The country has received praise from the United Nations for its efforts to protect Ukrainian refugees, despite being among the poorest nations in Europe. About 75% of the Ukrainian refugees in Moldova have been hosted by ordinary Moldovan families, sharing their homes with their new guests.

The government&#x27;s own efforts have been aided by Moldovans for Peace, an NGO civic initiative to provide help to Ukrainian refugees. The World Health Organization has stated that &quot;The Republic of Moldova&#x27;s authorities and humanitarian entities have demonstrated leadership in responding to the needs of refugees fleeing the war in Ukraine.&quot;

On 26 April 2022, authorities from the Transnistria region said two transmitting antennas broadcasting Russian radio programs at Grigoriopol transmitter broadcasting facility near the town of Maiac in the Grigoriopol District near the Ukrainian border had been blown up and the previous evening, the premises of the Transnistrian state security service had been attacked.

The Russian army has a military base and a large ammunition dump in the region. Russia has about 1,500 soldiers stationed in breakaway Transnistria. They are supposed to serve there as peacekeepers. In March 2022, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe recognized Transnistria as &quot;a Moldovan territory occupied by Russia.&quot; On 24 February, the Russian Foreign Ministry claimed that an attack &quot;on Transnistria would be &quot;an attack on the Russian Federation.&quot; According to &quot;The Kyiv Independent,&quot; &quot;There is speculation that this is a facade for a Russian plan to invade or destabilize Moldova.&quot; President Sandu dismissed that Moldova intended to invade Transnistria and called for calm.

The Moldovan government expressed its alarm and concern in April 2023 when Russian soldiers stationed in Transnistria undertook military manoeuvres without seeking Chișinău&#x27;s consent. The Security Zone is managed by the Joint Control Commission (JCC) which consists of representatives from Moldova, Russia, and the separatist regime in Tiraspol. &quot;Between February and April, Russian armoured military equipment moved outside the range of the Joint Peacekeeping Forces. The manoeuvre was not coordinated with the Unified Control Commission.&quot; On 8 May, Transnistria&#x27;s envoy to Moscow, Leonid Manakov, publicly requested that Russia should send more Russian soldiers into Transnistria because of what it called &quot;growing security risks&quot; from Ukraine and Moldova. Manakov also stated that &quot;As long as Russia&#x27;s peacekeeping mission continues, Moldova is constrained in any military plans and preparations against Trandsniestria&quot;. Moldova&#x27;s prime minister, Dorin Recean, said that Russian troops should be expelled from the region.

On 31 October 2022, Moldova&#x27;s Interior Ministry said that debris from a Russian missile landed in the northern village of Naslavcea after a Russian fusillade was intercepted by air defenses in neighboring Ukraine. The Ministry reported no people were hurt but the windows of several residential homes were shattered. The Russian strike was targeting a Ukrainian dam on the Nistru river that runs through Moldova and Ukraine. On 5 December, another missile fell near the city of Briceni as Russia launched another wave of missile strikes against Ukraine. Yet another missile fell into Larga on 14 January 2023 as a result of another wave of missile strikes against Ukraine and again on the same village on 16 February of the same year. On 25 September, a missile crashed into Chițcani, for the first time in Moldovan territory controlled by Transnistria. On 11 February 2024, fragments of a Russian drone were found in the village of Etulia. This happened again on 17 February in Etulia Nouă and on 4 April again in Etulia.

Russia&#x27;s &#x27;10 year plan&#x27;, written in 2021, was leaked to the international press, involved supporting pro-Russian groups, utilizing the Orthodox Church and threatening to cut off supplies of natural gas with the aim to destabilise Moldova.

In February 2023 an attempted coup by a series of Russian-backed actors was uncovered involving saboteurs with military training dressed in civilian clothes to stage attacks (including on state buildings), and take hostages. The Moldovan government was to be overthrown and replaced with a puppet government. The plan allegedly involved an alliance between criminal groups and two exiled Moldovan oligarchs. President Sandu said Russian, Montenegrin, Belarusian, and Serbian citizens were to enter Moldova to incite protests as part of the coup plan; Moldovan intelligence believes foreign provocateurs would be used to foment violent unrest during the anti-government protests. Foreign citizens were also to be involved in violent actions. Sandu credited Ukrainian partners for uncovering locations and logistical aspects of the plot. In a 10 March briefing, United States National Security Council Coordinator for Strategic Communications John Kirby made public information about Russian efforts to destabilise Moldova obtained by the U.S. Kirby stated the U.S. government believes Russia to be pursuing destabilisation efforts in Moldova with the ultimate goal of replacing the existing Moldovan government with one that would be more friendly to Russian interests.

In July 2023, opposition politician Oleg Khorzhan, a pro-Russian critic of the Transnistrian government, and leader of the local Transnistrian Communist Party in the breakaway Transnistria region, was found dead in his home on the outskirts of Tiraspol. The Moldovan National Police has opened an active investigation into his presumed murder.

==See also==

*Bessarabia
*Dissolution of the Soviet Union 
*History of Romania
*History of Ukraine
*List of presidents of Moldova
*List of prime ministers of Moldova
*Moldavia
*Politics of Moldova

==Notes==

==Further reading==

* Brezianu, Andrei, and Vlad Spânu. &quot;The A to Z of Moldova&quot; (Scarecrow Press, 2010).
* Chinn, Jeff, and Steven D. Roper. &quot;Ethnic mobilization and reactive nationalism: The case of Moldova.&quot; &quot;Nationalities papers&quot; 23.2 (1995): 291-325 online .
* King, Charles. &quot;The Moldovans: Romania, Russia, and the Politics of Culture&quot; (Hoover Institution Press, 2000).
* Lutsevych, Orysia. &quot;How to finish a revolution: Civil society and democracy in Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine&quot; (Chatham House, 2013).
* Mitrasca, Marcel. &quot;Moldova: A Romanian Province Under Russian Rule&quot; (Algora, 2002).
* Quinlan, Paul D. &quot;Moldova under Lucinschi.&quot; &quot;Demokratizatsiya&quot; 10.1 (2002): 83–103.
* RAND, &quot;Russia’s Hostile Measures: Combating Russian Gray Zone Aggression Against NATO in the Contact, Blunt, and Surge Layers of Competition&quot; (2020) online on Transnistria
* Way, Lucan A. &quot;Authoritarian state building and the sources of regime competitiveness in the fourth wave: The cases of Belarus, Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine.&quot; &quot;World Politics&quot; 57.2 (2005): 231–261.
* Way, Lucan A. &quot;Weak states and pluralism: The case of Moldova.&quot; &quot;East European Politics and Societies&quot; 17.03 (2003): 454–482. online 

==External links==
* The Republic of Moldova: An Historical Background, Survey by Dr. Vasile Nedelciuc 
* History of Moldova: Primary Documents 
* Istoria Moldovei</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q528560" start="4" end="22" title="History of Moldova" label="history of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="29" end="49" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="51" end="58" title="Ancient history" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="63" end="71" title="Medieval history" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="120" end="132" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="235" end="246" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="248" end="255" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="283" end="292" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="297" end="308" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="313" end="322" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="390" end="399" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="401" end="406" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="408" end="412" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="455" end="460" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="465" end="474" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="497" end="521" title="Principality of Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338106" start="522" end="542" title="founding of Moldavia" label="emerged in the 1350s"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="585" end="592" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="597" end="604" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="646" end="663" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="682" end="694" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="702" end="716" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="772" end="807" title="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)" label="one of several Russian–Turkish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="847" end="857" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="878" end="892" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="1006" end="1035" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="Moldavian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="1110" end="1117" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1170" end="1182" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="1251" end="1264" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="1298" end="1311" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1373" end="1396" title="dissolution of the USSR" label="dissolution of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895819" start="1412" end="1433" title="Moldovan Declaration of Independence" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="1451" end="1467" title="Transnistria War" label="Transnistria War"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="1502" end="1515" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1708" end="1722" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="1801" end="1808" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="1862" end="1870" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="1977" end="1994" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="early paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2003" end="2014" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="2127" end="2134" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2150" end="2159" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="2169" end="2179" title="Copper Age" label="Copper Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2185" end="2195" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2222" end="2230" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="2237" end="2255" title="Recorded history" label="historical records"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="2344" end="2366" title="Linear Pottery culture" label="Linear Pottery culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="2391" end="2418" title="Cucuteni–Trypillian culture" label="Cucuteni–Trypillian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q426737" start="2447" end="2460" title="Yamna culture" label="Yamna culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2579" end="2590" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="2592" end="2608" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2610" end="2628" title="Pottery#Firing" label="kiln-fired pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="2630" end="2637" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="2666" end="2677" title="Human settlement" label="settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="2866" end="2871" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2879" end="2890" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="2922" end="2935" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="2955" end="2978" title="Iron Gate (Danube)" label="Iron Gate of the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="3872" end="3881" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q264569" start="3950" end="3958" title="Akatziri" label="Akatziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="3993" end="4002" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="4004" end="4013" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="4018" end="4028" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4107" end="4112" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4119" end="4135" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="4257" end="4262" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="4264" end="4268" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="4270" end="4275" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="4277" end="4284" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="4286" end="4295" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035516" start="4297" end="4303" title="Cumans" label="Cumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="4313" end="4320" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399876" start="4335" end="4344" title="Khalyzians" label="Khalyzian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="4408" end="4430" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192104" start="4476" end="4480" title="Krum" label="Krum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380263" start="4484" end="4493" title="Presian I" label="Presian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="4657" end="4681" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399876" start="4773" end="4783" title="Khalyzians" label="Khalyzians"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="4788" end="4797" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403551" start="4818" end="4840" title="Principality of Halych" label="Principality of Halych"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="4894" end="4906" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="4966" end="4980" title="Genoa Republic" label="Genoa Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939981" start="5064" end="5075" title="Bolokhoveni" label="Bolokhoveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="5311" end="5319" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="5370" end="5380" title="Carpathian mountains" label="Carpathian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="5381" end="5387" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="5388" end="5396" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="5419" end="5431" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q168856" start="5674" end="5691" title="Chernivtsi oblast" label="Chernivtsi oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="5696" end="5702" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5713" end="5720" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="5854" end="5862" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q539053" start="5913" end="5926" title="Moldova River" label="Moldova River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338106" start="5933" end="5955" title="foundation of Moldavia" label="foundation of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="5977" end="5982" title="Vlach" label="Vlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q654356" start="6021" end="6027" title="Dragoş" label="Dragoş"/>
<link wikidata="Q187303" start="6031" end="6036" title="Bedeu" label="Bedeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743683" start="6047" end="6071" title="Voivodeship of Maramureș" label="Voivodeship of Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6136" end="6145" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="6191" end="6209" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="6222" end="6228" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q946073" start="6234" end="6242" title="Bogdan I of Moldavia" label="Bogdan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056010" start="6246" end="6251" title="Cuhea" label="Cuhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="7065" end="7082" title="Stephen III of Moldavia" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="7323" end="7329" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7337" end="7351" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q220653" start="7770" end="7781" title="Vasile Lupu" label="Vasile Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="8232" end="8240" title="Russian Empire" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="8274" end="8300" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774)" label="a war against the Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="8401" end="8418" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="8486" end="8494" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q849286" start="8503" end="8522" title="Treaty of Bucharest, 1812" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="8537" end="8566" title="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="8639" end="8649" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="8714" end="8726" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="8758" end="8777" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="8818" end="8828" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="8931" end="8940" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898966" start="8957" end="8974" title="Upper Trajan Wall" label="Upper Trajan Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="9018" end="9024" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q849286" start="9033" end="9052" title="Treaty of Bucharest, 1812" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9081" end="9095" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="9104" end="9118" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="9136" end="9165" title="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9443" end="9449" title="Oblast#Oblasts of the Russian Empire" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9634" end="9649" title="Scarlat Sturdza" label="Scarlat Sturdza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392518" start="9682" end="9706" title="Gavriil Bănulescu-Bodoni" label="Gavriil Bănulescu-Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9784" end="9791" title="Ivan Markovich Garting" label="Harting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="9916" end="9927" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10084" end="10094" title="Alexey Bakhmetev" label="Bakhmetiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="10307" end="10315" title="county" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="10356" end="10365" title="Nikolai I" label="Nikolai I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="10677" end="10684" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="10788" end="10799" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="10817" end="10832" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="10888" end="10894" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q503469" start="10975" end="10980" title="Cahul" label="Cahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q890122" start="10982" end="10989" title="Bolgrad" label="Bolgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q147739" start="10994" end="11000" title="Izmail" label="Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="11042" end="11048" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="11087" end="11095" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="11100" end="11109" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q958291" start="11132" end="11162" title="United Principalities" label="Romanian United Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="11186" end="11200" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q842803" start="11231" end="11238" title="zemstva" label="zemstva"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="11705" end="11718" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="11865" end="11894" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="11929" end="11945" title="Treaty of Berlin, 1878" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="12256" end="12263" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12472" end="12487" title="Dimitrie Sulima" label="Dimitrie Sulima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12519" end="12535" title="Antonie Shokotov" label="Antonie Shokotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="12583" end="12591" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12596" end="12603" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064931" start="12726" end="12739" title="Pavel Lebedev" label="Pavel Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="12935" end="12949" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="12953" end="12961" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q727635" start="13046" end="13063" title="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13092" end="13109" title="Sergey Lapidevsky" label="Sergey Lapidevsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13111" end="13128" title="Isakyi Polozensky" label="Isakyi Polozensky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13130" end="13148" title="Neofit Novodchikov" label="Neofit Novodchikov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13268" end="13284" title="Iakov Pyatnitsky" label="Iakov Pyatnitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492984" start="13432" end="13450" title="Most Holy Synod" label="Russian High Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703325" start="13638" end="13649" title="Luminătorul" label="Luminătorul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152366" start="13683" end="13694" title="Gurie Grosu" label="Gurie Grosu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13726" end="13744" title="Serafim Chichyagov" label="Serafim Chichyagov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064894" start="13781" end="13791" title="Anastasy (Gribanovsky)" label="Anastasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="14093" end="14117" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14208" end="14223" title="Nicodem de Huși" label="Nicodem de Huși"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14271" end="14285" title="Dionisie Erhan" label="Dionisie Erhan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14344" end="14361" title="Gurie Botoșăneanu" label="Gurie Botoșăneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392518" start="14494" end="14518" title="Gavriil Bănulescu-Bodoni" label="Gavriil Bănulescu-Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="14947" end="14955" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="14959" end="14966" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q647802" start="15298" end="15317" title="Bessarabian Germans" label="Bessarabian Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869624" start="15327" end="15343" title="Bessarabian Jews" label="Bessarabian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="15353" end="15361" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997993" start="15371" end="15393" title="Bessarabian Bulgarians" label="Bessarabian Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192616" start="15627" end="15632" title="Nogais" label="Nogai"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="15633" end="15638" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="15661" end="15675" title="Little Tartary" label="Little Tartary"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="15845" end="15857" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="16016" end="16024" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="16048" end="16059" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="16110" end="16116" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q647802" start="16130" end="16149" title="Bessarabian Germans" label="Bessarabian Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="16303" end="16311" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="16317" end="16325" title="Dobrudja" label="Dobrudja"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="16352" end="16358" title="Dniepr" label="Dniepr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997993" start="16390" end="16412" title="Bessarabian Bulgarians" label="Bessarabian Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="16417" end="16423" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332001" start="16747" end="16759" title="Hotin county" label="Hotin county"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="16858" end="16865" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="16870" end="16877" title="Podolia" label="Podolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869624" start="17081" end="17097" title="Bessarabian Jews" label="Bessarabian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="17164" end="17172" title="Chișinău" label="Kishinev"/>
<link wikidata="Q549381" start="17179" end="17185" title="History of the Jews in Moldova" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="17569" end="17575" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063226" start="17911" end="17921" title="Ion Nistor" label="Ion Nistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="18285" end="18311" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="18509" end="18557" title="Russian Revolution (1917)" label="Russian revolutions of February and October 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935555" start="18579" end="18591" title="Sfatul Țării" label="Sfatul Țării"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="18795" end="18824" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="Moldavian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q139319" start="18841" end="18857" title="Russian Democratic Federative Republic" label="Russian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="18939" end="18952" title="White Army" label="Russian White"/>
<link wikidata="Q887438" start="18961" end="18980" title="Dmitry Shcherbachev" label="Dmitry Shcherbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q714286" start="19455" end="19466" title="Ion Inculeț" label="Ion Inculeț"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176846" start="19510" end="19526" title="Pantelimon Erhan" label="Pantelimon Erhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377743" start="20006" end="20038" title="Union of Bessarabia with Romania" label="Union of Bessarabia with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q842803" start="20317" end="20324" title="zemstvo" label="zemstvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="20589" end="20603" title="state of siege" label="state of siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398958" start="20832" end="20842" title="Autonomism (political doctrine)" label="autonomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="21059" end="21065" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21186" end="21192" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293845" start="21235" end="21272" title="Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722786" start="21573" end="21593" title="Treaty of Paris (1920)" label="1920 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293845" start="21756" end="21793" title="Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="21828" end="21834" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="21953" end="21961" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="21987" end="21999" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="22363" end="22384" title="Kellogg-Briand Treaty" label="Kellogg-Briand Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q474138" start="22401" end="22417" title="London Convention for the Definition of Aggression" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="22469" end="22481" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="22495" end="22508" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="22542" end="22556" title="Moldavian ASSR" label="Moldavian ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372646" start="22582" end="22602" title="Tatarbunary Uprising" label="Tatarbunary Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="22617" end="22628" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="22708" end="22720" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576784" start="23467" end="23482" title="Romanianization" label="Romanianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693931" start="23977" end="24017" title="Agricultural State University of Moldova" label="Agricultural State University of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974468" start="24055" end="24074" title="National Museum of Fine Arts, Chișinău" label="Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001086" start="24111" end="24131" title="Alexandru Plămădeală" label="Alexandru Plămădeală"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152366" start="24133" end="24144" title="Gurie Grosu" label="Gurie Grosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300999" start="24159" end="24185" title="Metropolitan of Bessarabia" label="Metropolitan of Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828708" start="24198" end="24227" title="aviation in Moldova" label="scheduled flights to Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="24266" end="24275" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="24278" end="24284" title="Galați" label="Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="24287" end="24291" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749536" start="24333" end="24381" title="Compagnie Franco-Roumaine de Navigation Aérienne" label="Compagnie Franco-Roumaine de Navigation Aérienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q240656" start="24397" end="24402" title="TAROM" label="LARES"/>
<link wikidata="Q526518" start="24502" end="24518" title="Mihail Sadoveanu" label="Mihail Sadoveanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082581" start="24520" end="24534" title="Ştefan Ciobanu (politician)" label="Ștefan Ciobanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580816" start="24536" end="24549" title="Tudor Pamfile" label="Tudor Pamfile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24551" end="24568" title="Nicolae Dunăreanu" label="Nicolae Dunăreanu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24570" end="24584" title="N.N.Beldiceanu" label="N.N.Beldiceanu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24586" end="24601" title="Apostol D.Culea" label="Apostol D.Culea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997436" start="24752" end="24763" title="Pan Halippa" label="Pan Halippa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24782" end="24797" title="Nicolae Spătaru" label="Nicolae Spătaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235324" start="24824" end="24840" title="Nicolae Costenco" label="Nicolae Costenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924560" start="24843" end="24859" title="Viața Basarabiei" label="Viața Basarabiei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997436" start="24883" end="24894" title="Pan Halippa" label="Pan Halippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030978" start="24896" end="24911" title="Radio Basarabia" label="Radio Basarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488631" start="24979" end="25014" title="Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company" label="Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035974" start="25020" end="25035" title="Capitoline Wolf, Chișinău" label="Capitoline Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343360" start="25071" end="25097" title="Stephen the Great Monument" label="Stephen the Great Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001086" start="25115" end="25135" title="Alexandru Plămădeală" label="Alexandru Plămădeală"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="25297" end="25324" title="Moldavian Autonomous Oblast" label="Moldavian Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="25357" end="25365" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="25379" end="25392" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q805554" start="25424" end="25429" title="Balta, Ukraine" label="Balta"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="25455" end="25462" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="25563" end="25577" title="Moldavian ASSR" label="Moldavian ASSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="25709" end="25717" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="25764" end="25787" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q188689" start="26100" end="26109" title="ultimatum" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="26375" end="26436" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="occupied Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="26545" end="26580" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="26964" end="26981" title="Northern Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q45883" start="26995" end="27000" title="Hotin" label="Hotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q672990" start="27002" end="27010" title="Akkerman" label="Akkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q147739" start="27016" end="27022" title="Izmail" label="Izmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="27419" end="27430" title="irredentism" label="irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="27458" end="27470" title="Population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="deportations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="27497" end="27502" title="Ural Mountains" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="27507" end="27514" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="27520" end="27530" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="27565" end="27574" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="27899" end="27932" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Axis invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="28098" end="28119" title="Transnistria (World War II)" label="occupied Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="28548" end="28566" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="Paris peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="28736" end="28771" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29367" end="29402" title="Anti-Soviet resistance in Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="resistance movements to Soviet rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="29668" end="29683" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605592" start="29738" end="29765" title="Communist Party of Moldova" label="Communist Party of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736641" start="29817" end="29830" title="Nicolae Coval" label="Nicolae Coval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026239" start="29915" end="29930" title="Operation North" label="Operation North"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="30081" end="30105" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="30507" end="30524" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="30618" end="30626" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="30631" end="30642" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148" start="30948" end="30980" title="Council of Ministers (Soviet Union)" label="Council of Ministers of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="31107" end="31114" title="Russian rouble" label="roubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="31388" end="31414" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="leader of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="31416" end="31431" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q76986" start="31543" end="31574" title="Belavezha Accords" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="31697" end="31714" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="31722" end="31733" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="31738" end="31746" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041112" start="31820" end="31844" title="Popular Front of Moldova" label="Popular Front of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="32046" end="32054" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167214" start="32295" end="32313" title="Unity Movement for Equality in Rights" label="Yedinstvo-Unitatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516821" start="32423" end="32435" title="Gagauz Halkı" label="Gagauz Halkı"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="32512" end="32518" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091606" start="32614" end="32628" title="Supreme Soviet" label="Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q347679" start="32766" end="32779" title="Mircea Snegur" label="Mircea Snegur"/>
<link wikidata="Q130811" start="33283" end="33300" title="Flag of Romania" label="Romanian tricolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184540" start="33374" end="33394" title="Deșteaptă-te române!" label="Deșteaptă-te române!"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="33475" end="33538" title="Unification of Moldova and Romania" label="Movement for unification of Romania and the Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504040" start="33805" end="33848" title="Gagauz Republic" label="Gagauz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q241122" start="33891" end="33897" title="Comrat" label="Comrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="33963" end="33977" title="Dniester River" label="Dniester River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242857" start="33983" end="34033" title="Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="34759" end="34795" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="35065" end="35078" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895819" start="35229" end="35254" title="Moldovan Declaration of Independence" label="declared its independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="35279" end="35300" title="Post-Soviet countries" label="Post-Soviet countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q129985088" start="35315" end="35396" title="Succession, continuity and legacy of the Soviet Union" label="series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396168" start="35456" end="35468" title="Stepan Topal" label="Stepan Topal"/>
<link wikidata="Q309832" start="35473" end="35485" title="Igor Smirnov (politician)" label="Igor Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="35719" end="35733" title="Dniester River" label="Dniester River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400890" start="35786" end="35796" title="Russophone" label="Russophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242857" start="36060" end="36110" title="Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="36240" end="36247" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942756" start="36472" end="36492" title="Russian military presence in Transnistria" label="Russian intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q187311" start="36500" end="36516" title="14th Guards Army" label="14th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="37068" end="37075" title="De jure" label="De jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="37156" end="37164" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q347679" start="37315" end="37328" title="Mircea Snegur" label="Mircea Snegur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895839" start="37373" end="37400" title="1991 Moldovan presidential election" label="election for the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="37491" end="37505" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q187311" start="37633" end="37649" title="14th Guards Army" label="14th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057292" start="37677" end="37688" title="Don Cossacks" label="Don Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994954" start="37879" end="37907" title="Constitution of Moldova (1994)" label="1994 Constitution of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q242744" start="38025" end="38038" title="Limba noastră" label="Limba noastră"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="38088" end="38102" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="38148" end="38157" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181129" start="38321" end="38333" title="Moldovan leu" label="Moldovan leu"/>
<link wikidata="Q615640" start="38365" end="38378" title="Soviet rouble" label="Soviet rouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="38395" end="38410" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="39092" end="39095" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951901" start="39293" end="39303" title="Corruption in Moldova" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q941388" start="39404" end="39421" title="Valeriu Muravschi" label="Valeriu Muravschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q438706" start="39500" end="39515" title="Andrei Sangheli" label="Andrei Sangheli"/>
<link wikidata="Q355874" start="40000" end="40015" title="Petru Lucinschi" label="Petru Lucinschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605592" start="40051" end="40076" title="Moldavian Communist Party" label="Moldavian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q438715" start="40317" end="40327" title="Ion Ciubuc" label="Ion Ciubuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142572" start="40457" end="40488" title="1998 Russian financial crisis" label="1998 financial crisis in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672026" start="40765" end="40775" title="Ion Sturza" label="Ion Sturza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265040" start="40813" end="40828" title="Dumitru Braghiş" label="Dumitru Braghiş"/>
<link wikidata="Q750116" start="41363" end="41409" title="Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova" label="Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q189435" start="41514" end="41530" title="Vladimir Voronin" label="Vladimir Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182230" start="41637" end="41650" title="Vasile Tarlev" label="Vasile Tarlev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811403" start="41791" end="41831" title="Christian-Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party (Moldova)" label="Christian-Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="41952" end="41959" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290107" start="42152" end="42168" title="Kozak memorandum" label="Russian proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82973" start="42193" end="42214" title="Transnistria conflict" label="Transnistria conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="42423" end="42440" title="Veto" label="blocking minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858592" start="42614" end="42622" title="Colbasna" label="Colbasna"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="42747" end="42799" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="42855" end="42869" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q107177934" start="42925" end="42935" title="5+2 format" label="5+2 format"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="43301" end="43329" title="European Neighborhood Policy" label="European Neighborhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666298" start="43355" end="43375" title="2005 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="March 2005 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811403" start="43549" end="43582" title="Christian-Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party (Moldova)" label="Christian Democratic People Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189435" start="43627" end="43643" title="Vladimir Voronin" label="Vladimir Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61299" start="43846" end="43863" title="Zinaida Greceanîi" label="Zinaida Greceanîi"/>
<link wikidata="Q947093" start="43906" end="43929" title="April 2009 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="44594" end="44597" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="44735" end="44742" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="44747" end="44755" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q385065" start="44940" end="44961" title="2009 Moldova civil unrest" label="escalated into a riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="45678" end="45694" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q392752" start="45818" end="45837" title="agent provocateur" label="agents provocateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512484" start="46010" end="46031" title="July 2009 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="new general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280031" start="46100" end="46133" title="Alliance for European Integration" label="Alliance for European Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856318" start="46297" end="46317" title="2010 Moldovan constitutional referendum" label="a referendum in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595485" start="46410" end="46432" title="2010 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57478" start="46574" end="46589" title="Nicolae Timofti" label="Nicolae Timofti"/>
<link wikidata="Q947093" start="46725" end="46735" title="April 2009 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="April 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345490" start="46878" end="46887" title="2014 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164146" start="46994" end="47004" title="Igor Dodon" label="Igor Dodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022550" start="47026" end="47034" title="2016 Moldovan presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="47056" end="47066" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987557" start="47091" end="47099" title="2019 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430210" start="47181" end="47191" title="Socialist Party of Moldova" label="Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186294" start="47288" end="47311" title="European Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q61086544" start="47407" end="47411" title="NOW Platform DA and PAS" label="ACUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513766" start="47596" end="47631" title="2019 Moldovan constitutional crisis" label="2019 Moldovan constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q75020865" start="47651" end="47660" title="Ion Chicu" label="Ion Chicu"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="47816" end="47833" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="48325" end="48343" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="48650" end="48675" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294753" start="48998" end="49046" title="Ministry of Labour and Social Protection (Moldova)" label="Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029101" start="49100" end="49135" title="2020 Moldovan presidential election" label="November 2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="49175" end="49185" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q75020865" start="49307" end="49316" title="Ion Chicu" label="Ion Chicu"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="49526" end="49563" title="Parliament of the Republic of Moldova" label="Parliament of the Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231512" start="49574" end="49594" title="Constitutional Court of Moldova" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="49616" end="49634" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="49671" end="49691" title="coronavirus pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64505846" start="49717" end="49727" title="2021 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="took place"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909066" start="49827" end="49857" title="Party of Action and Solidarity" label="Party of Action and Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="49871" end="49881" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q111082103" start="49931" end="49976" title="Accession of Moldova to the European Union" label="full membership of the European Union by 2030"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="50013" end="50017" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q814923" start="50162" end="50178" title="Potential enlargement of the European Union" label="candidate status"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029801" start="50600" end="50617" title="James Wasserstrom" label="James Wasserstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721222" start="50808" end="50828" title="Alexandr Stoianoglo" label="Alexandru Stoianoglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58087" start="50898" end="50910" title="Iurie Leancă" label="Iurie Leanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975478" start="50928" end="50942" title="abuse of power" label="abuse of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164146" start="50965" end="50975" title="Igor Dodon" label="Igor Dodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="51070" end="51103" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="51372" end="51420" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407948" start="51576" end="51588" title="Dorin Recean" label="Dorin Recean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624010" start="51851" end="51860" title="Șor Party" label="Șor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231512" start="51879" end="51910" title="Constitutional Court of Moldova" label="Constitutional Court of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q117846032" start="52063" end="52076" title="Nicolae Roșca" label="Nicolae Roșca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526147" start="52285" end="52294" title="Ilan Shor" label="Ilan Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624010" start="52741" end="52750" title="Șor Party" label="Șor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526147" start="52863" end="52871" title="Ilan Shor" label="Ilan Șor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="53267" end="53300" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111082103" start="53353" end="53378" title="Accession of Moldova to the European Union" label="European Union membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q125407738" start="53441" end="53482" title="2024 Moldovan European Union membership referendum" label="2024 European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104821709" start="53582" end="53617" title="2024 Moldovan presidential election" label="November 2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="53806" end="53833" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="54072" end="54086" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="54129" end="54138" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q108009132" start="54716" end="54727" title="Ana Revenco" label="Ana Revenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q106043267" start="54778" end="54795" title="Sergiu Litvinenco" label="Sergiu Litvinenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="54872" end="54884" title="cyberwarfare" label="cyberwarfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="55217" end="55222" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q111030832" start="55266" end="55284" title="Ukrainian refugee crisis (2022–present)" label="Ukrainian refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q564811" start="55400" end="55414" title="seeking asylum" label="seeking asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="55866" end="55891" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222154" start="56215" end="56238" title="Grigoriopol transmitter" label="Grigoriopol transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708425" start="56278" end="56283" title="Maiac" label="Maiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072484" start="56291" end="56311" title="Grigoriopol District" label="Grigoriopol District"/>
<link wikidata="Q111724016" start="56338" end="56355" title="2022 Transnistria attacks" label="had been blown up"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229703" start="56402" end="56438" title="Ministry of State Security (Transnistria)" label="Transnistrian state security service"/>
<link wikidata="Q939743" start="56677" end="56724" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe" label="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q111028947" start="56972" end="56992" title="The Kyiv Independent" label="The Kyiv Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850771" start="57426" end="57450" title="Joint Control Commission" label="Joint Control Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="57542" end="57550" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973590" start="58404" end="58413" title="Naslavcea" label="Naslavcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="58655" end="58667" title="Dniester river" label="Nistru river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019727" start="58760" end="58767" title="Briceni" label="Briceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858719" start="58866" end="58871" title="Larga, Briceni" label="Larga"/>
<link wikidata="Q119145367" start="59057" end="59065" title="Chițcani" label="Chițcani"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858659" start="59215" end="59221" title="Etulia" label="Etulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120141" start="59456" end="59471" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Moldova" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q116780456" start="59581" end="59595" title="2023 Moldovan coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt allegations" label="attempted coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="59851" end="59868" title="puppet government" label="puppet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919633" start="59958" end="59967" title="Russian oligarchs" label="oligarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q120288610" start="60435" end="60501" title="National Security Council coordinator for strategic communications" label="National Security Council Coordinator for Strategic Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601108" start="60502" end="60512" title="John Kirby (admiral)" label="John Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q84723012" start="60867" end="60880" title="Oleg Khorzhan" label="Oleg Khorzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375985" start="60910" end="60934" title="Transnistrian Government" label="Transnistrian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395103" start="60960" end="60989" title="Transnistrian Communist Party" label="Transnistrian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="61075" end="61083" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503265" start="61089" end="61113" title="Moldovan Police" label="Moldovan National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="61191" end="61201" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="61203" end="61234" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q216672" start="61237" end="61255" title="History of Romania" label="History of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q210701" start="61257" end="61275" title="History of Ukraine" label="History of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="61277" end="61306" title="President of Moldova" label="List of presidents of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="61308" end="61342" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="List of prime ministers of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="61344" end="61352" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154124" start="61354" end="61373" title="Politics of Moldova" label="Politics of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62857" end="62873" title=":ro:Istoria Moldovei" label="Istoria Moldovei"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19242" wikidata="Q1786077" url="?curid=19242" title="Geography of Moldova">
<text>Located in Eastern Europe, Moldova is bordered on the west and southwest by Romania and on the north, south, and east by Ukraine. Most of its territory lies in Bessarabia region, between the area&#x27;s two main rivers, the Nistru and the Prut. The Nistru forms a small part of Moldova&#x27;s border with Ukraine in the northeast and southeast, but it mainly flows through the eastern part of the country, separating Bessarabia and Transnistria. The Prut River forms Moldova&#x27;s entire western boundary with Romania. The Danube touches the Moldovan border at its southernmost tip, and forms the border for .

== Basic data ==
== Climate ==
Moldova&#x27;s proximity to the Black Sea gives it a mild and sunny climate.

Moldova&#x27;s climate is moderately continental: the summers are warm and long, with temperatures averaging about , and the winters are relatively mild and dry, with January temperatures averaging . Annual rainfall, which ranges from around in the north to in the south, can vary greatly; long dry spells are not unusual. The heaviest rainfall occurs in early summer and again in October; heavy showers and thunderstorms are common. Because of the irregular terrain, heavy summer rains often cause erosion and river silting.

Weather records:
The highest temperature ever recorded was at Fălești on 7 August 2012.
The lowest temperature ever recorded was on January 20, 1963, at Brătușeni.

Chișinău&#x27;s climate. (Central Moldova)

Bălți&#x27;s climate. (Northern Moldova)
Tiraspol&#x27;s climate. (Central Moldova)
Cahul&#x27;s climate. (Southern Moldova)
== Topography ==
Most of Moldova&#x27;s territory is a moderate hilly plateau cut deeply by many streams and rivers. Geologically, Moldova lies primarily on the deep sedimentary rock that gives way to harder crystalline outcroppings only in the north. Moldova&#x27;s hills are part of the larger Moldavian Plateau.

The northern landscape of Moldova is characterized by gently rolling uplands (up to , in elevation) interlaced with small flat plains in the valleys of the numerous creeks (at elevation). These hills, which have an average altitude of and a maximum altitude of , are divided into the Northern Moldovan Plateau and the Dniester Plateau, and continue further occupying the northern part of the Chernivtsi oblast in Ukraine. The eastern slopes of the Dniester Ridge (average , max ), form the high right bank of the Dniester River.

To the south are located the Bălți Plain and the Middle Prut Plain, with an average of and a maximum altitude of . Originally forested, it has been extensively de-forested for agriculture during the 19th and 20th centuries. In contrast to the region to the north and south, which is more slant, this area is referred to as &quot;plain&quot;, although it has relief very different from that of flatland, and vegetation different from that of the steppe.

The hills of central Moldova are divided into the Ciulucuri Hills and the Codri Plateau, at an average elevation of about , are ridges interlaced by deep, flat valleys, ravines, and landslide-scoured depressions. Steep forest-clad slopes account for much of the terrain, where the most common trees are hornbeam, oak, linden, maple, wild pear, and wild cherry. The term &quot;codri&quot; refers more generally to forests, yet since in Moldova most of them were preserved in the central part, Codri sometimes can colloquially refer to the remaining forests in the hills west and north of Chișinău. The Dniester Hills border the Ciulucuri Hills to the north along the river Răut.

The country&#x27;s highest point, Bălănești Hill, which reaches , depending on the source, is situated in the Corneşti Hills, the western part of the Codri Plateau. Northwest of it are the Ciulucului Hills (average , max ). In the south, the Tigheci Hills (average , max ) are a prolongation, and run to the south parallel to the Lower Prut Valley.

To the south-east, the southern part of the Codri Plateau, which averages , max , and has numerous ravines and gullies, gradually merges into the Southern Moldovan Plain, continued by in Ukraine by the Budjak Plain. Most of Gagauzia resides on the Ialpug Plain.

Transnistria (the left bank of the Dniester) has spurs of the Podolian Plateau (, ), (average , max ), which are cut into by tributaries of the Dniester River. The southern half of Transnistria, the &quot;Lower Dniester Plain&quot;, can be regarded as the western end of the Eurasian steppe, and has an average elevation of , with a maximum of . The high right bank and low left bank of the Dniester are in sharp contrast here, where visibility is not impeded by forests.

About 75 percent of Moldova is covered by a soil type called black earth or chernozem. In the northern hills, more clay textured soils are found; in the south, red-earth soil is predominant. The soil becomes less fertile toward the south but can still support grape and sunflower production. The hills have woodland soils, while a small portion in southern Moldova is in the steppe zone, although most steppe areas today are cultivated. The lower reaches of the Prut and Dniester rivers and the southern river valleys are saline marshes.

Drainage in Moldova is to the south, toward the Black Sea lowlands, and eventually into the Black Sea, but only eight rivers and creeks extend more than . Moldova&#x27;s main river, the Dniester, is navigable throughout almost the entire country, and in warmer winters it does not freeze over. The Prut river is a tributary of the Danube, which it joins at the far southwestern tip of the country. Over 95% of the water circulation in Moldova flows into one of the two rivers – the Prut or Dniester. Of Moldova&#x27;s well-developed network of about 3,000 creeks and streams, all draining south to the Black Sea, only 246 exceed in length, and only 8 exceed .

Underground water, extensively used for the country&#x27;s water supply, includes about 2,200 natural springs. The terrain favors the construction of reservoirs of various sizes.

=== Extreme points ===

* The lowest point: An unnamed point on the bank of the Dniester River 
* The highest point: Dealul Bălănești 
* North extreme: Naslavcea
* South extreme: Giurgiulești
* West extreme: Criva
* East extreme: Palanca

== Natural habitat ==
Moldova&#x27;s natural habitat is characterized by forest steppes, a temperate-climate habitat type composed of grassland interspersed with areas of woodland or forest. A belt of forest steppes cross Eurasia from eastern Europe to Eastern Siberia, forming a transition between temperate broadleaf and mixed forests and temperate grasslands. In the 19th century, Moldova witnessed a sharp decrease in the forested areas, sacrificed for agriculture due to rich soil.

== Environment ==


===Historical references===

* In the 5th century BC, Herodotus visited the countryside between the rivers Dnister and Prut and described the place as &quot;a plain with deep black earth, rich in grass and well-irrigated&quot;.
* Lithuanian Prince Jogaila spoke of Moldavia as &quot;a rich and fructiferous country&quot;.
* According to the testimony of Venetian Mateus de Murano, &quot;the country was very well located, reach with cattle and all kinds of fruits, pastures are perfect&quot;.
* Rich natural resources of Moldavia always attracted nomads. Fleeing their devastating incursions, inhabitants of Moldavia left the brooded places and hid in forests. French knight Guillebert de Lannoy, who visited these places in 1421, has mentioned an insignificant population of the region: &quot;We moved through large deserts&quot;.
* Counsellor of Hungarian King George Reihersdorf (middle of 16th century) was complaining of travel through &quot;empty, uninhabited lands&quot;. In 1541, he produced the first geographical map (preserved to this day) of the Principality of Moldavia, with rivers Dnister and Prut shown, as well as cities and other localities, but also highlighted large steppes.
* A map of Moldavia was drawn by the German diplomat Sigismund von Herberstein. On his map one can see woodless spaces – Bălți Steppe in the north, and Bugeac Steppe in the south.
* In the 17th century, pilgrims Pavel Aleppskii (a Syrian deacon) and Ioan Lukianov (a Russian priest) traveled on their way to the Holy Land through Moldavia. These two travelers were struck by the disastrous state of the land that used to blossom: &quot;It better be not ravaged, as no other such can be found, it may yield any kind&quot;.
* English traveler John Bell, who also visited Moldavia, and wrote about fecund soils and &quot;small nice towns&quot; situated next to Răut.
* Russian geographer K. Laksman described Bălți steppe at the beginning of the 19th century: &quot;To the north is located a steppe with almost no trees at all. To the north-west the steppe is not as woodless&quot;.
* Scientist K. Arseniev mentioned that the north of Bessarabia is &quot;a genuine mix of arid steppes with most fertile pastures, rich meadows, and gardens&quot;.
* Travelers and scholars were amazed by the contrast between rich natural resources of Moldavia/Bălți steppe and its low population in the war-torn 18th century, the pitiful state of agriculture, as well as the poverty of the local population.
* &quot;Desert, waste, naked steppe... The settling among limitless expanses of Bălți steppe happened not &quot;in accordance&quot; with logic, but &quot;against&quot; it. The life of remote ancestors of Bălțiers was full of difficulties and crosses, but they managed to resist.&quot;
* &quot;Moldavian fields, as described by both ancient and contemporary writers, are great in their fertility, by far surpassing the richness of the mountains&quot; (Dimitrie Cantemir, &quot;Descriptio Moldaviae&quot;)
* &quot;Will someone describes Bessarabian steppes, indeed, they do merit a description. However for this, one needs the talent of unforgettable Gogol, who has so beautifully depicted us the steppes of his homeland. And Bessarabian steppes are not less beautiful.&quot; (Constantin Stamati-Ciurea)

=== Current issues ===
Moldova&#x27;s communist-era environmental legacy, like that of many other former Soviet republics, is one of environmental degradation. Agricultural practices such as overuse of pesticides and artificial fertilizers were intended to increase agricultural output at all costs, without regard for the consequences. As a result, Moldova&#x27;s soil and groundwater were contaminated by lingering chemicals, some of which (including DDT) have been banned in the West.

Such practices continue in Moldova to the present day. In the early 1990s, use of pesticides in Moldova averaged approximately twenty times that of other former Soviet republics and Western nations. Also, poor farming methods, such as destroying forests to plant vineyards, have contributed to the extensive soil erosion to which the country&#x27;s rugged topography is already prone.

== International environmental agreements ==
&quot;party to:&quot;
Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

&quot;signed, but not ratified:&quot; none of the selected agreements

== See also ==
* Moldova
* List of cities in Moldova

== Notes ==
==External links==

* Moldova.org
* google maps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="11" end="25" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="27" end="34" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="76" end="83" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="121" end="128" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="160" end="170" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="224" end="230" title="Nistru" label="Nistru"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="239" end="243" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="432" end="444" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="450" end="460" title="Prut River" label="Prut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="524" end="530" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="675" end="684" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="736" end="743" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078085" start="1310" end="1317" title="Fălești" label="Fălești"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858545" start="1401" end="1410" title="Brătușeni" label="Brătușeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634276" start="1878" end="1895" title="Moldavian Plateau" label="Moldavian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="1987" end="1996" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="2063" end="2069" title="Stream" label="creeks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2182" end="2207" title="Northern Moldovan Plateau" label="Northern Moldovan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2216" end="2232" title="Dniester Plateau" label="Dniester Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q168856" start="2290" end="2307" title="Chernivtsi oblast" label="Chernivtsi oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2311" end="2318" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021974" start="2457" end="2468" title="Bălți Steppe" label="Bălți Plain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2477" end="2494" title="Middle Prut Plain" label="Middle Prut Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="2554" end="2560" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2604" end="2615" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="2786" end="2792" title="Terrain" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="2873" end="2879" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2932" end="2947" title="Ciulucuri Hills" label="Ciulucuri Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493018" start="2956" end="2969" title="Codri" label="Codri Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="3469" end="3477" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807338" start="3554" end="3558" title="Răut" label="Răut"/>
<link wikidata="Q47940" start="3595" end="3609" title="Bălănești Hill" label="Bălănești Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858857" start="3803" end="3816" title="Tigheci" label="Tigheci Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4057" end="4080" title="Southern Moldovan Plain" label="Southern Moldovan Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="4113" end="4119" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="4135" end="4143" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4159" end="4171" title="Ialpug Plain" label="Ialpug Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="4174" end="4186" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q928120" start="4236" end="4252" title="Podolian Plateau" label="Podolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="4449" end="4464" title="Eurasian steppe" label="Eurasian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="4708" end="4719" title="Chernozem" label="black earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="4723" end="4732" title="chernozem" label="chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="5022" end="5028" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="5372" end="5380" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="5484" end="5488" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="5517" end="5523" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="6107" end="6121" title="Dniester River" label="Dniester River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47940" start="6144" end="6160" title="Bălăneşti Hill" label="Dealul Bălănești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973590" start="6179" end="6188" title="Naslavcea" label="Naslavcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="6206" end="6218" title="Giurgiulești" label="Giurgiulești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711656" start="6235" end="6240" title="Criva, Briceni" label="Criva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379856" start="6257" end="6264" title="Palanca, Ştefan Vodă" label="Palanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q840819" start="6339" end="6352" title="forest steppe" label="forest steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="6400" end="6409" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="6437" end="6445" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="6449" end="6455" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="6488" end="6495" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="6565" end="6602" title="temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="temperate broadleaf and mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q150071" start="6607" end="6627" title="temperate grasslands" label="temperate grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="6828" end="6837" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="7022" end="7029" title="Jogaila" label="Jogaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="7039" end="7047" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7128" end="7153" title="Venetian Mateus de Murano" label="Venetian Mateus de Murano"/>
<link wikidata="Q516283" start="7449" end="7469" title="Guillebert de Lannoy" label="Guillebert de Lannoy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7637" end="7655" title="George Reihersdorf" label="George Reihersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="7832" end="7856" title="Principality of Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="7870" end="7877" title="Dnister" label="Dnister"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="7882" end="7886" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q700720" start="8023" end="8048" title="Sigismund von Herberstein" label="Sigismund von Herberstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021974" start="8091" end="8103" title="Bălți Steppe" label="Bălți Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986154" start="8122" end="8135" title="Bugeac Steppe" label="Bugeac Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8182" end="8197" title="Pavel Aleppskii" label="Pavel Aleppskii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8220" end="8233" title="Ioan Lukianov" label="Ioan Lukianov"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="8282" end="8291" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082079" start="8511" end="8520" title="John Bell (traveller)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807338" start="8628" end="8632" title="Răut" label="Răut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8655" end="8665" title="K. Laksman" label="K. Laksman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8862" end="8873" title="K. Arseniev" label="K. Arseniev"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="8902" end="8912" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="9708" end="9725" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9733" end="9753" title="Descriptio Moldaviae" label="Descriptio Moldaviae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="9906" end="9911" title="Gogol" label="Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439303" start="10032" end="10057" title="Constantin Stamati-Ciurea" label="Constantin Stamati-Ciurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="10193" end="10218" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="10220" end="10232" title="Agriculture" label="Agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="10262" end="10271" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="10513" end="10516" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="11002" end="11015" title="Air Pollution" label="Air Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11017" end="11060" title="Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants" label="Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="11062" end="11074" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="11076" end="11090" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="11092" end="11121" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="11123" end="11138" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="11140" end="11158" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="11160" end="11176" title="Hazardous Wastes" label="Hazardous Wastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="11178" end="11200" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q259130" start="11202" end="11216" title="Ship Pollution" label="Ship Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="11218" end="11226" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="11316" end="11323" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919" start="11326" end="11351" title="List of cities in Moldova" label="List of cities in Moldova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19243" wikidata="Q2366865" url="?curid=19243" title="Demographics of Moldova">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Republic of Moldova include distribution, ethnicity, languages, religious affiliation and other statistical data.

==Overview of the demographic statistics==
According to the 2014 Moldovan Census, 2,789,205 people resided in the areas controlled by the central government of Republic of Moldova. Another 209,030 were non-resident citizens living abroad, for a total of 2,998,235.

According to the 2015 census in Transnistria, 475,007 people lived in the breakaway Transnistria, including the city of Bender, and the other localities &quot;de facto&quot; controlled by Transnistrian authorities. Thus, the total population of the country in 2014 amounted to 3,473,242.



==Urban–rural distribution of population==

According to the 2014 census, 1,144,428 residents or 38,2% live in cities while 1,853,807 are rural residents. The largest cities under the control of the constitutional authorities are Chișinău with 644,204 (with 590,631 actual urban dwellers) and Bălți with 102,457 (97,930 urban dwellers). The autonomous territorial unit of Gagauzia has 134,535, out of which 48,666 or 36,2% are urban dwellers. Ungheni is the third largest city with 32,828, followed by Cahul with 28,763, Soroca with 22,196 and Orhei with 21,065.

===By district (2004 census)===

===Transnistrian-controlled areas (2015 cens.)===

==Vital statistics==

===Bessarabia Governorate (1900–1914)===


===After WW II, total area===
(e)= estimate

===Moldova under central government control===
*Source: National Bureau of Statistics

*Starting with 2014, the sharp changes in the statistics are because of the new calculation methods and according with the latest census, and include only data of resident people that lived in the country predominantly during the last 12 months, regardless of temporary absences (for the purpose of recreation, vacations, visits to relatives and friends, business, medical treatment, religious pilgrimages, etc.).

===Current vital statistics===

===Structure of the population===



===Transnistrian-controlled areas===
Source:

===Current vital statistics===


===Fertility Rate (The Demographic Health Survey)===

Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):
== Ethnic groups ==


Out of the 2,804,801 people covered by the 2014 Moldovan census, 2,754,719 gave an answer as to their ethnic affiliation. Among them, 2,068,068 or 73.7% declared themselves Moldovans and 192,800 or 6.9% Romanians. Some organisations such as the Liberal party of Moldova have criticised the census results, claiming Romanians comprise 85% of the population and that census officials have pressured respondents to declare themselves Moldovans instead of Romanians and have purposefully failed to cover urban respondents who are more likely to declared themselves Romanians as opposed to Moldovans.

At the same time, 181,035 declared themselves Ukrainians, 111,726 Russians, 126,010 Gagauz and 51,867 Bulgarians. The proportion of Ukrainians and Russians in the area controlled by Chișinău has fallen from 8,4% to 6,5% and 5,9% to 4,0% respectively between 2004 and 2014. Meanwhile, the percentage of Gagauz has risen slightly from 4,4% in 2004 to 4,5% in 2014.

The proportion of Ukrainians and Russians in the previous 2004 census also decreased considerably in comparison to the last Soviet census in 1989: from 13.8% to 11.2% and from 13.0% to 9.4% respectively out of the combined population including Transnistria. This is mostly due to emigration.
Of the total population that declared its ethnicity, in the 2024 census, people who declared themselves Moldovan and Romanian constituted 77.2% and 7.9%, respectively. Among the ethnic minorities, 4.9% declared themselves Ukrainian, 4.2% Gagauz, 3.2% Russian, 1.6% Bulgarian, 0.4% Roma/Gypsy and 0.5% other ethnicities.

Of the total population that declared its ethnicity, in the 2024 census, people who declared themselves Moldovan and Romanian constituted 77.2% and 7.9%, respectively. Among the ethnic minorities, 4.9% declared themselves Ukrainian, 4.2% Gagauz, 3.2% Russian, 1.6% Bulgarian, 0.4% Roma/Gypsy and 0.5% other ethnicities. Of the total urban population that declared its ethnicity in 2024, people who declared themselves Moldovan and Romanian constituted 70.5% and 9.7% respectively. Among the ethnic minorities, 6.1% declared themselves Ukrainian, 5.9% Russian, 4.1% Gagauz, 2.1% Bulgarian, 0.6% Roma/Gypsy and 1% other ethnicities. In Chișinău, the proportion was 72.9% Moldovans, 13.1% Romanians, 5.9% Russians, 5.1% Ukrainians, 0.8% Gagauz, 0.9% Bulgarians, 0.1% Roma/Gypsies and 1.2% other ethnicities.

Ukrainians mostly live in the east (Transnistria) and the north, while Russians mostly live in urban areas: 27% of all Russians live in Chișinău, 18% live in Tiraspol, 11% in Bender and 6% in Bălți. Most of the Gagauz live in the south of Moldova in the autonomous region of Gagauzia.

===Total area===
Declared country of birth for the current inhabitants of the part of Moldova under the central government control, according to the 2004 census:

Population by district, according to the 2004 census:

1

===Transnistrian-controlled areas===
====2015 census====
According to the last census in Transnistria (October 2015), the population of the region was 475,373, a 14.47% decrease from the figure recorded at the 2004 census. By ethnic composition, the population of Transnistria was distributed as follows: 
* Russians: 29.1%
* Moldovans: 28.6%
* Ukrainians: 22.9%
* Bulgarians: 2.4%
* Gagauz: 1.1%
* Belarusians: 0.5%
* Transnistrians: 0.2%
* Others: 1.4%
Around 14% did not declare any ethnicity. For the first time, the population had the option to identify as &quot;Transnistrian&quot;.

In 2020, in Transnistria, 34.2% of the kindergarten students came from families that spoke mainly Romanian, while 28% came from families where Ukrainian was the main language.

====2004 census====


== Languages ==

Romanian is the official language of Moldova. However, many speakers use the term Moldovan to describe the language they speak, even though its literary standard is virtually identical to Romanian. Officially since 1990, it is written in the Latin alphabet.

===Native language===
Currently, 2,184,065 people or 80.2% of those covered by the 2014 census on the right bank of the Dniester or Moldova (proper) identified Moldovan or Romanian as their native language, of which 1,544,726 (55.1%) declared Moldovan and 639.339 (22.8%) declared it Romanian. 263,523 people or 9.4% have Russian as native language, 107,252 or 3.8% – Ukrainian, 114,532 or 4.1% – Gagauz, 41,756 or 1.5% – Bulgarian, 12,187 or 0.5% – another language. Only 2,723,315 declared their native language out of the 2,804,801 covered by the 2014 census.
Of the total population that declared its mother tongue (; distinct from the usually spoken language) in the 2024 census, 49.2% declared &quot;Moldovan&quot; and 31.3% declared Romanian, with both adding up to 80.5%. The share of the population that declared Romanian as its mother tongue increased by 8.1% compared to the 2014 census (23.2%), and the share that declared &quot;Moldovan&quot; decreased by 7.8% (56.9% in the 2014 census). Among other languages declared as mother tongues, Russian stood out with 11.1% of the population, followed by Gagauz with 3.8%, Ukrainian with 2.9%, Bulgarian with 1.2%, Romani/Gypsy with 0.3% and other languages with 0.2%.

===First language in daily use (2014 and 2024 censuses)===
According to the 2014 census, 2,720,377 answered to the question on &quot;language usually used for communication&quot;. 2,138,964 people or 78.63% of the inhabitants of Moldova (proper) have Moldovan/Romanian as first language, of which 1,486,570 (53%) declared it Moldovan and 652,394 (23.3%) declared it Romanian. 394,133 people or 14.1% have Russian as language of daily use, 73.802 or 2.6% – Ukrainian, 74.167 or 2.6% – Gagauz, 26,577 or 0.9% – Bulgarian, and 12,734 or 0.5% – another language. By contrast, 46.0% declared their usually spoken language to be Moldovan and 33.2% declared it to be Romanian in 2024. In the 2024 census, the percentage of speakers of Russian as their usually spoken language was 15.3%, with other minority languages&#x27; share being lower: 2.3% for Gagauz, 2% for Ukrainian, 0.8% for Bulgarian, 0.3% for Romani and 0.2% for other languages.

===First language in daily use (2004 census)===
===Usage of own language by the ethnic groups of Moldova (2004 census)===
====Urban areas====
==== Rural areas ====
===Soviet era data===

In the Soviet census of 1989 members of most of the ethnic groups in Moldavian SSR claimed the language of their ethnicity as their mother tongue: Moldovans (95%), Ukrainians (62%), Russians (99%), Gagauz (91%), Bulgarians (79%), and Gipsies (82%). The exceptions were Jews (26% citing Yiddish), Belarusians (43%), Germans (31%), and Poles (10%).

In the Soviet census of 1989, 62% of the total population claimed Moldovan as their native language. Only 4% of the entire population claimed Moldovan as a second language.

In 1979, Russian was claimed as a native language by a large proportion of Jews (66%) and Belarusians (62%), and by a significant proportion of Ukrainians (30%). Proportions of other ethnicities naming Russian as a native language ranged from 17% of Bulgarians to 3% of Moldovans (Russian was more spoken by urban Moldovans than by rural Moldovans). Russian was claimed as a second language by a sizeable proportion of all ethnicities: Moldovans (46%), Ukrainians (43%), Gagauz (68%), Jews (30%), Bulgarians (67%), Belarusians (34%), Germans (53%), Roma (36%), and Poles (24%).

== Religion (2004 census) ==

According to the 2004 census, the population of Moldova has the following religious composition:


History

In 1940–1941, and 1944–1991, the Soviet government strictly limited the activities of the Orthodox Church (and all religions) and at times sought to exploit it, with the ultimate goal of abolishing it and all religious activity altogether. Most Orthodox churches and monasteries in Moldova were demolished or converted to other uses, such as administrative buildings or warehouses, and clergy were sometimes punished for leading services. Still, many believers continued to practice their faith.

People in the independent Moldova have much greater religious freedom than they did in Soviet times. Legislation passed in 1992 guarantees religious freedom, but requires all religious groups to be officially recognized by the government.

Orthodox Christians

In 1991, Moldova had 853 Orthodox churches and eleven Orthodox monasteries (four for monks and seven for nuns). In 1992 construction or restoration of 221 churches was underway, but clergy remained in short supply. As of 2004, Christian Orthodox constitute the vast majority of the population in all districts of Moldova.

In the interwar period, the vast majority of ethnic Moldovans belonged to the Romanian Orthodox Church (Bucharest Patriarchate), but today both Romanian and Russian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) have jurisdiction in Moldova, with the latter having more parishes. According to the local needs, liturgy is performed in Romanian, Russian, and Turkic (Gagauz). After the revival of religious activity in the last 20 years, a minority of the clergy and the faithful wanted to return to the Bucharest Patriarchate (Metropolis of Bessarabia). Because higher-level church authorities were unable to resolve the matter, Moldova now has two episcopates, one for each patriarchate. After the Soviet occupation in 1940, the Metropolis was downgraded to a Bishopric. In late 1992, the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia issued a decree upgrading its eparchy of Chișinău and Moldova to a Metropolis.

Greek Catholics

Moldova also has a Greek Catholic minority, mainly among ethnic Ukrainians, although the Soviet government declared the Greek Catholic Churches illegal in 1946 and forcibly united them with the Russian Orthodox Church. However, the Greek Catholic Churches had survived underground until the dissolution of the Soviet Union.

Roman Catholics

Half of Moldova&#x27;s Roman Catholics are in Chișinău, and 1/5 in Bălți.

Old Believers

In addition, the Old Russian Orthodox Church (Old Believers) had fourteen churches and one monastery in Moldova in 1991.

Half of Moldova&#x27;s Old Believers are in Florești district, and 1/5 in Sîngerei district.

Judaism

Despite the Soviet government&#x27;s suppression and harassment, Moldova&#x27;s practicing Jews managed to retain their religious identity. About a dozen Jewish newspapers were started in the early 1990s, and religious leaders opened a synagogue in Chișinău; there were six Jewish communities of worship throughout the country. In addition, Moldova&#x27;s government created the Department of Jewish Studies at Chișinău State University, mandated the opening of a Jewish high school in Chișinău, and introduced classes in Judaism in high schools in several cities. The government also provides financial support to the Society for Jewish Culture.

Protestants

There are around 65,000 Protestants of all sects in Moldova today. There are more than 1,000 Baptists in the cities of Chișinău and Bălți, in Cahul, Fălești, Hîncești, Sîngerei, Ștefan Vodă, and Ungheni districts, and in Găgăuzia. There are more than 1,000 Seventh-day Adventists in Cahul, Hîncești and Sîngerei districts, and in Găgăuzia, there are more than 1,000 Pentecostals in Chișinău and in Briceni district. There are more than 1,000 members of Brethren assemblies only in Chișinău. There are more than 1,000 Evangelical Synod-Presbyterians only in Chișinău.

Others

Other religious denominations in Moldova include:
*Armenian Apostolic Church
*Molokans (a Russian Orthodox sect).
*Islam

==Immigration==

===Moldova migration data, 2014-present===

Foreign citizens (according to the Office of Migration and Asylum):

== Secondary demographic indices ==
=== Average age ===
=== Life expectancy at birth ===

Since 2000, there has been a continuous increase in life expectancy, except for 2005, a year in which there was a high level of general and infant mortality. In 2013, this indicator recorded the maximum value of the given period – 71.85 years, including men – 68.1 and women – 75.5 years. The significant increase in life expectancy was influenced by the decrease in the overall mortality rate to 10.7 deaths per 1000 inhabitants, and the infant death rate, which constituted 9.4 deaths under one year per 1,000 live births.

=== Population by sex ===
=== Infant mortality ===
Children under 1 year old in 1,000 newborns:

=== Marriage ===
* References:

===Urban and rural population===

* References:

==See also==
* Emigration from Moldova
* Ageing of Europe
* Poles in Moldova
* Poles in Transnistria

==References==

Inline:

General:
* Moldovan Census results 
* Official population data 
* 2004 Transnistrian Census results 
==External links==
* Arianna Montanari, &quot;Rumanian national identity in the Republic of Moldova&quot;
* Disaster by Depopulation , a Red Cross report about impact of demographic changes on family structure and child care</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="42" end="61" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="84" end="93" title="ethnicity" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739149" start="217" end="237" title="Moldovan Census (2014)" label="2014 Moldovan Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="317" end="336" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395767" start="440" end="467" title="2015 Transnistrian census" label="2015 census in Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="507" end="519" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="543" end="549" title="Bender, Moldova" label="Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="944" end="952" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="1007" end="1012" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="1086" end="1094" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858713" start="1157" end="1164" title="Ungheni" label="Ungheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q503469" start="1216" end="1221" title="Cahul" label="Cahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q853785" start="1235" end="1241" title="Soroca" label="Soroca"/>
<link wikidata="Q423258" start="1258" end="1263" title="Orhei" label="Orhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190582" start="1387" end="1409" title="Bessarabia Governorate" label="Bessarabia Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314923" start="1528" end="1557" title="National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova" label="National Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739149" start="1682" end="1695" title="2014 Moldovan Census" label="latest census"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2474" end="2483" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822918" start="2516" end="2540" title="Liberal Party (Moldova)" label="Liberal party of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2586" end="2595" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2723" end="2732" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2832" end="2841" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="2914" end="2924" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="2934" end="2942" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="2952" end="2958" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="2970" end="2980" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="3000" end="3010" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3015" end="3023" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="3250" end="3260" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3265" end="3273" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="3628" end="3636" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="3641" end="3649" title="Romanians" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210588" start="3746" end="3755" title="Ukrainians in Moldova" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="3762" end="3768" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400602" start="3775" end="3782" title="Russians in Moldova" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997993" start="3789" end="3798" title="Bulgarians in Moldova" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122199727" start="3805" end="3815" title="Romani people in Moldova" label="Roma/Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="3949" end="3957" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="3962" end="3970" title="Romanians" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210588" start="4067" end="4076" title="Ukrainians in Moldova" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="4083" end="4089" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400602" start="4096" end="4103" title="Russians in Moldova" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997993" start="4110" end="4119" title="Bulgarians in Moldova" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122199727" start="4126" end="4136" title="Romani people in Moldova" label="Roma/Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="4687" end="4699" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4722" end="4730" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4770" end="4778" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="4787" end="4795" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="4809" end="4817" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="4826" end="4832" title="Bender, Moldova" label="Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="4843" end="4848" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="4862" end="4868" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="4890" end="4897" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="4926" end="4934" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395767" start="5228" end="5259" title="2015 Transnistrian census" label="the last census in Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602617" start="5364" end="5379" title="2004 Transnistrian census" label="the 2004 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="5466" end="5474" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="5484" end="5493" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="5503" end="5513" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="5523" end="5533" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="5542" end="5548" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="5557" end="5568" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="5964" end="5972" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="6046" end="6054" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="6206" end="6220" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="6325" end="6335" title="Dniester" label="right bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="6466" end="6474" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="6507" end="6515" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="6591" end="6600" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="6620" end="6626" title="Gagauzian language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="6645" end="6654" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="6929" end="6937" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="6963" end="6971" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="7275" end="7282" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="7335" end="7341" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="7353" end="7362" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="7374" end="7383" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="7395" end="7407" title="Romani language" label="Romani/Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621042" start="8581" end="8602" title="Soviet Census (1989)" label="Soviet census of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="8643" end="8656" title="Moldavian SSR" label="Moldavian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="8721" end="8730" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="8738" end="8748" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="8756" end="8764" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="8772" end="8778" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="8786" end="8796" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="8808" end="8815" title="Romani people" label="Gipsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="8860" end="8867" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="8870" end="8881" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="8889" end="8896" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="8908" end="8913" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621042" start="8929" end="8950" title="Soviet Census (1989)" label="Soviet census of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377743" start="10901" end="10916" title="Union of Bessarabia with Romania" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="10972" end="10996" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="11051" end="11074" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="11195" end="11202" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300999" start="11411" end="11435" title="Metropolis of Bessarabia" label="Metropolis of Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285181" start="11739" end="11746" title="eparchy" label="eparchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q625160" start="11776" end="11786" title="Ecclesiastical province" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546359" start="11825" end="11839" title="Greek Catholic" label="Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="12284" end="12297" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097810" start="12874" end="12899" title="Moldova State University" label="Chișinău State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="13751" end="13776" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q303985" start="13778" end="13785" title="Molokan" label="Molokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469749" start="13815" end="13820" title="Islam in Moldova" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="14094" end="14109" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797605" start="14761" end="14784" title="Emigration from Moldova" label="Emigration from Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q680039" start="14787" end="14803" title="Ageing of Europe" label="Ageing of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083316" start="14806" end="14822" title="Poles in Moldova" label="Poles in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399655" start="14825" end="14846" title="Poles in Transnistria" label="Poles in Transnistria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19244" wikidata="Q1154124" url="?curid=19244" title="Politics of Moldova">
<text>The politics of [[Moldova]] take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, wherein the prime minister is the head of the Government of Moldova, and a multi-party system. The President of Moldova has no important powers. The government exercises executive power while the legislative power is vested in the Parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The position of the breakaway region of Transnistria (a self-proclaimed autonomous region, on the left side of the river Nistru), relations with Romania and with Russia, and integration into the EU dominate political discussions.

Scholars have characterized Moldova as an unstable democracy with systemic corruption and a deep cleavage regarding national identity. 

During the presidency of Maia Sandu the institutional framework has been orienting (although not officially) towards a semi-presidential system, where the President plays an important role in foreign affairs and setting the domestic agenda along with the prime minister.

==Legislative branch==

The Moldovan Parliament () has 101 members, elected for a four-year term by proportional representation.

The seat of the legislature is known simply as the .

===Parliamentary election results===

== Executive branch ==


The president is elected by popular vote for a four-year term. According to the Moldovan constitution, the president, on consulting with the Parliament, will designate a candidate for the office of prime minister; within 15 days from designation, the prime minister-designate will request a vote of confidence from the Parliament regarding his/her work program and entire cabinet. The cabinet is selected by prime minister-designate, subject to approval of Parliament. The cabinet meets at the Government House on Stephen the Great Boulevard in Central Chișinău.

==Judicial branch==

==Administrative divisions==
Moldova is divided into 32 raions, or &quot;raioane&quot;, three municipalities (Chișinău, Bălți, and Bender), one autonomous region (Gagauzia), and the breakaway region of Transnistria, the status of which is disputed.

==Issues==

=== Ethnic identity and unification with Romania ===
The underlying issue in the Republic of Moldova revolves around ethnicity and whether the country should re-unite with Romania, with which it shares a common ethnicity, language, culture and history. The Republic of Moldova represents roughly the eastern half of what is historically known as the Principality of Moldova. As a result of the Treaty of Bucharest (1812), ending the Russo-Turkish War of 1806, it was separated from the western part of the principality along the Prut river and annexed by the Russian Empire, which named it Bessarabia (Basarabia). The western half of the former Principality of Moldova, which was not annexed by Russia, united with Wallachia (Țara Românească) in 1859 to form the basis for modern day Romania. The eastern half united with Romania in 1918, but was re-annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940 as a result of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.

Russian and Soviet-era identity politics focused on Russification in the colonial sense as well as on stressing artificial differences between the Moldovans and the Romanians in an attempt to create a uniquely &quot;Moldovan&quot; identity, including indoctrination against Romania and Romanians. As a result, Moldovan ethnic identity is complicated and divided between those who consider themselves Moldovan and those who consider themselves Romanian. Although Moldovans comprise a sizeable ethnic majority of the population, they are fragmented in terms of degree of Russification and cultural indoctrination. The more pro-Russian the Moldovan, the more likely it is that s/he will call his/her language and ethnicity Moldovan rather than Romanian. Today, Moldova is effectively bilingual, with a Romanian-speaking majority and a sizable and influential, multi-ethnic, Russian-speaking minority, and with the Russian language still dominating the media. The Russophile population is generally hostile to the idea of unification with Romania and typically votes for left-wing parties. The Moldovan majority is divided between pro-Russian nostalgia and growing pro-Romanian and pro-EU sympathies, with a growing number of people supporting the idea of re-unification with Romania, especially among the youth.

Moldovas&#x27;s pro-Western and pro-Russian factions became increasingly divided since Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. In the November 2024 presidential election, Moldova&#x27;s pro-EU President Maia Sandu was re-elected with 55% of the vote in the run-off.

=== Transnistria ===


Transnistria is a strip of land running along Moldova&#x27;s eastern border with Ukraine, named after the Dniester river. The Transnistrian region is majority Slavic (Ukrainian and Russian) and Russian-speaking, in contrast with the rest of the country, and it was heavily industrialized during USSR rule. The Moldovan Declaration of Independence claims continuity of Moldovan sovereignty over the territory of Transnistria as it is &quot;a component part of the historical and ethnic territory of our people&quot;. However, the Moldovan Declaration of Independence is itself used as an argument against Moldovan sovereignty over Transnistria as it denounces the Ribbentrop-Molotov agreement of 23 August 1939 between the government of the Soviet Union and the government of Nazi Germany &quot;null and void&quot; being the only formal union between the two territories.

After failing to establish control over the breakaway region in the War of Transnistria, Moldova offered a broad cultural and political autonomy to the region. The dispute has strained Moldova&#x27;s relations with Russia. The July 1992 ceasefire agreement established a tripartite peacekeeping force composed of Moldovan, Russian, and Transnistrian units. Negotiations to resolve the conflict continue, and the ceasefire is still in effect. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) is trying to facilitate a negotiated settlement and has had an observer mission in place for several years.

The country remains divided, with the Transnistrian region controlled by separatist forces, supported &quot;de facto&quot; by a contingency of Russian troops posing as a peacekeeping mission.

=== Human trafficking ===
Due to the high rate of poverty, Moldova remains a large source-country of illegal sex workers that are exported to Western Europe, Russia and the Middle East. Because of pervasive corruption and a general lack of awareness, many victims of human trafficking are lured into the business with offers of high-salary jobs abroad, and are often trapped once out of the country. The US government urged Moldova to pass an anti-trafficking law in 2005, but due to a lack of enforcement, low regard of legal institutions, and unequal benchmark requirements, clear progress is difficult to ascertain. Organizations such as the International Organization for Migration provide non-governmental support integral to helping victims. However, NGOs are often subject to domestic constraints and government interference in their work, complicating their operations.

=== Other issues ===
There is disagreement as to whether elections and politics in Moldova are carried out in a free and democratic climate on the part of certain organizations. The United States Senate has held committee hearings on irregularities that marred elections in Moldova, including arrests and harassment of opposition candidates, intimidation and suppression of independent media, and state-run media bias in favor of candidates backed by the Communist-led Moldovan Government. Other critics have also referred to the Communist Party government as being authoritarian. Nevertheless, then-U.S. President George W. Bush stated that: &quot;We note and welcome Moldova&#x27;s positive record since independence in conducting free and fair elections and in implementing democratic reforms.&quot;

There were also reports of politically motivated arrests and arrests without valid legal grounds in 2005. Such arrests were allegedly carried out against opponents of the Communist Party government of President Vladimir Voronin. In one case which was criticized by various Western organizations and individuals, opposition politician Valeriu Pasat was sentenced to ten years imprisonment on dubious grounds.

Moldova joined the World Trade Organization and the Southeast European Stability Pact in 2001. Of primary importance have been the Moldovan Government&#x27;s efforts to improve relations with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank and to comply with agreements negotiated in 2000 by the former government. Agreement in these areas was critical, because large government debts that were due in 2002 had to be rescheduled. The government has made concerted efforts to find ways to pay for Moldova&#x27;s energy supplies.

Political parties and other groups publish newspapers, which often criticize government policies. There are several independent news services, radio stations, and an independent television station. Peaceful assembly is allowed, though permits for demonstrations must be obtained; private organizations, including political parties, are required to register with the government. Legislation passed in 1992 codified freedom of religion but required that religious groups be recognized by the government.

A 1990 Soviet law and a 1991 Parliamentary decision authorizing formation of social organizations provide for independent trade unions. However, the Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Moldova, successor to the former organizations of the Soviet trade union system, is the sole structure. It has tried to influence government policy in labour issues and has been critical of many economic policies. Moldovan labour law, which is based on former Soviet legislation, provides for collective bargaining rights.

==See also==
*List of political parties in Moldova
*Politics of Transnistria

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154124" start="4" end="27" title="Politics of Moldova" label="politics of [[Moldova]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="59" end="72" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="73" end="98" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="99" end="107" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="121" end="135" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375974" start="155" end="176" title="Government of Moldova" label="Government of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="184" end="202" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="208" end="228" title="President of Moldova" label="President of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="279" end="294" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="305" end="322" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="340" end="350" title="Parliament of the Republic of Moldova" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="356" end="365" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="459" end="471" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="534" end="546" title="Dniester" label="river Nistru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895855" start="549" end="571" title="Moldova–Romania relations" label="relations with Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895851" start="576" end="587" title="Moldova–Russia relations" label="with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5391415" start="593" end="616" title="Moldova and the European Union" label="integration into the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="725" end="735" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="766" end="783" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="812" end="822" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="906" end="930" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="1042" end="1056" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="1087" end="1106" title="Parliament of the Republic of Moldova" label="Moldovan Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="1159" end="1186" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="1310" end="1319" title="President of Moldova" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450299" start="1386" end="1407" title="Constitution of Moldova" label="Moldovan constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="1504" end="1518" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q110300851" start="1678" end="1685" title="Cabinet of Moldova" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12723530" start="1800" end="1816" title="Government House, Chișinău" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="1820" end="1837" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054385" start="1851" end="1867" title="Central Chișinău" label="Central Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="1920" end="1927" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="1947" end="1952" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="2001" end="2009" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="2011" end="2016" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="2022" end="2028" title="Bender, Moldova" label="Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="2054" end="2062" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="2093" end="2105" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="2311" end="2319" title="Unification of Moldova and Romania" label="re-unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="2503" end="2526" title="Principality of Moldova" label="Principality of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q849286" start="2547" end="2573" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1812)" label="Treaty of Bucharest (1812)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="2586" end="2611" title="Russo-Turkish War of 1806" label="Russo-Turkish War of 1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="2743" end="2753" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="2755" end="2764" title="Basarabia" label="Basarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="2868" end="2877" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="2879" end="2894" title="Țara Românească" label="Țara Românească"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377743" start="2963" end="2969" title="Union of Bessarabia with Romania" label="united"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="3000" end="3030" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="re-annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="3058" end="3081" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="3136" end="3149" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038479" start="3394" end="3418" title="Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova" label="Moldovan ethnic identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="4336" end="4350" title="Unification of Moldova and Romania" label="re-unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="4481" end="4514" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104821709" start="4543" end="4578" title="2024 Moldovan presidential election" label="November 2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="5076" end="5087" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5439" end="5451" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5474" end="5486" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="5639" end="5658" title="War of Transnistria" label="War of Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="6017" end="6069" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951901" start="6576" end="6596" title="Corruption in Moldova" label="pervasive corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="6646" end="6663" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="7024" end="7064" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7440" end="7460" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="7873" end="7887" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q189435" start="8273" end="8289" title="Vladimir Voronin" label="Vladimir Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="8490" end="8514" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375974" start="8602" end="8621" title="Government of Moldova" label="Moldovan Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="8667" end="8694" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="8703" end="8713" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q69136" start="10035" end="10071" title="List of political parties in Moldova" label="List of political parties in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577670" start="10073" end="10097" title="Politics of Transnistria" label="Politics of Transnistria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19245" wikidata="Q975172" url="?curid=19245" title="Economy of Moldova">
<text>The economy of Moldova is an emerging upper-middle income economy, Moldova is a landlocked Eastern European country, bordered by Ukraine on the East and Romania to the West. It is a former Soviet republic and today a candidate member to the European Union.

==Background==
On January 2, 1992, Moldova introduced a market economy, liberalising prices, which resulted in huge inflation. In 1993, a national currency, the Moldovan leu, was introduced to replace the Soviet rouble. The economic fortunes of Moldova began to change in 2001; since then the country has seen a steady annual growth of between 5% and 10%. Remittances from Moldovans abroad account for a quarter of Moldova&#x27;s GDP, one of the highest percentages in the world.

==Overview==

Moldova&#x27;s proximity to the Black Sea gives it a mild and sunny climate. The fertile Chernozem soil supports wheat, corn, barley, tobacco, sugar beet, and soybeans. Beef and dairy cattle are raised, and beekeeping is widespread. Moldova&#x27;s best-known product comes from its extensive and well-developed vineyards concentrated in the central and southern regions. Moldova produces liqueur and sparkling wine. It is also known for its sunflower seeds, walnuts, apples, and other fruits. This makes the area ideal for agriculture and food processing, which accounts for about 40% of the country&#x27;s GDP.

In 2018, Moldova produced:
* 1.1 million tons of wheat;
* 132 thousand tons of plum;
* 174 thousand tons of potato;
* 175 thousand tons of barley;
* 2.0 million tons of maize;
* 665 thousand tons of apple;
* 707 thousand tons of sugar beet (the beet is used to manufacture sugar and ethanol);
* 730 thousand tons of grape;
* 788 thousand tons of sunflower seed.

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like rapeseed (85 thousand tons). Moldova has a production of grape and apple between the 20th and 25th largest in the world, and a production of plum and sunflower seed between the 10th and 15th largest of the world.

Moldova has experienced economic difficulties, like many other former Soviet republics. Since its economy was highly dependent on the rest of the former Soviet Union for energy and raw materials, the breakdown in trade following the breakup of the Soviet Union had a serious effect, exacerbated at times by drought and civil conflict. The Russian rouble devaluation of 1998 had a deleterious effect on Moldova&#x27;s economy, but economic growth has been steady since 2000.

Moldova has made progress in economic reform since independence. The government has liberalized most prices and has phased out subsidies on most basic consumer goods. A program begun in March 1993 has privatized 80% of all housing units and nearly 2,000 small, medium, and large enterprises, which led to a rise in homelessness and unemployment. Other successes include the privatization of nearly all of Moldova&#x27;s agricultural land from state to private ownership, as a result of an American assistance program completed in 2000. A stock market opened in June 1995.

Inflation was brought down from over 105% in 1994 to 11% in 1997. Though inflation spiked again after Russia’s 1998 currency devaluation, Moldova made great strides in bringing it under control: 18.4% in 2000, 6.3% in 2001, and 4.4% in 2002. In 2003 inflation escalated again – due mainly to a drought-driven rise in agricultural prices – reaching 15.7%, although it was reined in to 12.5% in 2004. The local currency appreciated considerably in 2003 and the first months of 2004. By May, the leu had reached its highest level since the end of 1999. After the National Bank of Moldova increased considerably its purchases on the foreign exchange market, the leu stabilized in November–December 2004 at 12.00-12.50 to the US dollar.

Moldova continues transitioning towards a free-market economy. The country recorded its fifth consecutive year of positive GDP growth in 2004, with year-end real GDP growth of 8%. This growth is impressive considering that, prior to 2000, Moldova had recorded only one year of positive GDP growth since independence. Budget execution in 2004 was also impressive, as actual consolidated budget revenues exceeded projections by 1.4% for most of the year.

Privatization results in 2004 were not significant: several smaller companies and one winery were privatized in 2004, but the government postponed indefinitely the privatization of several larger state enterprises, including two electricity distribution companies. Sporadic and ineffective enforcement of the law, economic and political uncertainty, and government harassment and interference continue to discourage inflows of foreign direct investment.

Imports continued to increase more rapidly than exports during the first nine months of 2004; Moldova’s terms of trade worsened, as higher-priced energy imports outpaced the value of Moldova’s main exports—agricultural and agro-processing goods.

During 2002, Moldova rescheduled an outstanding Eurobond, in the amount of $39.6 million, to avoid a potential default. In May 2004, Moldova redeemed promissory notes with a total value of $114.5 million to Russian Gazprom for just $50 million. Moldova informed its bilateral creditors in mid-2003 that it would no longer service its debts. The 2004 budget did provide funds for external debt service (interest) at some 6% of the government budget, the 2005 budget projects external debt service at some 4%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank resumed lending to Moldova in July 2002, and then suspended lending again in July 2003. Although Moldova passed a poverty reduction strategy in 2004, it has yet to reach an agreement with international financial institutions.

70% of total electrical energy power consumed in Moldova is imported from Ukraine and only 30% is produced in Moldova.

In 2021 Moldova&#x27;s trade with Russia was $1.33b compared with the EU of $5.06. In 2022 the EU trade increased to $6.9b

== Macroeconomic situation ==
As a whole, Moldova is doing well, despite a series of consecutive shocks, which included the doubling of the price of imported natural gas and 2006 Russian ban of Moldovan and Georgian wines, and a severe drought in 2007. Growth is estimated at 5 percent in 2007 and is projected to increase to 7 percent in 2008. Investment is picking up, and is beginning to replace remittances as the main source of growth—an encouraging sign that the earlier model of consumption-driven growth is changing.

Moldova increasingly faces the challenges experienced by other transition economies. Improved growth prospects have come with strong appreciation pressures from foreign exchange inflows, and a widening trade deficit. Foreign direct investment (FDI) has picked up and is estimated to have reached 12 percent of GDP in 2007, compared with 7 percent in 2006.

The main macroeconomic concern is inflation, which at 13 percent remains high for the region.

A deterioration in the merchandise trade balance due to strong import growth has been offset by improvements in net income and transfers, with a small improvement in the current account deficit to 12 percent of GDP. A resumption of wine exports to Russia in October was a major positive development, although volumes are likely to recover slowly.

Fiscal policy remained tight, ending 2007 with a modest deficit of 0.3 percent of GDP. Strong revenue performance was driven by robust VAT on imports, while expenditure was kept in line with the budget. However, the tax cuts introduced in 2008 may undermine the favorable fiscal position.

Monetary tightening in 2007 was complicated by the strong inflow of foreign exchange. The National Bank of Moldova increased reserve requirements from 10 to 15 percent, and raised policy interest rates by 2.5 percentage points. Nevertheless, the possibility of second-round effects from the drought, liquidity pressures from growing remittances and FDI, and the continued strong growth in credit and broad money suggest that upside risks to inflation are not yet fully contained.

In spite of some favorable background, Moldova remains Europe&#x27;s poorest nation, resisting pursuing the types of reforms that have vastly improved the economies of some of its Eastern European neighbors. The Communist Party retained political control after winning the March 2005 parliamentary elections and re-elected its leader, Vladimir Voronin, as president in collaboration with the opposition. Although the government maintains a pro-Western stance, it has had trouble pursuing structural reforms and has made little progress on the International Monetary Fund&#x27;s program to attract external financial resources. The parliament approved the government&#x27;s economic growth and strategy paper in December 2004, but international financial institutions and Western investors will not be satisfied until the government begins to address fiscal adjustment, wage restraint, and payment of debt arrears. Despite the fact that the pace of privatization and industrial output has slowed, GDP growth was 7.3 percent in 2004, consumption continues to grow, and the currency continues to appreciate. The impasse in the pro-Russian Transnistria enclave, plagued by corruption and the smuggling of arms and contraband, continues despite international attempts at mediation.

== Business and economic environment==
According to the 2024 Index of Economic Freedom, Moldova ranks 99th globally with the overall score of 57.1, a decrease relative to 2023.
&quot;*Everything above 60 is considered to be Moderately Free.&quot;

According to the 2020 Ease of Doing Business Index, Moldova&#x27;s Distance to Frontier is 74.4/100 (48th globally), an increase of 1.3 relative to 2019.

&quot;*DTF (Distance to Frontier): Higher is better&quot;

== Trade policy ==
According to the World Bank, Moldova&#x27;s weighted average tariff rate in 2001 (the most recent year for which World Bank data are available) was 2.8 percent. (The World Bank has revised the figure for 2001 downward from the 3.9 percent reported in the 2005 Index.) A 2004 World Bank report notes a &quot;range of informal barriers to both imports and exports in Moldova, such as cumbersome and restrictive trade procedures, corruption, burdensome and inappropriate regulations and high transport costs.&quot; Based on the revised trade factor methodology, Moldova&#x27;s trade policy score is unchanged.

===Free Trade Agreements===
Currently Moldova has signed multilateral and bilateral Free Trade Agreements with 43 countries.

== Regional developments ==
Countries tend to benefit from sharing borders with developed markets as this facilitates trade and development. Below is a table of Moldova&#x27;s neighboring countries, their GDP per capita in 1995 and 2021, and trade values between the pairs. Their evolution is distinct as Romania went from a GDP per capita which was about 1.7 times larger than that of Moldova&#x27;s in 1995 to one which in 2021 is more than 2.5 times as large. Ukraine on the other hand has decreased when compared to Moldova.

The Russian Federation for comparison rose from 5,613 in 1995 to 34,043 in 2021, slightly less than Romania.

== Regional GDP ==

This is a list of regions of Republic of Moldova by nominal GDP shown in Moldovan leu and Euro. Statistics shown are for 2021.

== Fiscal burden ==
Moldova&#x27;s income tax rate has been a flat 12 percent since 2019.

The corporate tax rate for SRL companies has been 12 percent from 2012, since 2018 the unique tax of 7% for IT companies part of Moldova IT Park was implemented.

The Sales tax (VAT) standard rate has remained at 20% since 2014. There are reduced rates of 12% and 8% for certain goods.

In 2024, Moldova decided that companies in Transnistria and Moldova should be treated in a similar way as regards customs duties on imported goods, resulting in Transnistria import companies needing to register with Moldova and pay import custom duties (but not V.A.T., nor excise duties) to Moldova. This would also hopefully reduce smuggling of goods out of Transnistria that had been imported duty free, such as cigarettes.

== Monetary policy ==

Annual inflation rate hit 30.2% in December 2022, mainly as a result of the rise in world wide fuel and food costs, falling in 2023, interest rates are now also falling but remain high until inflation is under control.

== Foreign investment ==
The Moldovan government does not maintain many formal barriers to foreign investment, and the Moldovan embassy reports that foreign investors are free to &quot;place their investments throughout the Republic of Moldova, in any area of business activity, as long as it does not go against the interests of the national security, anti-monopoly legislation, environment protection norms, public health and public order.&quot;

Since gaining independence in 1992, Moldova privatised most state-owned enterprises, and most sectors of the economy are almost entirely in private hands. The government keeping control of electrical distribution, railways, the state airline Air Moldova, fixed line communication company Moldtelecom and the country’s largest tobacco company.

Invest Moldova was created to encourage inward investment, promoting the low levels of tax on individuals and companies. Free Economic Zones have been created designed for export-oriented manufacturing companies, Industrial Parks have been established to bring companies together and offer lower operating costs.

Foreign direct investment is slowly rising, $587m in 2022, $410m in 2021 and $150m in 2020, with each year supplemented with $4.7-4.9 billion of loans, with manufacturing, financial intermediation, and trade being the main sectors.

== Banking and finance ==
There are no official barriers to founding foreign banks or branches in Moldova. The central bank the National Bank of Moldova has a responsibility to the management and control of all banks in Moldova.

In 2014 a major fraud took place, the 2014 Moldovan bank fraud scandal which nearly bankrupted the country. $1 billion disappeared from three Moldovan banks: &quot;Banca de Economii&quot;, &quot;Unibank&quot; and &quot;Banca Socială&quot;. In the week preceding the 2014 Moldovan parliamentary election more than $750 million were extracted from the three banks in just three days, with a van loaded with stolen files from the banks being burned. A number of people were charged, Ilan Shor was convicted but fled justice.

Major reforms to the legal framework of the Moldovan financial sector have taken place as the country progresses to implementing the EU`s legislation. By 2023 the Moldovan banking system is regarded as harmonized at a high level with the relevant EU community. The IMF reported in 2023 that Banks remain adequately capitalised, maintain adequate liquidity coverage and healthy asset quality.

== Wages and prices ==
The government influences prices through the large state-owned sector. According to the Ministry of Economy, the state regulates the prices of goods and services provided by monopolies and the prices of electric or thermal energy, land, medical services, and services offered by local tax regions. Moldova has two legal monthly minimum wages: one wage for state employees and another, higher wage for the private sector.

In 2023, the average monthly salary in the economy was MDL 12,175 (approx. 630 EUR / 686 USD)

== Property rights ==
The U.S. Department of Commerce reports that the &quot;legal system has improved in recent years. Moldova has a documented and consistently applied commercial law.&quot; Nevertheless, much more needs to be done. According to the U.S. Department of State, &quot;The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary; however, the executive branch has exerted undue influence on the judiciary. Many observers believe that arrears in salary payments also make it difficult for judges to remain independent from outside influences and free from corruption.&quot;

== Regulation ==
&quot;Bureaucratic procedures are not always transparent and red tape often makes processing unnecessarily long,&quot; reports the U.S. Department of Commerce. &quot;[C]ommercial law is a confusing patchwork of narrow statutes and an outdated civil code. With USAID experts, a draft civil code has been developed which follows the current European practice of incorporating commercial law provisions.&quot; The same source reports that anti-corruption laws &quot;are not effectively enforced and corruption exists at an advanced level.&quot; A report provided by the World Bank indicates that labor laws are somewhat rigid.

== Informal market ==
Transparency International&#x27;s 2004 score for Moldova is 2.3. Thereafter, Moldova&#x27;s informal market score is 4 in 2005.
In 2011 the corruption score for Moldova is 2.9, better than it was in 2004, concluding TI.

== Tourism ==

*Total: 503,700 in 2023
**International Tourism: 406,000
***Inbound: 43,600
**** - 38.9%
**** - 14.4%
**** - 14.0%
**** - 5.3%
**** - 5.2%
***Outbound: 362,400
**** - 47.0%
**** - 18.9%
**** - 10.6%
**** - 10.3%
**** - 5.5%
**Domestic Tourism: 97,700

There are around 15,000 sights and 300 natural zones within Moldova, which represent a potential for domestic and international tourists.

==Statistics==
===Moldovan economy in graphics===
Industrial production growth rate:
3.4% (2017)&lt;br&gt;
Agricultural production growth rate:
2.5% (2018)

==See also==
*Economy of Europe
*Moldova

==References==

==External links==
*National Bureau of Statistics of Moldova 
*National Bank of Moldova
*International Monetary Fund: Republic of Moldova: Statistical Appendix </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975172" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Moldova" label="economy of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="29" end="37" title="Emerging market" label="emerging"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="67" end="74" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="91" end="105" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="129" end="136" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="153" end="160" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="189" end="204" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q814923" start="217" end="233" title="Potential enlargement of the European Union" label="candidate member"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="241" end="255" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="314" end="328" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="374" end="383" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181129" start="419" end="431" title="Moldovan leu" label="Moldovan leu"/>
<link wikidata="Q615640" start="463" end="476" title="Soviet rouble" label="Soviet rouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="614" end="624" title="Remittance" label="Remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="688" end="691" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="785" end="794" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="842" end="851" title="Chernozem" label="Chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="866" end="871" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="873" end="877" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="879" end="885" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="887" end="894" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="896" end="906" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="912" end="919" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915" start="931" end="943" title="dairy cattle" label="dairy cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178780" start="1141" end="1148" title="liqueur" label="liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="1153" end="1167" title="sparkling wine" label="sparkling wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1276" end="1287" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1360" end="1363" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="1415" end="1420" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="1445" end="1449" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="1474" end="1480" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="1505" end="1511" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1535" end="1540" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="1565" end="1570" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="1595" end="1605" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="1639" end="1644" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="1649" end="1656" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="1682" end="1687" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="1712" end="1726" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q177932" start="1801" end="1809" title="rapeseed" label="rapeseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="1858" end="1863" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="1868" end="1873" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="1942" end="1946" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="1951" end="1965" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2168" end="2180" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142572" start="2354" end="2380" title="1998 Russian financial crisis" label="Russian rouble devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2691" end="2701" title="privatization" label="privatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="3028" end="3040" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="3063" end="3072" title="Inflation" label="Inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3165" end="3171" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636071" start="3623" end="3647" title="National Bank of Moldova" label="National Bank of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="3692" end="3715" title="foreign exchange market" label="foreign exchange market"/>
<link wikidata="Q181129" start="3721" end="3724" title="Moldovan leu" label="leu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="3784" end="3793" title="US dollar" label="US dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="4677" end="4702" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068725" start="5000" end="5008" title="Eurobond (international)" label="Eurobond"/>
<link wikidata="Q190122" start="5102" end="5117" title="promissory note" label="promissory note"/>
<link wikidata="Q102673" start="5167" end="5174" title="Gazprom" label="Gazprom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="5464" end="5491" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="5502" end="5512" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5814" end="5821" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898539" start="6158" end="6205" title="2006 Russian ban of Moldovan and Georgian wines" label="2006 Russian ban of Moldovan and Georgian wines"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351664" start="6329" end="6339" title="Investment (macroeconomics)" label="Investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="6754" end="6757" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="7173" end="7176" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="7445" end="7448" title="VAT" label="VAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636071" start="7690" end="7714" title="National Bank of Moldova" label="National Bank of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="7949" end="7952" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="8261" end="8275" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q750116" start="8293" end="8308" title="Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189435" start="8416" end="8432" title="Vladimir Voronin" label="Vladimir Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="8473" end="8483" title="opposition (politics)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="8624" end="8651" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="8852" end="8859" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="8860" end="8868" title="investor" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558143" start="8931" end="8948" title="fiscal adjustment" label="fiscal adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="8950" end="8964" title="incomes policy" label="wage restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="9217" end="9229" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="9250" end="9260" title="political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="9282" end="9286" title="weapon" label="arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="9291" end="9301" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="9420" end="9445" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="9629" end="9657" title="Ease of Doing Business Index" label="Ease of Doing Business Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="11397" end="11407" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="11457" end="11470" title="corporate tax" label="corporate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q407606" start="13102" end="13113" title="Air Moldova" label="Air Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044445" start="13148" end="13159" title="Moldtelecom" label="Moldtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636071" start="13879" end="13903" title="National Bank of Moldova" label="National Bank of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q20431593" start="14019" end="14051" title="2014 Moldovan bank fraud scandal" label="2014 Moldovan bank fraud scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345490" start="14247" end="14283" title="2014 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="2014 Moldovan parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526147" start="14461" end="14470" title="Ilan Shor" label="Ilan Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="15463" end="15490" title="U.S. Department of Commerce" label="U.S. Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="15688" end="15712" title="U.S. Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="16297" end="16302" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="16684" end="16710" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="16776" end="16791" title="informal market" label="informal market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226947" start="17482" end="17499" title="Economy of Europe" label="Economy of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="17501" end="17508" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19246" wikidata="Q2329415" url="?curid=19246" title="Telecommunications in Moldova">
<text>Telecommunications in Moldova are maintained at a relatively high performance level. Because Moldova is a small country, telecommunications companies managed to achieve good coverage in both wired and wireless communications infrastructure. Landline is available in most settlements, however mobile phone popularity has vastly increased in recent years. Mobile communications infrastructures are fairly well developed but suffer from high prices, nonetheless the amount of mobile subscriptions is growing very fast compared to the landline. As far as the Internet is concerned, Moldova has one of the best wired Internet connections in the world as well as one of the cheapest in $ per Mbit.

== Landline ==
After the break of the Soviet Union Moldova&#x27;s telecommunications facilities were in a very poor condition. In 1990 Moldova had an average of 11 telephones per 100 inhabitants and there were more than 200,000 unfilled orders for telephone installations. The situation didn&#x27;t progress much as only around 24,000 new lines were installed by 1994. Only after 1995 the state owned Moldtelecom began to upgrade their lines and stations. When in 1999 Moldtelecom became a JSC the company began a rapid upgrade process of all of their equipment and installations across the country. In 2000 around 440,000 new lines were installed and the overall power of telephone stations was increased to 645,000 numbers, at that time the average number of telephones per 100 inh. was around 16. The upgrade process to digital has also sped up and in 2008 around 83% of all stations were digital, for example in 1993 only 4% of all stations were digital. Currently all stations in the country are digital and the number of installed lines is 1,171,300 with around 33 telephones per 100 inh. In recent years however the general trend was the decrease in total number of landline subscriptions, after reaching its peak of 1,222,400 subscriptions in Q1 2014.&lt;br&gt;
Currently Moldtelecom is the dominant provider in this industry holding around 89% of the market share, the rest are shared between some ISP&#x27;s who provide triple play options to their customers, however most if not all of them rent lines from Moldtelecom.&lt;br&gt;
Until recently an open dialing plan was used but as of April 1, 2012 Moldova has implemented a closed dialing plan on all of its territory.

Landline Subscriptions and Penetration level. (2020)
* Number of Landline Subscriptions - 1,027,689 
*Penetration Level - 38.9%

Market Structure by Number of Users. (2020)
*Moldtelecom - 89.5%
*Other Providers - 10.5%

&quot;*Statistics do not include data from Transnistria.&quot;

== Mobile telephony ==

The mobile telephone market of Moldova is divided between two GSM carriers - Orange Moldova and Moldcell, and two CDMA carriers - Unité and Interdnestrcom. Orange Moldova launched its network in October 1998 under the brand of Voxtel and was the first and only carrier at the time. In April 2000 TeliaSonera entered the market with its own network under the brand of Moldcell and thus became the second carrier in the country. Moldtelecom became the third carrier when it launched its own network in March 2007 under the brand of Unité. In December 2007 another carrier named Eventis entered the market but three previous carriers have already saturated it so much that on February 5, 2010 Eventis declared bankruptcy and shut down its network.&lt;br&gt;
After the War of Transnistria in early 1990s Transnistrian government denied access of operation for many Moldavian based companies on its territory including telecommunications companies. As such the only major carrier on its territory is Interdnestrcom or IDC who began its operation in 1998.&lt;br&gt;
Unlike Internet market the state of the mobile market in the country is very poor, while coverage is not really an issue all carriers practice archaic methods that carriers in many developed countries have long since abolished, general prices are very high compared to other CIS and even EU countries with no change in this segment in many years in fact in some cases the prices have even increased, mobile Internet access is in no better condition with very high prices and very low monthly caps compared to extremely well developed and cheap wired Internet access.&lt;br&gt;
The first millionth subscription was registered in September 2005 since then the number of subscriptions has quadrupled and now amounts to around 4,323,500 which is almost 25% more than the estimated population of the country (without Transnistria), this means that the penetration level has exceeded 100%.&lt;br&gt;
In October 2008 Moldcell became the first carrier in Moldova to launch a 3G network, currently, all carriers provide 3G services throughout the country. In September 2009 Moldova became the first country in the world to launch high-definition voice services (HD voice) for mobile phones, and the first country in Europe to launch 14.4 Mbit/s mobile broadband at a national scale, with over 40% population coverage. 
On April 26, 2012, Interdnestrcom becomes the first carrier in the country to launch a commercial LTE network. On November 20, 2012, Orange became the second carrier in the country and first in official Moldova to successfully launch commercial LTE network. On December 24, 2012, Moldcell became the third carrier in the country to successfully launch a commercial LTE network. On October 22, 2015, Unité became the last carrier to launch a commercial LTE network.

Mobile Subscriptions and Penetration level. (2020)
* Total Number of Mobile Subscriptions - 4,108,207
* Number of Active Mobile Subscriptions - 3,420,383
*Penetration Level of Active Users - 129.5%

Market Structure by Number of Users. (2020)
* Orange Moldova - 55.7%
* Moldcell - 33.1%
* Moldtelecom (Unité) - 11.2%

&quot;*Statistics do not include data from Transnistria.&quot;

== Internet ==

Moldova has one of the best wired Internet connections in the world as well as one of the cheapest in terms of $ per Mbit. The overall infrastructure is well developed which allows many users to experience good quality services throughout the country. However, despite high speed availability and cheap prices the penetration level is quite low compared to many EU or CIS countries. At the end of 2015 there were 80 registered ISP&#x27;s in the country with the majority being local or regional only with only few offering their services throughout the country. Moldtelecom and StarNet are country&#x27;s leading providers sharing around 86% of the market. The remaining 14% are shared between other ISP&#x27;s like SunCommunications, Arax Communications and others. All ISP&#x27;s that offer their services across the country have their headquarters located in the capital city of Chişinău.&lt;br&gt;
Moldtelecom is the only ISP that offers its services throughout the country on a wide scale, StarNet follows offering its services in several large towns and regional centers. Other ISP&#x27;s are limited to their town or region.&lt;br&gt;
Since 2008 all mobile carriers offer 3G HSDPA Internet access throughout the country. LTE is also available in Chişinău and select regions and is provided by all carriers. While Moldtelecom and StarNet are major players on the &quot;wired Internet access&quot; market, Orange Moldova, Moldcell and Unité are major players on &quot;mobile Internet access&quot; market. However, because the general state of the mobile market in the country is rather poor the gap between prices and quality for wired and mobile Internet is extremely high.&lt;br&gt;
After the War of Transnistria in early 1990s Transnistrian government denied access of operation for many Moldavian based companies on its territory including telecommunications companies. As such the only major ISP&#x27;s in that area are local IDC or Interdnestrcom (&quot;Интерднестрком&quot;) and LinkService, both operate only on Transnistrian territory.&lt;br&gt;
The most popular wired Internet access technology is FTTx with about 72% of the market share as of 2020, xDSL comes second with about 19% of the market share. Average download speed throughout the country is estimated to be around 120 Mbit/s according to Ookla Net Metrics. In Chişinău and some regional centers speeds as high as 1 Gbit/s are easily available through FTTx.

Number of Broadband Subscriptions. (2020)
*Wired:
** Number of Wired Subscriptions - 719,001
**Penetration level - 27.2%
*Mobile:
** Number of Mobile Subscriptions - 2,371,108
**Penetration level - 89.8%

Structure of Wired Broadband Service Market, by Access Technology. (2020)
* FTTx - 72.3%
* xDSL - 19.2%
* Cable - 8.2%
* Other - 0.3%

&quot;Top Level Domain: MD&quot;

&quot;*Statistics do not include data from Transnistria.&quot;
Internet hosting service

Moldova has numerous internet hosting services:

* Alexhost (Alexhost S.R.L)
* MangoHost (IT FRUIT S.R.L)
* HOST.md (Molddata Î.S)

== Television ==
Television industry in Moldova began in 1956 with the construction of the country&#x27;s first dedicated television tower in Chişinău which took a little over a year to complete, the finished tower was 196 meters tall and could broadcast within a 60 km radius. The first television transmission was sent on 30 April 1958 at 19:00 and included amongst other things cheers from all the parties that participated in the project&#x27;s development as well as some local celebrities.

At first programs were broadcast only two times a week on Friday and Sunday but by the end of 1958 broadcasts became daily. The first live broadcast in the country also happened in 1958.

In 1961 the coverage area was expanded after several relay masts were constructed in Bălți, Cahul and Comrat. Since 1974 all broadcasts were made in color and in 1977 the first dedicated television studio was built which is still in use to this day. In the early 1980s there were more than a million citizens with access to television sets. During the Soviet era there weren&#x27;t all that many channels available with most of them being news and general purpose channels which were all state owned. The industry didn&#x27;t really change much and only after the fall of the USSR was when the television industry in the country really started to gain momentum. One of the first cable companies to begin their operation in the country was EuroCable which began its operation shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the company offered cable television to its customers with multiple local and foreign channels. EuroCable remained the dominant cable television provider until the mid 1990s when it was bought by SunCommunications which merged it with its own service and re-branded it into SunTV. Because EuroCable and later SunTV began very early they gathered a large subscription base and remain the dominant cable television provider to this day offering their services in several large towns in the country, although this might soon change as Moldtelecom is rapidly gaining momentum. During the 2000s many other Chişinău based cable television providers such as Satellit, Delta and Alfa emerged offering similar services as SunTV. In 2015 there were 83 registered television providers. In 2007 Arax Communications launched its own cable television network called Zebra TV which became the first digital network in the country, SunTV followed launching its own digital network later that year. Until recently accessing television was only possible via cable but in 2011 StarNet and Moldtelecom launched their separate IPTV services in Chişinău and other towns offering multiple channels in both SD and HD qualities. Local broadcasting has remained fairly undeveloped since the time it was first launched although progress towards better quality is quite rapid with most local channels hoping to go fully digital in the near future.

Subscriptions and Penetration level. (2020)
* Number of multichannel TV subscriptions - 360,932
*Household Penetration level - 41.0%

Structure of multichannel TV subscriptions, by reception technology. (2020)
* IPTV - 58.4%
* Cable - 41.6%
&quot;of which:&quot;
* Digital - 78.9%
* Analog - 21.1%

&quot;*Statistics do not include data from Transnistria.&quot;

== Printed media ==

The main daily newspaper in the republic, Moldova Suverană, is published by the government. Sfatul Țării is published by Parliament, which also publishes the daily Nezavisimaya Moldova in Russian. Other principal newspapers include Rabochiy Tiraspol&#x27; (in Russian, the main newspaper of the Slavs in Transnistria), Ţara, Tineretul Moldovei/Molodezh Moldovy (in Romanian and Russian), and Viaţa satului (published by the government).

The main cultural publication in Moldova is the weekly journal Literatura şi arta, published by the Union of Writers of Moldova. Other principal periodicals include Basarabia (also published by the Writers&#x27; Union), Chipăruş, Alunelul, Femeia Moldovei, Lanterna Magică, Moldova, Noi, and SudEst.

Kishinëvskiye novosti, Kodry, and Russkoye Slovo are Russian-language periodicals. Other minority-language periodicals include Prosvita and Homin in Ukrainian, Ana sözu and Cîrlangaci in Gagauz, Rodno slovo in Bulgarian, and Undzer kol/Nash golos in Yiddish and Russian. In all, 240 newspapers (ninety-seven in Romanian) and sixty-eight magazines (thirty-five in Romanian) were being published in the republic in 1990. Basa Press, an independent news service, was established in November 1992.

== General Information ==
* Fixed telephony subscriptions - 1,143,900 (2017)
* Fixed telephony penetration - 32.2% (2017)
* Mobile telephony subscriptions - 4,460,000 (2017)
* Mobile telephony penetration - 125.6% (2017)
* Wired Broadband subscriptions - 584,300 (2017)
* Wired Broadband penetration - 16.5% (2017)
* Mobile Broadband subscriptions - 2,430,078 (2017)
* Mobile Broadband penetration - 68,4% (2017)
* Internet hosts - 711,564 (2012)
* Internet Service Providers (ISP&#x27;s) - 80 (2015)
* Country code (Top level domain) - MD

== See also ==
*Internet in Moldova

==References==
==External links==
*The Ministry of Information Development of Moldova
*National Bureau of Statistic of Moldova
*National Regulatory Agency for Electronic Communications and Information Technology (ANRCETI)
*Media of Republic of Moldova
* Media Guide of the Republic of Moldova 2008 (List of publishers, news agencies and broadcasters, in Romanian and English. Also covers Transnistria.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329415" start="0" end="29" title="Telecommunications in Moldova" label="Telecommunications in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="731" end="743" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="744" end="751" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="759" end="777" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="1183" end="1186" title="joint-stock company" label="JSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142340" start="2123" end="2134" title="Triple play (telecommunications)" label="triple play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="2252" end="2269" title="Open dialling plan" label="open dialing plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="2329" end="2348" title="Closed dialing plans" label="closed dialing plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="2745" end="2748" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971178" start="2779" end="2787" title="Moldcell" label="Moldcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="2797" end="2801" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044445" start="2813" end="2818" title="Unité" label="Unité"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202030" start="2823" end="2837" title="Interdnestrcom" label="Interdnestrcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q862303" start="2979" end="2990" title="TeliaSonera" label="TeliaSonera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044445" start="3110" end="3121" title="Moldtelecom" label="Moldtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038382" start="3259" end="3266" title="Eventis" label="Eventis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="3448" end="3467" title="War of Transnistria" label="War of Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="3483" end="3495" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="4018" end="4021" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4031" end="4033" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="4710" end="4712" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971178" start="5789" end="5797" title="Moldcell" label="Moldcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044445" start="5808" end="5819" title="Moldtelecom" label="Moldtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="5917" end="5924" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6279" end="6281" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="6285" end="6288" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044445" start="6479" end="6490" title="Moldtelecom" label="Moldtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050035" start="6495" end="6502" title="StarNet" label="StarNet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6633" end="6650" title="SunCommunications" label="SunCommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="6799" end="6807" title="Chişinău" label="Chişinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="7096" end="7098" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="7099" end="7104" title="HSDPA" label="HSDPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="7617" end="7636" title="War of Transnistria" label="War of Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="7652" end="7664" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="8030" end="8034" title="FTTx" label="FTTx"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="8082" end="8086" title="xDSL" label="xDSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575658" start="8232" end="8249" title="Speedtest.net" label="Ookla Net Metrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210425" start="8836" end="8861" title="Internet hosting service" label="internet hosting services"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="8964" end="8974" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068623" start="9069" end="9085" title="television tower" label="television tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q431102" start="9578" end="9592" title="Live television" label="live broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="9717" end="9722" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q503469" start="9724" end="9729" title="Cahul" label="Cahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q241122" start="9734" end="9740" title="Comrat" label="Comrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10208" end="10212" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="10475" end="10491" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10651" end="10668" title="SunCommunications" label="SunCommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044445" start="10987" end="10998" title="Moldtelecom" label="Moldtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050035" start="11513" end="11520" title="StarNet" label="StarNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="11561" end="11565" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="11638" end="11640" title="Standard-definition television" label="SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="11645" end="11647" title="High-definition television" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496085" start="12302" end="12318" title="Moldova Suverană" label="Moldova Suverană"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459709" start="12352" end="12364" title="Sfatul Țării (newspaper)" label="Sfatul Țării"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12424" end="12436" title="Nezavisimaya" label="Nezavisimaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12448" end="12455" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12492" end="12509" title="Rabochiy Tiraspol" label="Rabochiy Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="12564" end="12576" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12585" end="12603" title="Tineretul Moldovei" label="Tineretul Moldovei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12604" end="12620" title="Molodezh Moldovy" label="Molodezh Moldovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="12625" end="12633" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12652" end="12665" title="Viaţa satului" label="Viaţa satului"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12761" end="12779" title="Literatura şi arta" label="Literatura şi arta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12794" end="12825" title="the Union of Writers of Moldova" label="the Union of Writers of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="12863" end="12872" title="Basarabia" label="Basarabia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12918" end="12926" title="Chipăruş" label="Chipăruş"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12928" end="12936" title="Alunelul" label="Alunelul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12938" end="12953" title="Femeia Moldovei" label="Femeia Moldovei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12955" end="12970" title="Lanterna Magică" label="Lanterna Magică"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12990" end="12996" title="SudEst" label="SudEst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12999" end="13020" title="Kishinëvskiye novosti" label="Kishinëvskiye novosti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13022" end="13027" title="Kodry" label="Kodry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401039" start="13033" end="13047" title="Russkoye Slovo" label="Russkoye Slovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q338683" start="13126" end="13134" title="Prosvita" label="Prosvita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13139" end="13144" title="Homin" label="Homin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13159" end="13167" title="Ana sözu" label="Ana sözu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13172" end="13182" title="Cîrlangaci" label="Cîrlangaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="13186" end="13192" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13194" end="13205" title="Rodno slovo" label="Rodno slovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="13209" end="13218" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13224" end="13234" title="Undzer kol" label="Undzer kol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13235" end="13245" title="Nash golos" label="Nash golos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="13249" end="13256" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834649" start="13418" end="13428" title="Basa Press" label="Basa Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="13997" end="14009" title="Country code" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202100" start="14051" end="14070" title="Internet in Moldova" label="Internet in Moldova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19247" wikidata="Q1274307" url="?curid=19247" title="Transport in Moldova">
<text>In 1995, the main means of transportation in Moldova were railways () and a highway system ( overall, including of paved surfaces). The major railway junctions are Chișinău, Bender, Ungheni, Ocnița, Bălți, and Basarabeasca. Primary external rail links connect the republic&#x27;s network with Odesa (in Ukraine) on the Black Sea and with the Romanian cities of Iași and Galați; they also lead northward into Ukraine. Highways link Moldova&#x27;s main cities and provide the chief means of transportation within the country, but roads are in poor repair. The country&#x27;s major airport is in Chișinău.

Shipping is possible on the lower Prut and Nistru rivers, but water transportation plays only a modest role in the country&#x27;s transportation system. In 1990 a total of 317 million tonkilometers of freight were carried on inland waterways as compared with 15,007 million ton-kilometers on railways and 1,673 million ton-kilometers on roads.

The movement of manufactured goods and of passengers on all means of transportation started to decline in 1989. From 1993 to 1994, for example, the total amount of transported goods fell by 31 percent, passenger traffic decreased by 28 percent, and the number of passengers declined by 24 percent. The main causes for these declines are the high cost of transportation, a lack of fuels, and the poor state of Moldova&#x27;s transportation infrastructure: approximately 20 percent of Moldova&#x27;s roads are considered in a critical technical state.

== Railways ==


&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;broad gauge:&quot;
 of gauge (2005)
The entire length of the Moldovan railway network is single track and not electrified. Much of the railway infrastructure is still in a poor state, all of the rolling stock being inherited from the former Soviet Union. Average commercial speed for passenger trains is (including stops). However, substantial investments was made in building new railway lines since 2003, with the goal of connecting Chișinău to southern Moldova and eventually to the Giurgiulești oil terminal. The first such segment was the Revaca–Căinari line, opened in 2006.

Connections exist to Ukraine at Kuchurhan, Mohilyv-Podil&#x27;s&#x27;ky, Ocnița. The track between Basarabeasca and Reni crosses the border back and forth. The Kuchurhan crossing as well as the Tighina–Tiraspol–Kuchurhan segment are under the control of the Transnistrian separatist authorities, the circulation of trains on the route depending on the level of political tensions between the separatists and the Government of Moldova.

Between Moldova and Romania there is a break-of-gauge (Romania employing standard gauge). The most important crossing (including gauge changing equipment) is Ungheni–Iași, another two are Cantemir–Fălciu and Giurgiulești–Galați. International passenger trains run to Bucharest, Kyiv, Minsk and used to travel to Saint Petersburg and Moscow.

In 2022/23 major investment, supported by the EU, is being undertaken to renovate rail lines to provide freight facilities for Ukraine to connect with Constanța to export grain and import fuel.

The EU proposed in 2023 that their Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) be extended to Moldova and onwards to Ukraine with a standard gauge (1435mm) rail line, to assist in the integration of Moldova with EU rail networks. Starting with the Ungheni, on the border with Romania, to Chisinau, by laying a new line alongside the existing 1520mm track, to avoid disruption.

== Highways ==

Moldova requires use of vignettes (&quot;roviniete&quot;) on all public roads, inside and outside localities, as a form of road tolling for non-Moldovan vehicles.

&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;paved:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;unpaved:&quot;
 (2003)

== Waterways ==
* (on the Dniester River) (2005). Parts fully under control of the separatist Transnistrian authorities.
*a tiny () access to the Danube at Giurgiulești.

== Pipelines ==
Natural gas (2021) 

Moldova began importing gas from Romania in December 2022 through the Iași–Chișinău pipeline, connecting to the European energy system, began exporting gas to Ukraine in February 2023 and disconnected from Russia gas lines in May 2023.

== Ports and harbours ==
Moldova has one small oil terminal on the Danube at Giurgiulești (Cahul), compatible with small seagoing vessels. The harbor was opened in 2006 and occupies the entire Moldovan stretch of the river (less than ), with a mixed-gauge rail loading/unloading facilities. Run by Danube Logistics, which is owned by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

== Merchant marine ==
Statistics for 2021: 
* 147 ships with total . 
* 2,526 seafarers. 

== Airports ==


3 operational airports (2021 est.). The main airport (Chișinău International Airport) has over 10 busy international destinations (with 2.9 million passengers carried on 27,000 flights in 2019).

=== Airports - with paved runways ===
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
7
&lt;br&gt;&quot;over :&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under :&quot;
1 (2006 est.)

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
6
&lt;br&gt;&quot;:&quot;
3
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under :&quot;
3 (2006 est.)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="45" end="52" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="164" end="172" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="174" end="180" title="Bender, Moldova" label="Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q858713" start="182" end="189" title="Ungheni" label="Ungheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q993697" start="191" end="197" title="Ocnița" label="Ocnița"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="199" end="204" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q809787" start="210" end="222" title="Basarabeasca" label="Basarabeasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="293" end="298" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="303" end="310" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="342" end="349" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="361" end="365" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="370" end="376" title="Galați" label="Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="408" end="415" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="593" end="601" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="638" end="642" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="647" end="653" title="Nistru" label="Nistru"/>
<link wikidata="Q142200" start="1624" end="1640" title="Calea Ferată din Moldova" label="Moldovan railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="1673" end="1684" title="Railway electrification" label="electrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="1998" end="2006" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="2049" end="2061" title="Giurgiulești" label="Giurgiulești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628984" start="2107" end="2113" title="Revaca" label="Revaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377759" start="2114" end="2121" title="Căinari" label="Căinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2166" end="2173" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006054" start="2177" end="2186" title="Kuchurhan, Rozdilna Raion" label="Kuchurhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q997469" start="2188" end="2216" title="Mohilyv-Podil&amp;#x27;s&amp;#x27;ky" label="Mohilyv-Podil&amp;#x27;s&amp;#x27;ky"/>
<link wikidata="Q993697" start="2218" end="2224" title="Ocnița" label="Ocnița"/>
<link wikidata="Q809787" start="2244" end="2256" title="Basarabeasca" label="Basarabeasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q890311" start="2261" end="2265" title="Reni, Ukraine" label="Reni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="2339" end="2346" title="Tighina" label="Tighina"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="2347" end="2355" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="2403" end="2416" title="Transnistrian" label="Transnistrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959245" start="2620" end="2634" title="break-of-gauge" label="break-of-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="2654" end="2668" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918337" start="2710" end="2734" title="Bogie exchange" label="gauge changing equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q858713" start="2739" end="2746" title="Ungheni" label="Ungheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="2747" end="2751" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250055" start="2769" end="2777" title="Cantemir, Moldova" label="Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724790" start="2778" end="2784" title="Fălciu" label="Fălciu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="2789" end="2801" title="Giurgiulești" label="Giurgiulești"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="2802" end="2808" title="Galați" label="Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2848" end="2857" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="2859" end="2863" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="2865" end="2870" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2893" end="2909" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2914" end="2920" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="3074" end="3083" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q858713" start="3363" end="3370" title="Ungheni" label="Ungheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q260866" start="3533" end="3542" title="Vignette (road tax)" label="vignettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="3799" end="3807" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="3919" end="3925" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q18540367" start="4051" end="4073" title="Iași–Chișinău pipeline" label="Iași–Chișinău pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="4285" end="4291" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="4295" end="4307" title="Giurgiulești" label="Giurgiulești"/>
<link wikidata="Q503469" start="4309" end="4314" title="Cahul" label="Cahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="4556" end="4604" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q844951" start="4769" end="4799" title="Chișinău International Airport" label="Chișinău International Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19248" wikidata="Q619232" url="?curid=19248" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of Moldova">
<text>The [[Armed Forces]] of the [[Moldova|Republic of Moldova]] () consist of the National Army (which is divided into the Land Forces Command and the Air Forces Command) and the Trupele de Carabinieri under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Until 2012, the Moldovan Border Police (then known as the Border Troops) belonged to the armed forces.

== History ==

On 2 November 1990, prior to the formation of the state of Moldova, the Supreme Soviet of the Moldovan SSR ordered creation of the &quot;Republican Guard&quot; (Romanian: Garda Republicană) as a militarized government agency. This force subsequently became the Moldovan military upon independence.

Moldova has accepted all relevant arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union. On October 30, 1992, Moldova ratified the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of conventional military equipment and provides for the destruction of weapons in excess of those limits. It acceded to the provisions of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in October 1994 in Washington, DC. It does not have nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons.

Moldova joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization&#x27;s Partnership for Peace on March 16, 1994.

A transition to a professional force of 12,000 to 15,000 volunteers was planned at first, but when fighting erupted in 1991 between supporters of the central government in Chișinău and supporters of separatist regions (Transnistria conflict), males between eighteen and forty years of age were mobilized, and the size of Moldova&#x27;s military was temporarily expanded to meet the demands of the Transnistria War. In early 1995, the armed forces totaled some 11,000 volunteers, and there were plans to gradually create a professional army.

Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine and a series of explosions in Transnistria in 2022, the President of Moldova Maia Sandu declared on 27 April of that year that the Moldovan army had been left largely neglected for three decades and that it was unable to defend Moldova in the face of danger. She said the Moldovan army would go through a process of modernization and professionalization in the future. Later, on 4 May, the President of the European Council Charles Michel said that the European Union would provide aid to Moldova, including additional military equipment for its armed forces. The support would come from the Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace and would not include lethal weaponry. This caused controversy among the socialist opposition leaders of the time, who strove for further cooperation with Russia.

== General Staff ==
The General Staff of the National Army is currently composed of the following:

* Headquarters of the General Staff (Chișinău)
** Land Force Command
** Air Force Command
* Personnel Directorate
* Operations Directorate
* Logistics Directorate
* Strategic Planning Directorate
* Communication and Information Systems Directorate
* Education, Training and Doctrine Directorate
* Planning, Finance and Monitoring
* Legal Section
* Medical Section
* Military police

==Structure==
===National Army===
====Land Force Command====

At the beginning of 1994, the Moldovan Ground Forces (under the Ministry of Defense) consisted of 9,800 men organized into three motor rifle brigades, one artillery brigade, and one reconnaissance/assault battalion. The Library of Congress Country Studies wrote that its armaments consisted of fifty-six ballistic missile defenses; seventy-seven armored personnel carriers and sixty-seven &quot;look-alikes.&quot; (&quot;Look-alikes&quot; is a Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty term denoting modifications of armored personnel carriers for specialised missions such as anti-tank missile carriage, reconnaissance, or engineer duties). This data appears garbled; in the 1995/96 edition of the IISS &quot;Military Balance&quot;, armored infantry fighting vehicles were listed as 54 BMDs (Boyevaya Mashina Desanta, Airborne Combat Vehicle), there were sundry armored personnel carriers, and 67 &quot;look-alikes&quot;.

Artillery included eighteen 122 mm and fifty-three 152 mm towed artillery units; nine 120 mm combined guns/mortars; seventy AT-4 Spigot, nineteen AT-5 Spandrel, and twenty-seven AT-6 Spiral anti-tank guided weapons; one hundred thirty-eight 73 mm SPG-9 recoilless launcher, forty-five MT-12 100 mm anti-tank guns; and thirty ZU-23 23 mm and twelve S-60 57 mm air defense guns. Moldova has received some arms from former Soviet stocks maintained on the territory of the republic as well as undetermined quantities of arms from Romania, particularly at the height of the fighting with Transnistria.

By 2006–7, the Moldovan Ground Forces had been reduced to a strength of 5,710, including three motor rifle brigades, one artillery brigade, and independent Special forces and engineer battalions, plus an independent guard unit. Equipment and weaponry included 44 BMD-1 AIFVs, and 266 APCs, including 91 TAB-71s, as well as 227 artillery pieces.

In 2022, during the Russian war in Ukraine, various Western countries pledged to support Moldova&#x27;s territorial integrity and provide energy and military aid. During a visit to Chișinau, German Defense Minister Christine Lambrecht said that Germany is prepared to offer purchases of drones and military training to Moldova. Later that month, Moldovan Defense Minister Anatolie Nosatii expressed that 90 percent of Moldova&#x27;s military equipment dates back to the Soviet era and is in need of urgent replacement. He also mentioned that the armed forces face equipment shortages due to insufficient funding.

====Air Force Command====
In 1994 the Moldovan Air Force consisted of 1,300 men organized into one fighter regiment, one helicopter squadron, and one missile brigade. Armaments used by the air force included thirty-one MiG-29 Fulcrum aircraft, eight Mi-8 Hip helicopters, five transport aircraft (including an Antonov An-72 Coaler), and twenty-five SA-3 Goa/SA-5 Gammon surface-to-air missiles.

The 86th Guards Fighter Aviation Regiment had been located at Mărculești since October 1951, and had been reequipped with MiG-29s in 1988. It had been part of the 119th Fighter Aviation Division, which had been resubordinated to the Soviet Black Sea Fleet since December 1989.

The United States purchased twenty-one of the MiG-29s in October 1997 to prevent their sale on the world market and for research purposes. All the spare parts for those aircraft were also purchased, as were the accompanying 500 air-to-air missiles.
 All the aircraft were transported from Moldova to the National Air Intelligence Center (NAIC) at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base near Dayton, Ohio, in Boeing C-17 Globemaster III transport planes over a period of two weeks.

 all the MiG-29 fighters had either been sold or scrapped, and the Moldovan Air Force had only 2 An-2 Colts, 1 An-26 Curl, 2 An-72 Coalers, 8 Mi-8 Hips, and 12 SA-3 &#x27;Goa&#x27; SAMs in service, manned by 1,040 personnel.

===Carabinieri===
The Trupele de Carabinieri is the gendarmerie-type force of the military, based on the Italian Carabinieri. The Moldovan Carabinieri is designed to ensure, together with the General Police Inspectorate or independently, public order and the protection of rights and freedoms of citizens.

=== Other forces ===

====Border Police====

The Moldovan Border Police was founded on 3 September 1991, being entrusted to the Ministry of National Security under the subordination of the subunit of the former Soviet Border Troops deployed on Moldovan territory. On 11 January 1992, Colonel in June 1992, the Border Troops became an official separate branch of the armed forces, In December 1999, it was reorganized into the Department of the Border Guard Troops of Moldova and was withdrawn from the Ministry of National Security a month and a half later. On 1 July 2012, Prime Minister Vlad Filat ordered its shift from the armed forces to the internal affairs ministry.

====Danube Force====
The Danube Forces of Moldova is a small militarized river flotilla. It is based in the port of Giurgiulesti. They have at their disposal several unarmed and auxiliary boats of various types.

== Equipment ==

As part of NATO&#x27;s Defence and Related Security Capacity Building Initiative since 2014, the Moldovan Armed Forces are receiving modest amounts of equipment from the alliance. The large part of Moldova&#x27;s military equipment, however, is of Soviet origin and in need of replacement. The country has no defence-industrial capabilities beyond the basic maintenance of front-line equipment.

With the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the European Union pledged to increase its military aid. As of June 2023, more than €87 million were provided in support for the modernisation of the defence sector.

==Professional holidays==
On 3 September, the National Army marks its professional holiday, &quot;Ziua Armatei Naționale&quot; (Day of the National Army). The President of Moldova as well as the Prime Minister of Moldova usually present congratulations to all active servicemen. On September 2, the Ministry of Defense organizes large demonstrations on the occasion of holiday. Military and civilian staff lay flowers at the Stephen the Great Monument and the Eternity Memorial Complex. There is also a ceremony of the decoration of state and National Army distinctions, as well as honor diplomas to the best military and civilian employees. Festive activities are also organized in Balti, Cahul, Edineţ and Ungheni, in common with the local public administrations. In 2018, the National Army Day silver jubilee celebrations were held at the base of the 1st Motorized Infantry Brigade &quot;Moldova&quot; in Bălți.

On 2 March, the armed forces celebrates its Remembrance Day, which honours the memory of the Transnistria War. Remembrance Day events are usually organized throughout the country from 1–4 March. Flowers are usually laid at the Stephen the Great Monument. The participants have also organized the Memory March, walking from Great National Assembly Square to the Maica Indurerata (Grieving Mother) Monument at Eternitate Memorial.

==Military awards==

*Medal &quot;10 years of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Moldova&quot;
*Veteran of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Moldova
*Medal &quot;For service to the Motherland&quot;
*Medal &quot;For the strengthening of the military community&quot;
*Medal &quot;For the Merit of the Carabinieri&quot;
*Medal &quot;For Impeccable Service in the Ministry of Internal Affairs&quot;
*Medal &quot;15th anniversary of the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan&quot;
*Medal &quot;10 years of the War in Transnistria&quot; 
*Medal &quot;10 years of the Border Troops&quot;
*Medal &quot;10 years of the Moldavian Army&quot;
*Medal &quot;10 years of the Carabinieri Troops&quot;
*Commemorative Medal &quot;75 years since the victory in the Second World War
*Commemorative Medal &quot;The 70th anniversary of the victory over fascism in the World War II&quot;

==Veterans’ organizations==
Moldovans who served in WWII, the Soviet–Afghan War, as liquidators at the Chernobyl disaster, and the Transnistrian War are eligible for a range of benefits such as discounts, medical services, and free use of public transportation. In 1990, the Republican Council of Soldiers-Internationalists was created, it was headed by the military commissar of the then Oktyabrsky District of Chișinău, Colonel Vitaly Zavgorodniy, a veteran of the war in Afghanistan. The Union of Veterans of the War in Afghanistan of the Republic of Moldova is a veteran&#x27;s group based in Moldova that advocates for the well-being of veterans of the Afghan War. On 15 May 2000, after the Government&#x27;s initiative to abolish benefits for veterans of the war in Afghanistan, sympathizers went to Great National Assembly Square. In 2001, the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova, which came to power, radically changed the position of all veterans in the country.

==Foreign forces==
Other military forces also remain within Moldova. In early 1994, the government of Transnistria had armed forces of about 5,000 which included the Dniester battalion of the Republic Guard and some 1,000 Cossacks.

As of early 1994, the former Soviet 14th Guards Army (about 9,200 troops) consisted of one army headquarters, the 59th Guards Motor Rifle Division, one tank battalion, one artillery regiment, and one anti-aircraft brigade. Their equipment and weaponry consisted of 120 main battle tanks, 180 armoured fighting vehicles, and 130 artillery pieces/multiple rocket launchers/mortars. The remainder of the 14th Guards Army had been over the border in Ukraine and was absorbed by the Ukrainian armed forces.

Around 1994, peacekeepers in Transnistria consisted of six airborne battalions supplied by Russia, three infantry battalions supplied by Moldova, and three airborne battalions supplied by Transnistria.

Since 2007 the Russian force, now designated the Operational Group of Russian Forces in Moldova, under the command of the Western Military District had withered away to a strength of some 1500 which included two motor rifle battalions, an independent security and support battalion, a helicopter detachment and several smaller, administrative detachments.

==See also==
* Moldova–NATO relations

==References==

== External links ==
*Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Moldova
*MDNationalArmy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q619232" start="4" end="59" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of Moldova" label="[[Armed Forces]] of the [[Moldova|Republic of Moldova]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q20431302" start="78" end="91" title="Moldovan National Army" label="National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064785" start="119" end="138" title="Moldovan Ground Forces" label="Land Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988547" start="147" end="165" title="Moldovan Air Force" label="Air Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848012" start="175" end="197" title="Trupele de Carabinieri" label="Trupele de Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294302" start="208" end="236" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs (Moldova)" label="Ministry of Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20430087" start="254" end="276" title="Moldovan Border Police" label="Moldovan Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="518" end="526" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="656" end="663" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="729" end="741" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q834195" start="785" end="830" title="Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe" label="Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="1031" end="1063" title="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" label="nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1083" end="1097" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1178" end="1212" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="1220" end="1241" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="1434" end="1442" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q82973" start="1481" end="1502" title="Transnistria conflict" label="Transnistria conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="1659" end="1675" title="Transnistria War" label="Transnistria War"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="1818" end="1845" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111724016" start="1850" end="1872" title="2022 Transnistria attacks" label="a series of explosions"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="1876" end="1888" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="1902" end="1922" title="President of Moldova" label="President of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="1923" end="1933" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="2236" end="2269" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q950958" start="2270" end="2284" title="Charles Michel" label="Charles Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2299" end="2313" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="2786" end="2794" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="3115" end="3130" title="Military police" label="Military police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064785" start="3224" end="3246" title="Moldovan Ground Forces" label="Moldovan Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="3410" end="3449" title="The Library of Congress Country Studies" label="The Library of Congress Country Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="3498" end="3515" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="3540" end="3565" title="armored personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q834195" start="3638" end="3674" title="Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty" label="Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="3888" end="3892" title="IISS" label="IISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q796336" start="3976" end="3979" title="BMD-1" label="BMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="4052" end="4077" title="armored personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="4177" end="4186" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="4220" end="4226" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q298656" start="4237" end="4248" title="AT-4 Spigot" label="AT-4 Spigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q298659" start="4259" end="4272" title="AT-5 Spandrel" label="AT-5 Spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q298671" start="4291" end="4302" title="AT-6 Spiral" label="AT-6 Spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="4303" end="4312" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781096" start="4360" end="4365" title="SPG-9" label="SPG-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q477295" start="4398" end="4403" title="MT-12" label="MT-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q697521" start="4438" end="4443" title="ZU-23" label="ZU-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q682874" start="4461" end="4465" title="57 mm AZP S-60" label="S-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4639" end="4646" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064785" start="4726" end="4748" title="Moldovan Ground Forces" label="Moldovan Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q796336" start="4974" end="4979" title="BMD-1" label="BMD-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083648" start="5272" end="5291" title="Christine Lambrecht" label="Christine Lambrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q108213037" start="5429" end="5445" title="Anatolie Nosatîi" label="Anatolie Nosatii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988547" start="5709" end="5727" title="Moldovan Air Force" label="Moldovan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="5890" end="5904" title="MiG-29 Fulcrum" label="MiG-29 Fulcrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="5921" end="5925" title="Mil Mi-8" label="Mi-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q572590" start="5981" end="5994" title="Antonov An-72" label="Antonov An-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q312471" start="6020" end="6028" title="SA-3 Goa" label="SA-3 Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q326673" start="6029" end="6040" title="SA-5 Gammon" label="SA-5 Gammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="6041" end="6063" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q19907298" start="6071" end="6108" title="86th Guards Fighter Aviation Regiment" label="86th Guards Fighter Aviation Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608314" start="6129" end="6139" title="Mărculești" label="Mărculești"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="6307" end="6322" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6349" end="6362" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="6692" end="6723" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="6729" end="6741" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q211369" start="6746" end="6773" title="Boeing C-17 Globemaster III" label="Boeing C-17 Globemaster III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988547" start="6887" end="6905" title="Moldovan Air Force" label="Moldovan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848012" start="7068" end="7090" title="Trupele de Carabinieri" label="Trupele de Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="7098" end="7109" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="7151" end="7170" title="Italian Carabinieri" label="Italian Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503265" start="7238" end="7265" title="General Police Inspectorate" label="General Police Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20430087" start="7402" end="7424" title="Moldovan Border Police" label="Moldovan Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355627" start="7564" end="7584" title="Soviet Border Troops" label="Soviet Border Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q57685" start="7942" end="7952" title="Vlad Filat" label="Vlad Filat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="8144" end="8156" title="Giurgiulesti" label="Giurgiulesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="8269" end="8273" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8506" end="8512" title="USSR" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="8663" end="8690" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8696" end="8710" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="9018" end="9038" title="President of Moldova" label="President of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="9054" end="9079" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="Prime Minister of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343360" start="9284" end="9310" title="Stephen the Great Monument" label="Stephen the Great Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058860" start="9319" end="9344" title="Eternity Memorial Complex, Chișinău" label="Eternity Memorial Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="9542" end="9547" title="Bălți" label="Balti"/>
<link wikidata="Q503469" start="9549" end="9554" title="Cahul" label="Cahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150271" start="9556" end="9562" title="Edineţ" label="Edineţ"/>
<link wikidata="Q858713" start="9567" end="9574" title="Ungheni" label="Ungheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550874" start="9656" end="9670" title="silver jubilee" label="silver jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12722955" start="9713" end="9763" title="1st Motorized Infantry Brigade &amp;quot;Moldova&amp;quot;" label="1st Motorized Infantry Brigade &amp;quot;Moldova&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="9767" end="9772" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="9868" end="9884" title="Transnistria War" label="Transnistria War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343360" start="10002" end="10028" title="Stephen the Great Monument" label="Stephen the Great Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545425" start="10098" end="10128" title="Great National Assembly Square, Chișinău" label="Great National Assembly Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058860" start="10171" end="10202" title="Eternity Memorial Complex, Chișinău" label="Monument at Eternitate Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="10713" end="10732" title="War in Transnistria" label="War in Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="11136" end="11153" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377734" start="11158" end="11169" title="Liquidator (Chernobyl)" label="liquidators"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="11177" end="11195" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545425" start="11880" end="11910" title="Great National Assembly Square, Chișinău" label="Great National Assembly Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q750116" start="11925" end="11971" title="Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova" label="Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="12280" end="12288" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q187311" start="12327" end="12343" title="14th Guards Army" label="14th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031870" start="12405" end="12437" title="59th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="59th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="12491" end="12504" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="12560" end="12576" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="12583" end="12608" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21643625" start="13046" end="13092" title="Operational Group of Russian Forces in Moldova" label="Operational Group of Russian Forces in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566413" start="13119" end="13144" title="Western Military District" label="Western Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q302666" start="13369" end="13391" title="Moldova–NATO relations" label="Moldova–NATO relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="13458" end="13477" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19249" wikidata="Q2280968" url="?curid=19249" title="Foreign relations of Moldova">
<text>After achieving independence from the Soviet Union, the Republic of Moldova established relations with other European countries. A course for European Union integration and neutrality define the country&#x27;s foreign policy guidelines.

In 1995, the country became the first post-Soviet state admitted to the Council of Europe. In addition to its participation in NATO&#x27;s Partnership for Peace program, Moldova is a member state of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the North Atlantic Cooperation Council, the World Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Francophonie and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

In 2005, Moldova and EU established an action plan that sought to improve the collaboration between the two neighboring structures. After the Transnistria War, Moldova sought a peaceful resolution to the Transnistria conflict by working with Romania, Ukraine, and Russia, calling for international mediation, and cooperating with the OSCE and UN fact-finding and observer missions.

==Overview==
List of countries which Moldova maintains diplomatic relations with:
===Relations with the European Union===

Moldova aspires to join the European Union and is implementing its first three-year Action Plan within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) of the EU.

As regards to its energy policy, Moldova was an observer to the treaty establishing Energy Community from the outset (2006). Following its interest in full membership, the European Commission was mandated to carry out negotiations with Moldova in 2007. In December 2009, the Energy Community Ministerial Council decided on the accession, but made it conditional to amendment of Moldova&#x27;s gas law. Moldova joined the Energy Community as a full-fledged member in March 2010.

===Relations with NATO===

NATO relations with Moldova date back to 1992, when the country joined the North Atlantic Cooperation Council. Moldova works alongside NATO allies and partner countries in a wide range of areas through the Partnership for Peace and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council.

===Relations with post-Soviet states===
The Moldovan Parliament approved the country&#x27;s membership in the Commonwealth of Independent States and the CIS charter on economic union in April 1994. Moldova however has never participated in any military aspects of CIS, citing its neutral status.

In 1998, Moldova contributed to the founding of GUAM, a regional cooperation agreement made up of Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova. Although the agreement initially included a declaration of mutual defense, Moldova has since declared its disinterest in participating in any GUAM-based mutual defense initiative.

Russia continues to maintain a military presence in the Transnistrian region of Moldova, despite previous agreements with Moldova and within OSCE and CAF to withdraw its troops and ammunition.

Moldova was granted Observer Status in the Russian-led Eurasian Union in April 2017.

===Relations with Transnistria===

The territory of Moldova includes the separatist Transnistria region. Transnistria had a particularly large non-Moldovan population (about 60%) and broke away from Moldova less than a year after Moldova became independent at the fall of the Soviet Union. The Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic controls main part of this region, and also the city of Bender and its surrounding localities on the west bank. The international diplomatic situation with respect to the question of Transnistria determines and is determined by Moldova&#x27;s relations with Russia. Russia, Ukraine, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, EU, and United States are involved at different degrees in the conflict resolution.

===Relations with the United Kingdom===
On 20 November 2024, Moldova and the United Kingdom signed a Defence and Security Partnership.

==Bilateral relations==

===Multilateral===
===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
===Oceania===
==See also==
*List of diplomatic missions in Moldova
*List of diplomatic missions of Moldova
*List of Ambassadors to Moldova

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* Moldovan Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

==Further reading==
* Baltag, Dorina. &quot;EU external representation post-Lisbon: the performance of EU diplomacy in Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine.&quot; &quot;The Hague Journal of Diplomacy&quot; 13.1 (2018): 75-96. online
* Baltag, Dorina. &quot;Practice and performance: EU diplomacy in Moldova, Ukraine and Belarus after the inauguration of the European External Action Service, 2010–2015&quot; (Diss. Loughborough University, 2018.) online
* Cozma, Artur. &quot;The Diplomacy of the Republic of Moldova during 1944-2001.&quot; (2007). online 
* Del Medico, Nicola. &quot;A Black Knight in the Eastern Neighbourhood? Russia and EU Democracy Promotion in Armenia and Moldova.&quot; (EU Diplomacy Paper No. 7) (2014). online
* Ejova, Cristina, and Anastasia Eșanu. &quot;Public diplomacy of the European Union and its reflection in the Republic of Moldova.&quot; &quot;Moldoscopie&quot; 92.1 (2021): 43-53. online
* Löwenhardt, John. &quot;The OSCE, Moldova and Russian diplomacy in 2003.&quot; &quot;Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics&quot; 20.4 (2004): 103-112.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="38" end="50" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="56" end="75" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="142" end="156" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5391415" start="157" end="168" title="Moldova-European Union relations" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q124652347" start="173" end="183" title="Moldovan neutrality" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="276" end="293" title="post-Soviet states" label="post-Soviet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="310" end="327" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="365" end="369" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="377" end="398" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q160016" start="421" end="433" title="UN member" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="441" end="455" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="461" end="513" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="526" end="560" title="North Atlantic Cooperation Council" label="North Atlantic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="566" end="590" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="596" end="623" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="629" end="639" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="645" end="657" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="666" end="714" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="859" end="875" title="Transnistria War" label="Transnistria War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82973" start="921" end="942" title="Transnistria conflict" label="Transnistria conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="959" end="966" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="968" end="975" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="1347" end="1376" title="European Neighbourhood Policy" label="European Neighbourhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989312" start="1816" end="1832" title="Energy Community" label="Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="1976" end="2010" title="North Atlantic Cooperation Council" label="North Atlantic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="2107" end="2128" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="2137" end="2170" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="2283" end="2317" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q124652347" start="2453" end="2460" title="Moldovan neutrality" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q326816" start="2518" end="2522" title="GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development" label="GUAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="2568" end="2575" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2577" end="2584" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="2586" end="2596" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="2601" end="2608" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173083" start="3040" end="3054" title="Eurasian Union" label="Eurasian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="3155" end="3167" title="Transnistria (geographical region)" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="3335" end="3359" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="fall of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="3365" end="3398" title="Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic" label="Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192176" start="3455" end="3461" title="Bender, Moldova" label="Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3673" end="3680" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="3682" end="3734" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433572" start="4081" end="4119" title="List of diplomatic missions in Moldova" label="List of diplomatic missions in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981638" start="4121" end="4159" title="List of diplomatic missions of Moldova" label="List of diplomatic missions of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561304" start="4161" end="4191" title="List of Ambassadors to Moldova" label="List of Ambassadors to Moldova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19250" wikidata="Q47863" url="?curid=19250" title="Midway Atoll">
<text>Midway Atoll (colloquial: Midway Islands; ; ) is a atoll in the North Pacific Ocean. Midway Atoll is an insular area of the United States and is an unorganized and unincorporated territory. The largest island is Sand Island, which has housing and an airstrip. Immediately east of Sand Island, across the narrow Brooks Channel, is Eastern Island, which is uninhabited and no longer has any facilities. Forming a rough, incomplete circle around the two main islands and creating Midway Lagoon is Spit Island, a narrow reef.

Roughly equidistant between North America and Asia, Midway is the only island in the Hawaiian Archipelago that is not part of the state of Hawaii. Unlike the other Hawaiian islands, Midway observes Samoa Time (UTC−11:00, i.e., eleven hours behind Coordinated Universal Time), which is one hour behind the time in the Hawaii–Aleutian Time Zone used in Hawaii. For statistical purposes, Midway is grouped as one of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. The Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge, encompassing of land and water in the surrounding area, is administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS). The refuge and surrounding area are part of the larger Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument.

From 1941 until 1993, the atoll was the home of Naval Air Facility Midway Island, which played a crucial role in the Battle of Midway, June 4–6, 1942. Aircraft based at the then-named Henderson Field on Eastern Island joined with United States Navy ships and planes in an attack on a Japanese battle group that sank four carriers and one heavy cruiser and defended the atoll from invasion. The battle was a critical Allied victory and a significant turning point of the Pacific campaign of World War II.

About 50 people live on Sand Island: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service staff and contract workers. Visiting the atoll is possible only for business reasons, which includes permanent and temporary staff, contractors, and volunteers, as the tourism program has been suspended due to budget cutbacks. In 2012, the last year that the visitor program was in operation, 332 people made the trip to Midway. Tours focused on the unique ecology of Midway and its military history. The economy is derived solely from governmental sources. Nearly all supplies must be brought to the island by ship or plane, although a hydroponic greenhouse and garden supply some fresh fruits and vegetables.

==Location==
As its name suggests, Midway is roughly equidistant between North America and Asia and lies almost halfway around the world longitudinally from Greenwich, England. It is near the northwestern end of the Hawaiian archipelago, northwest of Honolulu, Hawaii, and about one-third of the way from Honolulu to Tokyo, Japan. Unlike the rest of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, Midway is not part of the State of Hawaii due to the Hawaiian Organic Act of 1900 that formally annexed Hawaii to the United States as a territory, which defined Hawaii as &quot;the islands acquired by the United States of America under an Act of Congress entitled &#x27;Joint resolution to provide for annexing the Hawaiian Islands to the United States,&#x27;&quot; referring to the Newlands Resolution of 1898. While it could be argued that Midway became part of Hawaii when Captain N.C. Brooks of the sealing ship &quot;Gambia&quot; sighted it in 1859, it was assumed at the time that Midway was independently acquired by the United States when Captain William Reynolds of visited in 1867, and thus not part of the Hawaii Territory.

In defining which islands the state of Hawaii would inherit from the Territory, the Hawaii Admission Act of 1959 clarified the question, specifically excluding Midway (along with Palmyra Island, Johnston Island, and Kingman Reef) from the jurisdiction of the state.

Midway Atoll is approximately east of the International Date Line, about west of San Francisco, and east of Tokyo.

==Geography and geology==


Midway Atoll is part of a chain of volcanic islands, atolls, and seamounts extending from the Island of Hawaii up to the tip of the Aleutian Islands and known as the Hawaiian–Emperor seamount chain, between Pearl and Hermes Atoll and Kure Atoll in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. It consists of a ring-shaped barrier reef nearly in diameter and several sand islets. The two significant pieces of land, Sand Island and Eastern Island, provide a habitat for millions of seabirds. The island sizes are shown in the table above. The atoll, which has a small population (approximately 60 in 2014, but no indigenous inhabitants), is designated an &quot;insular area&quot; under the authority of the United States Department of the Interior.

Midway was formed roughly 28 million years ago when the seabed underneath it was over the same hotspot from which the Island of Hawaii is now being formed. Midway was once a shield volcano, perhaps as large as the island of Lanai. As the volcano piled up, lava flows built the island, its weight depressed the crust, and the island slowly subsided for millions of years, a process known as isostatic adjustment.

As the island subsided, a coral reef around the former volcanic island could maintain itself near sea level by growing upwards. That reef is now over thick (in the lagoon, , composed mostly of post-Miocene limestones with a layer of upper Miocene (Tertiary &quot;g&quot;) sediments and lower Miocene (Tertiary &quot;e&quot;) limestones at the bottom overlying the basalts). What remains today is a shallow water atoll about across. Following Kure Atoll, Midway is the 2nd most northerly atoll in the world.

===Infrastructure===
The atoll has some of roads, of pipelines, one port on Sand Island (World Port Index Nr. 56328, MIDWAY ISLAND), and an airfield. Henderson Field airfield at Midway Atoll, with its one active runway (rwy 06/24, around long) has been designated as an emergency diversion airport for aircraft flying under ETOPS rules. Although the FWS closed all airport operations on November22, 2004, public access to the island was restored in March 2008.

Eastern Island Airstrip is a disused airfield used by U.S. forces during the Battle of Midway. It is mostly constructed of Marston Mat and was built by the United States Navy Seabees.

==Climate==
Despite being located at 28°12′N, which is north of the Tropic of Cancer, Midway Atoll has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen &quot;As&quot;) with very pleasant year-round temperatures. Rainfall is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, with only one month (June) having an average annual precipitation of less than .
==History==
Midway has no indigenous inhabitants and was uninhabited until the 19th century.

===19th century===
The atoll was sighted on July 5, 1859, by Captain N.C. Brooks, of the sealing ship &quot;Gambia&quot;. The islands were named the &quot;Middlebrook Islands&quot;. Brooks claimed Midway for the United States under the Guano Islands Act of 1856, which authorized Americans to occupy uninhabited islands temporarily to obtain guano. There is no record of any attempt to mine guano on the island. On August28, 1867, Captain William Reynolds of formally took possession of the atoll for the United States; the name changed to &quot;Midway&quot; some time after this. The atoll was the first Pacific island annexed by the United States as the Unincorporated Territory of Midway Island and was administered by the United States Navy.
The first attempt at settlement was in 1870 when the Pacific Mail Steamship Company started a project of blasting and dredging a ship channel through the reef to the lagoon using money put up by the United States Congress. The purpose was to establish a mid-ocean coaling station to avoid the high taxes imposed at ports controlled by the Kingdom of Hawai&#x27;i. The project was a failure, and the evacuated the channel project&#x27;s workforce in October 1870. The ship ran aground on 21 October at Kure Atoll, stranding 93 men. On 18 November, five men set out in a small boat to seek help. On 19 December, four of the men perished when the boat was upset in the breakers off of Kauai. The survivor reached the U.S. Consulate in Honolulu on Christmas Eve. Relief ships were despatched and reached Kure Atoll on 4 January 1871. The survivors of the Saginaw wreck reached Honolulu on 14 January 1871.

===Early 20th century===
In 1903, workers for the Commercial Pacific Cable Company took up residence on the island as part of the effort to lay a trans-Pacific telegraph cable. To make the island more verdant, these workers introduced many non-native species to the island, including the canary, cycad, Norfolk Island pine, she-oak/Ironwood, coconut, and various deciduous trees; along with some of soil from Oahu and Guam. Ants, cockroaches, termites, centipedes, and countless other organisms were unintentionally introduced to Midway and the soil.

On January 20, 1903, the United States Navy opened a radio station in response to complaints from cable company workers about Japanese squatters and poachers. Between 1904 and 1908, President Theodore Roosevelt stationed 21 Marines on the island to end wanton destruction of bird life and keep Midway safe as a U.S. possession, protecting the cable station.

In 1935, operations began for the Martin M-130 flying boats operated by Pan American Airlines. The M-130s island-hopped from San Francisco to the Republic of China, providing the fastest and most luxurious route to the Far East and bringing tourists to Midway until 1941. Only the wealthy could afford the trip, which in the 1930s cost more than three times the annual salary of an average American. With Midway on the route between Honolulu and Wake Island, the flying boats landed in the atoll and pulled up to a float offshore in the lagoon. Tourists transferred to the Pan Am Hotel or the &quot;Gooneyville Lodge&quot;, named after the ubiquitous &quot;Gooney birds&quot; (albatrosses), in this case Laysan Albatross and Black-footed Albatross.

===World War II===
The military importance of the location of Midway in the Pacific included its use as a convenient refueling stop on transpacific flights and for Navy ships. Beginning in 1940, as tensions with the Japanese rose, Midway was deemed second only to Pearl Harbor in importance to the protection of the U.S. West Coast. Airstrips, gun emplacements, and a seaplane base quickly materialized on the tiny atoll. The channel was widened, and Naval Air Station Midway was completed. Midway was also an important submarine base.

On February 14, 1941, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8682 to create naval defense areas in the central Pacific territories. The proclamation established the &quot;Midway Island Naval Defensive Sea Area&quot;, which encompassed the territorial waters between the extreme high-water marks and the marine boundaries surrounding Midway. &quot;Midway Island Naval Airspace Reservation&quot; was also established to restrict access to the airspace over the naval defense sea area. Only U.S. government ships and aircraft were permitted to enter the naval defense areas at Midway Atoll unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy.

Midway&#x27;s importance to the U.S. was brought into focus on December7, 1941, when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. Two destroyers bombarded Midway on the same day; this was the first Bombardment of Midway. A Pan-Am flying clipper stopped at Midway and evacuated passengers and Pan-American employees from Wake island, which had also been attacked earlier that day. The clipper was on its usual passenger route to Guam when the attack on Pearl Harbor happened; it then made a return journey going from Wake to Midway, Honolulu, and back to the USA.

A Japanese submarine bombarded Midway on February10, 1942. In total, Midway had been attacked four times between 7 December 1941 and the Japanese submarine attack of 10 February 1942.

Four months later, on June 4, 1942, a major naval battle near Midway resulted in the U.S. Navy inflicting a devastating defeat on the Imperial Japanese Navy. Four Japanese fleet aircraft carriers, , , and , were sunk, along with the loss of hundreds of Japanese aircraft, losses that the Japanese Empire would never be able to replace. The U.S. lost the aircraft carrier , along with a number of its carrier- and land-based aircraft that were either shot down by Japanese forces or bombed on the ground at the airfields. The Battle of Midway was, by most accounts, the beginning of the end of the Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s control of the Pacific Ocean.

Starting in July 1942, a submarine tender was always stationed at the atoll to support submarines patrolling Japanese waters. In 1944, a floating dry dock joined the tender.
After the Battle of Midway, a second airfield was developed on Sand Island. This work necessitated enlarging the island through landfill techniques that, when completed, more than doubled its size.
===Korean and Vietnam Wars===
From August 1, 1941, to 1945, U.S. military forces occupied Midway. In 1950, the Navy decommissioned Naval Air Station Midway, only to re-commission it again to support the Korean War. Thousands of troops on ships and aircraft stopped at Midway for refueling and emergency repairs. Midway Island was a Naval Air Facility from 1968 to September10, 1993.

With about 3,500 people living on Sand Island, Midway supported the U.S. troops during the Vietnam War. In June 1969, President Richard Nixon met South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu at the Officer-in-Charge house, also known as &quot;Midway House&quot;.
Amateur radio

Because of its particularly remote location and political status as a U. S. Navy base not part of the State of Hawaii, Midway was a separate country for amateur radio purposes. During this era, there were two main amateur radio stations: KM6BI on Sand Island and KM6CE on Eastern Island. Many other amateurs operated under callsigns from their quarters. They all provided a vital link to home via messages and phone patches.

====Missile Impact Location System====
From 1958 through 1960, the United States installed the Missile Impact Location System (MILS) in the Navy-managed Pacific Missile Range, later the Air Force-managed Western Range, to localize the splashdowns of test missile nose cones. MILS was developed and installed by the same entities that had completed the first phase of the Atlantic and U.S. West Coast SOSUS systems. A MILS installation, consisting of both a target array for precision location and a broad ocean area system for good positions outside the target area, was installed at Midway as part of the system supporting Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) tests. Other Pacific MILS shore terminals were at the Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay supporting Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM) tests with impact areas northeast of Hawaii and the other ICBM test support systems at Wake Island and Eniwetok.

Eastern Island

Eastern Island was home to the Naval Security Group Activity, Midway Island, from July 1, 1954, until February 1971. The activity operated AN/GRD-6 High-Frequency Direction Finder, which was part of the Eastern and Western Pacific HFDF networks.

====Naval Facility Midway====

During the Cold War, the U.S. established a shore terminal, in which output of the array at sea was processed and displayed utilizing the Low-Frequency Analyzer and Recorder (LOFAR), of the Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS), Naval Facility (NAVFAC) Midway Island, to track Soviet submarines. The facility became operational in 1968 and was commissioned on January13, 1969. It remained secret until its decommissioning on September30, 1983, after data from its arrays had been remoted first to Naval Facility Barbers Point, Hawaii, in 1981 and then directly to the Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF) Ford Island, Hawaii. U.S. Navy WV-2

===Civilian handover===
In 1978, the Navy downgraded Midway from a Naval Air Station to a Naval Air Facility, and many personnel and dependents began leaving the island. With the war in Vietnam over and with the introduction of reconnaissance satellites and nuclear submarines, Midway&#x27;s significance to U.S. national security was diminished. The World War II facilities at Sand and Eastern Islands were listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May28, 1987, and were simultaneously added as a National Historic Landmark.

As part of the Base Realignment and Closure process, the Navy facility on Midway has been operationally closed since September10, 1993. However, the Navy assumed responsibility for cleaning up environmental contamination.

===2011 tsunami===
The 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami on March 11 caused many deaths within the bird community on Midway. It was reported that a -tall wave completely submerged the atoll&#x27;s reef inlets and Spit Island, killing more than 110,000 nesting seabirds at the National Wildlife Refuge. Scientists on the island, however, do not think it will have long-term negative impacts on the bird populations.

A U.S. Geological Survey study found that the Midway Atoll, Laysan, and Pacific islands like them could become inundated and unfit to live on during the 21st century, due to increased storm waves and rising sea levels.

==National Wildlife Refuge and National Monument==

Midway was designated an overlay National Wildlife Refuge on April22, 1988, while still under the primary jurisdiction of the Navy.

From August 1996, the general public could visit the atoll through study ecotours. This program ended in 2002, but another visitor program was approved and began operating in March 2008. This program operated through 2012, but was suspended in 2013 due to budget cuts.

On October 31, 1996, President Bill Clinton signed Executive Order 13022, which transferred the jurisdiction and control of the atoll to the United States Department of the Interior. The FWS assumed management of the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge. The last contingent of Navy personnel left Midway on June30, 1997, after an ambitious environmental cleanup program was completed.

On September 13, 2000, Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt designated the Wildlife Refuge as the Battle of Midway National Memorial. The refuge is now called the &quot;Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge and Battle of Midway National Memorial&quot;.

On June 15, 2006, President George W. Bush designated the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands as a national monument. The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Marine National Monument encompasses and includes of coral reef habitat. The Monument also includes the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge and the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge.

In 2007, the Monument&#x27;s name was changed to Papahānaumokuākea () Marine National Monument. The National Monument is managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the State of Hawaii. In 2016, President Barack Obama expanded the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument and added the Office of Hawaiian Affairs as a fourth co-trustee of the monument.

== Gooney monument ==
The so-called &quot;Gooney monument&quot; was carved from a mahogany log as a personal project by a U.S. Navy dental officer stationed on the island. The project began in 1949. The statue was tall and stood for 40 years before succumbing to termite damage. It was replaced with a mock egg after its removal.

==Environment==
Midway Atoll forms part of the Northwest Hawaiian Islands Important Bird Area (IBA), designated as such by BirdLife International because of its seabirds and endemic landbirds. The atoll is a critical habitat in the central Pacific Ocean and includes breeding habitat for 17 seabird species. Many native species rely on the island, which is now home to 67–70 percent of the world&#x27;s Laysan albatross population and 34–39 percent of the global population of black-footed albatross. A minimal number of the very rare short-tailed albatross also have been observed. Fewer than 2,200 individuals of this species are believed to exist due to excessive feather hunting in the late nineteenth century. In 2007–08, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service translocated 42 endangered Laysan ducks to the atoll as part of their efforts to conserve the species.

Over 250 different species of marine life are found in the of the lagoon and surrounding waters. The critically endangered Hawaiian monk seals raise their pups on the beaches, relying on the atoll&#x27;s reef fish, squid, octopus, and crustaceans. Green sea turtles, another threatened species, occasionally nest on the island. The first was found in 2006 on Spit Island and another in 2007 on Sand Island. A resident pod of 300 spinner dolphins lives in the lagoons and nearshore waters.

Human habitation has extensively altered the islands of Midway Atoll. Starting in 1869 with the project to blast the reefs and create a port on Sand Island, the environment of Midway Atoll has experienced profound changes.

Several invasive exotics have been introduced; for example, ironwood trees from Australia were planted to act as windbreaks. Of the 200 species of plants on Midway, 75 percent are non-native. Recent efforts have focused on removing non-native plant species and re-planting native species.

Lead paint on the buildings posed an environmental hazard (avian lead poisoning) to the albatross population of the island. In 2018, a project to strip the paint was completed.

===Pollution===
Midway Atoll, in common with all the Hawaiian Islands, receives substantial amounts of marine debris from the Great Pacific Garbage Patch. Consisting of 90 percent plastic, approximately 20 tons of this debris accumulates on the beaches of Midway every year. The garbage is hazardous to the island&#x27;s bird population: approximately 5 tons of debris is fed to albatross chicks by their parents, but the parents often collect the debris while they are out at sea. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates at least of plastic washes up every week.

Of the 1.5 million Laysan albatrosses that inhabit Midway during the winter breeding season, nearly all are found to have plastic in their digestive system. Approximately one-third of the chicks die. These deaths are attributed to the albatrosses confusing brightly colored plastic with marine animals (such as squid and fish) for food. Recent results suggest that oceanic plastic develops a chemical olfactory signature that is normally used by seabirds to locate food items.

Because albatross chicks do not develop the reflex to regurgitate until they are four months old, they cannot expel the plastic pieces. Albatrosses are not the only species to suffer from the plastic pollution; sea turtles and monk seals also consume the debris. Various plastic items wash upon the shores, from cigarette lighters to toothbrushes and toys. An albatross on Midway can have up to 50 percent of its intestinal tract filled with plastic.

==Transportation==
The usual method of reaching Sand Island, Midway Atoll&#x27;s only populated island, is on chartered aircraft landing at Sand Island&#x27;s Henderson Field, which also functions as an emergency diversion point runway for transpacific flights. An example of this occurring was in 2011, where Delta Air Lines Flight 277, a Boeing 747-400 traveling from Honolulu to Osaka made an emergency landing at Henderson Field due to a cracked windshield. The US National Wildlife Refuge employees working on the atoll assisted the landing and cared for the nearly 380 passengers and crew for eight hours until a backup plane arrived. No injuries were reported. 
==See also==

*Desert island
*Lists of islands
*List of national memorials of the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
===Natural history===
* 
* 

===Military history===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*U.S. Fish &amp; Wildlife Service Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge and Battle of Midway National Memorial (this article incorporated some content from this public domain site)
*Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument – Midway 
*Diary from the middle of nowhere BBC&#x27;s environment correspondent David Shukman reports on the threat of plastic rubbish drifting in the North Pacific Gyre to Midway. Accessed 2008-03-26.
*&quot;The Battle of Midway: Turning the Tide in the Pacific,&quot; a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan 
*&quot;Marines at Midway: by Lieutenant Colonel R.D. Heinl, Jr., USMC Historical Section, Division of Public Information Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps 1948,&quot; 
*Past residents of Midway Discussion of Midway related topics by former residents and those interested in Midway.
*Midway Atoll Today (2010)
*Island Conservation: Midway Atoll Restoration Project </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="0" end="12" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="14" end="24" title="colloquialism" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="26" end="40" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="51" end="56" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q462778" start="104" end="116" title="insular area" label="insular area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="148" end="178" title="Insular area#Unorganized unincorporated territories" label="unorganized and unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="516" end="520" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="608" end="628" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="662" end="668" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816926" start="721" end="731" title="Samoa Time Zone" label="Samoa Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="733" end="742" title="UTC−11:00" label="UTC−11:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="770" end="796" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="Coordinated Universal Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241537" start="840" end="865" title="Hawaii–Aleutian Time Zone" label="Hawaii–Aleutian Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645" start="940" end="976" title="United States Minor Outlying Islands" label="United States Minor Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="982" end="1019" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="1100" end="1139" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q787425" start="1202" end="1244" title="Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument" label="Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982458" start="1295" end="1327" title="Naval Air Facility Midway Island" label="Naval Air Facility Midway Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="1364" end="1380" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713299" start="1431" end="1446" title="Henderson Field (East Midway)" label="Henderson Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1477" end="1495" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="1717" end="1733" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1737" end="1749" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="2357" end="2367" title="hydroponic" label="hydroponic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="2589" end="2598" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="2683" end="2691" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2749" end="2754" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183110" start="2786" end="2815" title="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands" label="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020515" start="2870" end="2890" title="Hawaiian Organic Act" label="Hawaiian Organic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341456" start="3201" end="3220" title="Newlands Resolution" label="Newlands Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="3465" end="3472" title="Captain (United States Navy)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568908" start="3473" end="3489" title="William Reynolds (naval officer)" label="William Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684233" start="3638" end="3658" title="Hawaii Admission Act" label="Hawaii Admission Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q123076" start="3733" end="3747" title="Palmyra Island" label="Palmyra Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131008" start="3749" end="3764" title="Johnston Island" label="Johnston Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q130895" start="3770" end="3782" title="Kingman Reef" label="Kingman Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="3863" end="3886" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3902" end="3915" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="4030" end="4038" title="seamount" label="seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="4059" end="4075" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="4097" end="4113" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q632794" start="4131" end="4162" title="Hawaiian–Emperor seamount chain" label="Hawaiian–Emperor seamount chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357927" start="4172" end="4194" title="Pearl and Hermes Atoll" label="Pearl and Hermes Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q686179" start="4199" end="4209" title="Kure Atoll" label="Kure Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q183110" start="4217" end="4246" title="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands" label="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="4277" end="4289" title="coral reef" label="barrier reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q462778" start="4615" end="4627" title="insular area" label="insular area"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="4661" end="4701" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="4799" end="4806" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="4822" end="4838" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="4878" end="4892" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q187063" start="4928" end="4933" title="Lanai" label="Lanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q188719" start="5094" end="5114" title="isostasy" label="isostatic adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="5143" end="5153" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="5315" end="5322" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q686179" start="5559" end="5569" title="Kure Atoll" label="Kure Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248637" start="5714" end="5730" title="World Port Index" label="World Port Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888137" start="5775" end="5790" title="Henderson Field (Midway Atoll)" label="Henderson Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048926" start="5949" end="5954" title="ETOPS" label="ETOPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220505" start="6210" end="6221" title="Marston Mat" label="Marston Mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="6262" end="6269" title="Seabees" label="Seabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="6340" end="6356" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="6377" end="6401" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6403" end="6409" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="6793" end="6800" title="seal hunting" label="sealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="6940" end="6957" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="7046" end="7051" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="7135" end="7142" title="Captain (United States Navy)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568908" start="7143" end="7159" title="William Reynolds (naval officer)" label="William Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="7430" end="7448" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045550" start="7503" end="7533" title="Pacific Mail Steamship Company" label="Pacific Mail Steamship Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="7568" end="7576" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="7649" end="7671" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q815045" start="7714" end="7729" title="coaling station" label="coaling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="7789" end="7812" title="Kingdom of Hawai&amp;#x27;i" label="Kingdom of Hawai&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q686179" start="7951" end="7961" title="Kure Atoll" label="Kure Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q201026" start="8132" end="8137" title="Kauai" label="Kauai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="8182" end="8190" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="8194" end="8207" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152516" start="8403" end="8435" title="Commercial Pacific Cable Company" label="Commercial Pacific Cable Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="8513" end="8522" title="electric telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q253941" start="8641" end="8647" title="Domestic Canary" label="canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q161073" start="8649" end="8654" title="Cycas" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q161070" start="8656" end="8675" title="Araucaria heterophylla" label="Norfolk Island pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q756005" start="8677" end="8693" title="Casuarina" label="she-oak/Ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="8695" end="8702" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="8716" end="8725" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="9031" end="9039" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="9040" end="9049" title="squatting" label="squatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="9054" end="9062" title="Poaching" label="poachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="9097" end="9115" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="9129" end="9136" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893191" start="9216" end="9231" title="United States territory" label="U.S. possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q615402" start="9298" end="9310" title="Martin M-130" label="Martin M-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="9311" end="9322" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="9336" end="9357" title="Pan American Airlines" label="Pan American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="9389" end="9402" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="9410" end="9427" title="Republic of China (1912-1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="9483" end="9491" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="9697" end="9705" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="9710" end="9721" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="9941" end="9950" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q934841" start="9968" end="9984" title="Laysan albatross" label="Laysan Albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q600319" start="9989" end="10011" title="Black-footed Albatross" label="Black-footed Albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="10278" end="10290" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="10330" end="10345" title="West Coast of the United States" label="U.S. West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982458" start="10465" end="10489" title="Naval Air Station Midway" label="Naval Air Station Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="10583" end="10601" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="10609" end="10624" title="Executive Order (United States)" label="Executive Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="11176" end="11197" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="11298" end="11319" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attacked Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452562" start="11383" end="11410" title="first Bombardment of Midway" label="first Bombardment of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="12074" end="12096" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="12118" end="12134" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="12228" end="12243" title="Japanese Empire" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="12465" end="12481" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716850" start="12623" end="12639" title="submarine tender" label="submarine tender"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12735" end="12752" title="Dry dock#Floating" label="floating dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982458" start="13101" end="13125" title="Naval Air Station Midway" label="Naval Air Station Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="13173" end="13183" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="13445" end="13456" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="13482" end="13495" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="13500" end="13513" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="13527" end="13543" title="Nguyen Van Thieu" label="Nguyen Van Thieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856573" start="14152" end="14182" title="Missile Impact Location System" label="Missile Impact Location System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988214" start="14261" end="14274" title="Western Range (USSF)" label="Western Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="14681" end="14715" title="Intercontinental Ballistic Missile" label="Intercontinental Ballistic Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029760" start="14777" end="14813" title="Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay" label="Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="14956" end="14967" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q649190" start="14972" end="14980" title="Eniwetok" label="Eniwetok"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="15288" end="15296" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15415" end="15458" title="Low-Frequency Analyzer and Recorder (LOFAR)" label="Low-Frequency Analyzer and Recorder (LOFAR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="15467" end="15492" title="SOSUS" label="Sound Surveillance System"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="15550" end="15556" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q862435" start="15901" end="15915" title="Lockheed EC-121 Warning Star" label="U.S. Navy WV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="16145" end="16169" title="reconnaissance satellite" label="reconnaissance satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036429" start="16268" end="16291" title="World War II Facilities at Midway" label="World War II facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="16339" end="16375" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="16427" end="16453" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="16471" end="16499" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="Base Realignment and Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982458" start="16513" end="16526" title="Naval Air Facility Midway" label="Navy facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="16702" end="16736" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="16940" end="16947" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="16956" end="16980" title="Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="17098" end="17120" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="17296" end="17313" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410668" start="17401" end="17425" title="National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="17574" end="17582" title="ecotourism" label="ecotours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="17802" end="17814" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q878739" start="18208" end="18221" title="Bruce Babbitt" label="Bruce Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="18444" end="18458" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q787425" start="18532" end="18586" title="Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument" label="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Marine National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q787425" start="18666" end="18707" title="Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument" label="Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="18928" end="18975" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="19028" end="19040" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="19584" end="19603" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="19633" end="19655" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q934841" start="19913" end="19929" title="Laysan albatross" label="Laysan albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q600319" start="19987" end="20009" title="black-footed albatross" label="black-footed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q853412" start="20045" end="20067" title="short-tailed albatross" label="short-tailed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q247745" start="20299" end="20310" title="Laysan duck" label="Laysan duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q695199" start="20499" end="20517" title="Hawaiian monk seal" label="Hawaiian monk seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="20624" end="20641" title="Green turtle" label="Green sea turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q649513" start="20805" end="20820" title="spinner dolphin" label="spinner dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="21098" end="21114" title="invasive species" label="invasive exotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q474620" start="21150" end="21158" title="Casuarinaceae" label="ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474070" start="21439" end="21459" title="avian lead poisoning" label="avian lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q463960" start="21661" end="21674" title="marine debris" label="marine debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q638904" start="21684" end="21711" title="Great Pacific Garbage Patch" label="Great Pacific Garbage Patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649" start="22267" end="22283" title="digestive system" label="digestive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="22798" end="22815" title="plastic pollution" label="plastic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="22817" end="22828" title="sea turtles" label="sea turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q695199" start="22833" end="22843" title="Hawaiian monk seal" label="monk seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888137" start="23217" end="23232" title="Henderson Field (Midway Atoll)" label="Henderson Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="23368" end="23383" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="23398" end="23412" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q531178" start="23428" end="23436" title="Daniel K. Inouye International Airport" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193682" start="23440" end="23445" title="Kansai International Airport" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410668" start="23527" end="23551" title="National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="23742" end="23755" title="Desert island" label="Desert island"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="23757" end="23773" title="Lists of islands" label="Lists of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245432" start="23775" end="23822" title="List of national memorials of the United States" label="List of national memorials of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="24213" end="24216" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112270" start="24321" end="24339" title="North Pacific Gyre" label="North Pacific Gyre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19260" wikidata="Q217" url="?curid=19260" title="Moldova">
<text>Moldova, officially the Republic of Moldova, is a landlocked country in Eastern Europe, on the northeastern corner of the Balkans. The country spans a total of and has a population of approximately 2.42 million as of January 2024. Moldova is bordered by Romania to the west and Ukraine to the north, east, and south. The unrecognised breakaway state of Transnistria lies across the Dniester river on the country&#x27;s eastern border with Ukraine. Moldova is a unitary parliamentary representative democratic republic with its capital in Chișinău, the country&#x27;s largest city and main cultural and commercial centre.

Most of Moldovan territory was a part of the Principality of Moldavia from the 14th century until 1812, when it was ceded to the Russian Empire by the Ottoman Empire (to which Moldavia was a vassal state) and became known as Bessarabia. In 1856, southern Bessarabia was returned to Moldavia, which three years later united with Wallachia to form Romania, but Russian rule was restored over the whole of the region in 1878. During the 1917 Russian Revolution, Bessarabia briefly became an autonomous state within the Russian Republic. In February 1918, it declared independence and then integrated into Romania later that year following a vote of its assembly. The decision was disputed by Soviet Russia, which in 1924 established, within the Ukrainian SSR, a so-called Moldavian autonomous republic on partially Moldovan-inhabited territories to the east of Bessarabia. In 1940, as a consequence of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, Romania was compelled to cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union, leading to the creation of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic (Moldavian SSR).

On 27 August 1991, as the dissolution of the Soviet Union was underway, the Moldavian SSR declared independence and took the name Moldova. However, the strip of Moldovan territory on the east bank of the Dniester has been under the &quot;de facto&quot; control of the breakaway government of Transnistria since 1990. The constitution of Moldova was adopted in 1994, and the country became a parliamentary republic with a president as head of state and a prime minister as head of government. Under the presidency of Maia Sandu, elected in 2020 on a pro-Western and anti-corruption ticket, Moldova has pursued membership of the European Union, and was granted candidate status in June 2022. Accession talks to the EU began on 13 December 2023. Sandu has also suggested an end to Moldova&#x27;s constitutional commitment to military neutrality in favour of a closer alliance with NATO and strongly condemned Russia&#x27;s invasion of neighbouring Ukraine.

Moldova is the second poorest country in Europe by GDP per official capita after Ukraine and much of its GDP is dominated by the service sector. It has one of the lowest Human Development Indexes in Europe, ranking 76th in the world (2022). Moldova ranks 68th in the world on the Global Innovation Index . Moldova is a member state of the United Nations, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development, the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation, and the Association Trio.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Moldova&quot; is derived from the Moldova River (); the valley of this river served as a political centre at the time of the foundation of the Principality of Moldavia in 1359. The origin of the name of the river remains unclear. According to a legend recounted by Moldavian chroniclers Dimitrie Cantemir and Grigore Ureche, Prince Dragoș named the river after hunting aurochs: following the chase, the prince&#x27;s exhausted hound &quot;Molda (Seva)&quot; drowned in the river. The dog&#x27;s name, given to the river, extended to the principality.

For a short time in the 1990s, at the founding of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the name of the current Republic of Moldova was also spelled &quot;Moldavia&quot;. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the country began to use the Romanian name, . Officially, the name &quot;Republic of Moldova&quot; is designated by the United Nations.

==History==


The history of Moldova spans prehistoric cultures, ancient and medieval empires, and periods of foreign rule and modern independence.

Evidence of human habitation dates back 800,000–1.2 million years, with significant developments in agriculture, pottery, and settlement during the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. In antiquity, Moldova&#x27;s location made it a crossroads for invasions by the Scythians, Goths, Huns, and other tribes, followed by periods of Roman and Byzantine control. The medieval Principality of Moldavia emerged in the 1350s, and was the medieval precursor of modern Moldova and Romania. It reached prominence under rulers like Stephen the Great before becoming a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire from 1538, until the 19th century.

In 1812, following one of several Russian–Turkish wars, the eastern half of the principality, Bessarabia, was annexed by the Russian Empire, marking the beginning of Russian influence in the region. In 1918, Bessarabia briefly became independent as the Moldavian Democratic Republic and, following the decision of the Parliament (Sfatul Țării), united with Romania. During the Second World War it was occupied by the Soviet Union which reclaimed it from Romania. It joined the Union in 1940 as the Moldavian SSR. During this period, policies of Russification and economic transformation deeply influenced the region.

The dissolution of the USSR in 1991 led to declared independence, followed by the Transnistria War in 1992, a conflict that left the Transnistrian region as a de facto independent state. Moldova continues to navigate a complex relationship between pro-Western and pro-Russian factions. In recent years, it has pursued closer ties with the European Union, submitting a formal membership application in 2022.

In the November 2020 presidential election, the pro-European opposition candidate Maia Sandu was elected as the new president of the republic, becoming the first female elected president of Moldova. In the November 2024 presidential election, President Maia Sandu was re-elected with 55% of the vote in the run-off.

==Politics==
The Republic of Moldova is a constitutional republic with a unicameral parliamentary system of government and competitive, multi-party elections. The constitution provides for executive and legislative branches as well as an independent judiciary and a clear separation of powers. The president serves as the head of state, is elected every four years, and can be re-elected once. The prime minister serves as the head of government, appointed by the president with parliament&#x27;s support. The head of government in turn assembles a cabinet, subject to parliamentary approval. Legislative authority is vested in the unicameral Parliament of Moldova which has 101 seats and whose members are elected by popular vote on party lists every four years. The president&#x27;s official residence is the Presidential Palace, Chișinău.

After the prime minister and government resigned in 2020 and the president and parliament failed to form a new government, early parliamentary elections were held in July 2021. According to Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe observers, the 2021 parliamentary elections were well-administered and competitive, and fundamental freedoms were largely respected. The Party of Action and Solidarity won 63 seats in the 101-seat parliament, enough to form a single-party majority.
The 1994 Constitution of Moldova sets the framework for the government of the country. A parliamentary majority of at least two-thirds is required to amend the Constitution of Moldova, which cannot be revised in times of war or national emergency. Amendments to the Constitution affecting the state&#x27;s sovereignty, independence, or unity can only be made after a majority of voters support the proposal in a referendum. Furthermore, no revision can be made to limit the fundamental rights of people enumerated in the Constitution. The 1994 constitution also establishes an independent Constitutional Court, composed of six judges (two appointed by the President, two by Parliament, and two by the Supreme Council of Magistrature), serving six-year terms, during which they are irremovable and not subordinate to any power. The court is invested with the power of judicial review over all acts of parliament, over presidential decrees, and over international treaties signed by the country.

The head of state is the President of Moldova, who between 2001 and 2015 was elected by the Moldovan Parliament, requiring the support of three-fifths of the deputies (at least 61 votes). This system was designed to decrease executive authority in favour of the legislature. Nevertheless, the Constitutional Court ruled on 4 March 2016 that this constitutional change adopted in 2000 regarding the presidential election was unconstitutional, thus reverting the election method of the president to a two-round system direct election.

===Foreign relations===

After achieving independence from the Soviet Union, Moldova&#x27;s foreign policy was designed with a view to establishing relations with other European countries, neutrality, and European Union integration. In May 1995, the country signed the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly Convention to become a member and was also admitted in July 1995 to the Council of Europe.

Moldova became a member state of the United Nations the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the North Atlantic Cooperation Council, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in 1992. 1994 saw Moldova become a participant in NATO&#x27;s Partnership for Peace programme. Moldova joined the Francophonie in 1996, the World Trade Organization in 2001, and the International Criminal Court in 2002.

In 2005, Moldova and the European Union established an action plan that sought to improve cooperation between Moldova and the union. At the end of 2005, the European Union Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine (EUBAM) was established at the joint request of the presidents of Moldova and Ukraine. EUBAM assists the Moldovan and Ukrainian governments in approximating their border and customs procedures to EU standards and offers support in both countries&#x27; fight against cross-border crime.

After the 1990–1992 War of Transnistria, Moldova sought a peaceful resolution to the conflict in the Transnistria region by working with Romania, Ukraine, and Russia, calling for international mediation, and co-operating with the OSCE and UN fact-finding and observer missions. The foreign minister of Moldova, Andrei Stratan, repeatedly stated that the Russian troops stationed in the breakaway region were there against the will of the Moldovan government and called on them to leave &quot;completely and unconditionally&quot;. In 2012, a security zone incident resulted in the death of a civilian, raising tensions with Russia.

In September 2010, the European Parliament approved a grant of €90 million to Moldova. The money was to supplement US$570 million in International Monetary Fund loans, World Bank and other bilateral support already granted to Moldova. In April 2010, Romania offered Moldova development aid worth of €100 million while the number of scholarships for Moldovan students doubled to 5,000. According to a lending agreement signed in February 2010, Poland provided US$15 million as a component of its support for Moldova in its European integration efforts. The first joint meeting of the Governments of Romania and Moldova, held in March 2012, concluded with several bilateral agreements in various fields. The European orientation &quot;has been the policy of Moldova in recent years and this is the policy that must continue,&quot; Nicolae Timofti told lawmakers before his election in 2012.

On 29 November 2013, at a summit in Vilnius, Moldova signed an association agreement with the European Union dedicated to the European Union&#x27;s &#x27;Eastern Partnership&#x27; with ex-Soviet countries. The ex-Romanian President Traian Băsescu stated that Romania will make all efforts for Moldova to join the EU as soon as possible. Likewise, Traian Băsescu declared that the unification of Moldova and Romania is the next national project for Romania, as more than 75% of the population speaks Romanian.

====Russia====

A document written in 2021 by the Russia&#x27;s FSB&#x27;s Directorate for Cross-Border Cooperation, titled &quot;Strategic objectives of the Russian Federation in the Republic of Moldova&quot; sets out a 10-year plan to destabilise Moldova, using energy blackmail, and political/elite sources in Moldova that are favourable to Russia and the Orthodox Church. Russia denies any such plan.

Religious leaders play a role in shaping foreign policy. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian Government has frequently used its connections with the Russian Orthodox Church to block and stymie the integration of former Soviet states like Moldova into the West.

In February 2023, Russia canceled a 2012 decree underpinning Moldova&#x27;s sovereignty. In May 2023, the Moldovan government announced the immediate suspension of its participation in the Commonwealth of Independent States and its intentions to ultimately withdraw from the organisation entirely. In July 2023, Moldova passed a legislation removing it from membership in the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly.

On 25 July 2023, the Moldovan government summoned the Russian ambassador Oleg Vasnetsov to Moldova after media reports of alleged spying devices on the rooftop of their embassy in Chişinău. On 26 July 2023, the Moldovan government expelled 45 Russian diplomats and embassy staff due to &quot;hostile actions&quot; intended to destabilise the Republic of Moldova, according to Foreign Minister Nicu Popescu. On 30 July, the Russian embassy announced that it would suspend consular appointments &quot;for technical reasons&quot;.

The Moldovan Security and Intelligence Service (SIS) also ended all partnership agreements with Russia&#x27;s FSB after sending official notifications to the authorities in Moscow.

==== European Union Accession ====

Moldova has set 2030 as the target date for EU Accession.

Moldova signed the Association Agreement with the European Union in Brussels on 27 June 2014. The signing came after the accord was drafted in Vilnius in November 2013.

Moldova signed the membership application to join the EU on 3 March 2022. On 23 June 2022, Moldova was officially granted candidate status by EU leaders. The United Nations Development Programme is also providing assistance to Moldova in implementing the necessary reforms for full accession by 2030. The European Union&#x27;s High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Josep Borrell has confirmed that the pathway to accession does not depend upon a resolution of the Transnistria conflict.&lt;ref name=&quot;RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

On 27 June, Moldova signed a comprehensive free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association. On 28 June 2023, the European Union announced a €1.6 billion support and investment programme for Moldova, as well as confirming reductions in the price of mobile data and voice roaming charges in Moldova by European and Moldovan telecoms operators, as well as Moldova joining the EU&#x27;s joint gas purchase platform.

Formal accession talks began on 13 December 2023. A referendum on joining the EU is planned for autumn 2024, there will be no voting stations in Transnistria, however residents there will be free to travel into other areas of Moldova to vote, should they wish to. 

In Moldova&#x27;s referendum on joining the EU, a narrow 50.17% voted &quot;yes,&quot; with Maia Sandu alleging &quot;unprecedented&quot; outside interference. Sandu received 42% in the simultaneous presidential election, while her rival, Alexandr Stoianoglo, garnered 26%, leading to a run-off on 3 November 2024. The referendum was seen as a test of Moldova&#x27;s commitment to EU integration, amid claims of vote manipulation by criminal groups.

===Security===
The European Union created a Partnership Mission in Moldova through its Common Security and Defence Policy on 24 April 2023. The mission seeks to support the government of Moldova in countering hybrid threats the country faces as a result of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

A memorandum dated 29 March 2023 stated that the mission aims at &quot;enhancing the resilience of Moldova&#x27;s security sector in the area of crisis management as well as enhancing resilience to hybrid threats, including cybersecurity, and countering foreign information manipulation and interference&quot;. The initial mandate of the mission is expected to be for two years and it will be made up of up to 40 police and customs officers and judicial officials. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Germany, Poland, Sweden, the Czech Republic, Portugal, Romania, and Denmark have all voiced support for the mission.

On 2 February 2023 Moldova passed a law introducing criminal penalties for separatism, including prison terms. The law continues with penalties for financing and inciting separatism, plotting against Moldova, and collecting and stealing information that could harm the country&#x27;s sovereignty, independence and integrity.

===Military===

The Moldovan armed forces consists of the Ground Forces and Air Force.
Moldova maintains a standing army of just 6,500 soldiers, and spends just 0.4 percent of its GDP on defence, far behind its regional neighbours.

Moldova accepted all relevant arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union. On 30 October 1992, Moldova ratified the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of conventional military equipment and provides for the destruction of weapons in excess of those limits. The country acceded to the provisions of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in October 1994 in Washington, D.C. It does not have nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons. Moldova joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation&#x27;s Partnership for Peace on 16 March 1994.

Moldova is committed to a number of international and regional control of arms regulations such as the UN Firearms Protocol, Stability Pact Regional Implementation Plan, the UN Programme of Action (PoA), and the OSCE Documents on Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition. Since declaring independence in 1991, Moldova has participated in UN peacekeeping missions in Liberia, Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, Sudan, and Georgia. On 12 November 2014, the US donated to Moldovan Armed Forces 39 Humvees and 10 trailers, with a value of US$700,000, to the 22nd Peacekeeping Battalion of the Moldovan National Army to &quot;increase the capability of Moldovan peacekeeping contingents.&quot;

Moldova signed a military agreement with Romania to strengthen regional security in 2015. The agreement is part of Moldova&#x27;s strategy to reform its military and cooperate with its neighbours.

Since 2022, the army has begun a process of modernisation, and has been provided with more than €87 million in support for the modernisation of the defence sector and the strengthening of security through the European Peace Facility. In October 2022, Defense Minister Anatolie Nosatii claimed that 90 percent of the country&#x27;s military equipment is outdated and of Soviet origin, dating back to the 1960s and 1980s. In April 2023, Valeriu Mija, Secretary of State for Defence Policy and National Army Reform in the Defence Ministry, claimed that Moldova needed $275 million to modernise its armed forces, especially in light of Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine and the presence of 1,500 Russian soldiers in Transnistria. In June 2023, Poland also sent a transport of military equipment worth €8 million (including drones, laptops, explosive ordnance disposal equipment, and ultrasound equipment) to the Moldovan police to increase the country&#x27;s internal security. Analysts at the Centre for European Policy Analysis have called for further western weapon donations.

===Human rights===

Freedom House ranked Moldova as a &quot;partly free&quot; country with a score of 62/100 in 2023. They summarised their finds as follows: &quot;Moldova has a competitive electoral environment, and freedoms of assembly, speech, and religion are mostly protected. Nonetheless, pervasive corruption, links between major political figures and powerful economic interests, and critical deficiencies in the justice sector and the rule of law all continue to hamper democratic governance.&quot; According to Transparency International, Moldova&#x27;s Corruption Perceptions Index improved to 39 points in 2022 from 34 in 2020. Reporters Without Borders improved Moldova&#x27;s Press Freedom Index ranking from 89th in 2020 to 40th in 2022, while cautioning that &quot;Moldova&#x27;s media are diverse but extremely polarised, like the country itself, which is marked by political instability and excessive influence by oligarchs.&quot;

According to Amnesty International&#x27;s 2022/23 report, &quot;No visible progress was made in reducing instances of torture and other ill-treatment in detention. Impunity continued for past human rights violations by law enforcement agencies. New &quot;temporary&quot; restrictions on public assemblies were introduced. The rights of LGBTI people were not fully realised, leading to cases of harassment, discrimination and violence. Some refugee reception centres turned away religious and ethnic minority refugees. In the breakaway Transdniestria region, prosecution and imprisonment for peaceful dissent continued.&quot; On 18 June 2023, some 500 LGBT activists and supporters held a Pride parade in the capital city of Chișinău which for the first time needed no heavy police cordons to protect them from protesters largely linked to the Orthodox church.

According to Human Rights Report of the United States Department of State, released in 2022, &quot;While authorities investigated reports of human rights abuses and corruption committed by officials, the process was slow and burdensome. During the year, authorities indicted and detained several former high-level officials including former President Igor Dodon, former member of parliament Vladimir Andronachi, Shor Party member of parliament Marina Tauber and former director of Moldovan Railways Anatolie Topala. None of these cases resulted in conviction by a court at year&#x27;s end. Authorities took some steps to identify, investigate, and prosecute officials for human rights abuses, but progress was slow.&quot;

In a meeting with the European Union in October 2022, EU representatives &quot;welcomed positive developments in Moldova such as the ratification of the Istanbul Convention on preventing and combating violence against women, the adoption of legislation on hate crime, and the ongoing work to reform the Electoral Code. It encouraged Moldovan authorities to address shortcomings identified by OSCE/ODIHR and the Venice Commission across all areas and ensure effective and continuous implementation of human rights legislation.&quot; The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights&#x27; 2016 recommendations on hate crimes were &quot;largely reflected in amendments to the Criminal Code adopted by the Moldovan Parliament and published on 3 June 2022&quot;, but the report notes that Moldovan law enforcement officers often fail to record the bias motivations behind hate crimes, and additionally recommended &quot;developing its victim support system to ensure effective access to justice, assistance, and protection services for hate crime victims&quot;. In 2021, 8 hate crimes were recorded, 7 of which reached a successful conviction, with one going to prosecution but without a conviction.

===Administrative divisions===


Moldova is divided into 32 districts (&quot;raioane&quot;, singular &quot;raion&quot;), three municipalities and two autonomous regions (Gagauzia and the Left Bank of the Dniester). The final status of Transnistria is disputed, as the central government does not control that territory. 10 other cities, including Comrat and Tiraspol, the administrative seats of the two autonomous territories, also have municipality status.

Moldova has 66 cities (towns), including 13 with municipality status, and 916 communes. Another 700 villages are too small to have a separate administration and are administratively part of either cities (41 of them) or communes (659). This makes for a total of 1,682 localities in Moldova, two of which are uninhabited.

The largest city in Moldova is Chișinău with a population of approx. 695,400 people. The second largest city is Tiraspol at 129,500, part of the unrecognised breakaway region of Transnistria, followed by Bălți (146,900) and Bender (91,000).

=== Law enforcement and emergency services ===
The Moldovan police force (General Police Inspectorate) reports to the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MAI) and is the primary law enforcement body, responsible for internal security, public order, traffic, and criminal investigations. Several agencies responsible for border management, emergency situations, migration and asylum also report to the ministry. Civilian authorities maintained effective control over the security forces. The Moldovan Police are divided into state and municipal organisations. State police provide law enforcement throughout Moldova while municipal police operate at the local administrative level. National and municipal police forces often collaborate closely for law enforcement purposes. The Special Forces Brigade &quot;Fulger&quot; is a specialised combat-ready police force primarily responsible for tackling organised crime, serious violent crime, and hostage situations. They are subordinate to the General Police Inspectorate and therefore under strict civilian control.

There are also a number of more specialised police institutions including the Police Department of Chisinau Municipality and the General Directorate of Criminal Investigation. The Moldovan Border Police are responsible for border security. It was a military branch until 2012 when it was put under the control of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. According to &quot;The Law on Police Use of Force Worldwide,&quot; &quot;Moldova does not regulate and restrict the use of firearms by law enforcement officials as international law requires. Police use of a firearm can only be lawful where necessary to confront an imminent threat of death or serious injury or a grave and proximate threat to life.&quot;

The Security and Intelligence Service (SIS) is a Moldovan state body specialised in ensuring national security by exercising all appropriate intelligence and counter-intelligence measures, such as: collecting, processing, checking and capitalising the information needed to identify, prevent and counteract any actions that according to law represent an internal or external threat to independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity, constitutional order, democratic development, internal security of the state, society and citizens, the statehood of the Republic of Moldova, the stable functioning of vitally important branches of the national economy, both on the territory of the Republic of Moldova and abroad.

Emergency services in Moldova consist of emergency medical services, search and rescue units, and a state firefighting service. There are two hospitals in the capital city Chișinău, the primary being Medpark International Hospital, and general hospitals in Bălți, Briceni, Cahul, and Călărași. Moldova has a universal healthcare system through a mandatory health insurance scheme. Casa Mariorei, founded in 2002, is a domestic violence shelter in Chișinău which provides shelter, healthcare, legal advice, and psychosocial support for native Moldovan, immigrant, and refugee women.

==Geography==
Moldova is a landlocked country situated in Eastern Europe, on the northeastern corner of the Balkans in the Black Sea Basin, between latitudes 45° and 49° N, and mostly between meridians 26° and 30° E (a small area lies east of 30°). The country lies to the east of the Carpathian Mountains and is bordered by Romania to its west and by Ukraine to its north, east, and south. The total length of the national boundaries is 1,389 km, including 939 km with Ukraine and 450 km with Romania. The country is separated from Romania on the west by the Prut river and on the east from Ukraine by the Dniester river. The total land area is , of which is water. The largest part of the country (around 88% of the area) lies in the Bessarabia region, while a narrow strip in the east is located in the unrecognised breakaway state of Transnistria on the eastern bank of the Dniester.

Although the country is technically landlocked, in 1999 Moldova acquired from Ukraine (in exchange for ceding a stretch of contested road in the east of the country) a 0.45 kilometer river frontage to the Danube, on the confluence of the Danube and Prut rivers. This has transformed the old village of Giurgiulești (in the extreme south-west of the country) into a river port, providing Moldova access to international waters via the Danube and the Black Sea. The Dniester river, which rises in Ukraine near the city of Drohobych, passes through Moldova, separating the main territory from its unrecognised breakaway region Transnistria, and empties into the Black Sea in Ukraine. At its closest point, Moldova is separated from the Dniester Liman, an estuary of the Black Sea, by only 3 km of Ukrainian territory.
While most of the country is hilly, elevations never exceed , the highest point being the Bălănești Hill. Moldova&#x27;s hills are part of the Moldavian Plateau, which geologically originate from the Carpathian Mountains. Its subdivisions in Moldova include the Dniester Hills (Northern Moldavian Hills and Dniester Ridge), the Moldavian Plain (Middle Prut Valley and Bălți Steppe), and the Central Moldavian Plateau (Ciuluc-Soloneț Hills, Cornești Hills—Codri Massive, &quot;Codri&quot; meaning &quot;forests&quot;—Lower Dniester Hills, Lower Prut Valley, and Tigheci Hills). In the south, the country has a small flatland, the Bugeac Plain. The territory of Moldova east of the river Dniester is split between parts of the Podolian Plateau, and parts of the Eurasian Steppe. Moldova&#x27;s exceptionally rich Chernozem soil covers around three-quarters of the country&#x27;s land area.

Moldova&#x27;s capital and largest city is Chișinău, with approximately a third of the country&#x27;s population residing in its metro area. Chișinău is Moldova&#x27;s main industrial and commercial centre, and is located in the middle of the country, on the river Bîc, a tributary of the Dniester. Moldova&#x27;s second-largest city is Tiraspol, which lies on the eastern bank of the Dniester and is the capital of the unrecognised breakaway region of Transnistria. The country&#x27;s third-largest city is Bălți, often referred to as the &#x27;northern capital&#x27;. It is situated north of the capital Chișinău, and is located on the river Răut, a tributary of the Dniester, on a hilly landscape in the Bălți steppe. Comrat is the administrative centre of the autonomous region of Gagauzia.

===Climate===

Moldova has a climate which is moderately continental; its proximity to the Black Sea leads to the climate being mildly cold in the autumn and winter and relatively cool in the spring and summer.

The summers are warm and long, with temperatures averaging about and the winters are relatively mild and dry, with January temperatures averaging . Annual rainfall, which ranges from around in the north to in the south, can vary greatly; long dry spells are not unusual. The heaviest rainfall occurs in early summer and again in October; heavy showers and thunderstorms are common. Because of the irregular terrain, heavy summer rains often cause erosion and river silting.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Moldova was on 21 July 2007 in Camenca. The lowest temperature ever recorded was on 20 January 1963 in Brătușeni, Edineț county.

===Biodiversity===

Phytogeographically, Moldova is split between the East European Plain and the Pontic–Caspian steppe of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. It is home to three terrestrial ecoregions: Central European mixed forests, East European forest steppe, and Pontic steppe. Forests currently cover only 11% of Moldova, though the state is making efforts to increase their range. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 2.2/10, ranking it 158th globally out of 172 countries. Game animals, such as red deer, roe deer and wild boar can be found in these wooded areas.

The environment of Moldova suffered extreme degradation during the Soviet period, when industrial and agricultural development proceeded without regard for environmental protection. Excessive use of pesticides resulted in heavily polluted topsoil, and industries lacked emission controls. Founded in 1990, the Ecological Movement of Moldova, a national, non-governmental, nonprofit organisation which is a member of the International Union for Conservation of Nature has been working to restore Moldova&#x27;s damaged natural environment. The movement is national representative of the Centre &quot;Naturopa&quot; of the Council of Europe and United Nations Environment Programme of the United Nations.

Once possessing a range from the British Isles through Central Asia over the Bering Strait into Alaska and Canada&#x27;s Yukon as well as the Northwest Territories, saigas survived in Moldova and Romania into the late 18th century. Deforestation, demographic pressure, as well as excessive hunting eradicated the native saiga herds. They were considered a characteristic animal of Scythia in antiquity. Historian Strabo referred to the saigas as the &quot;kolos&quot;, describing it as &quot;between the deer and ram in size&quot; which (understandably but wrongly) was believed to drink through its nose.

Another animal which was extinct in Moldova since the 18th century until recently was the European Wood Bison or wisent. The species was reintroduced with the arrival of three European bison from Białowieża Forest in Poland several days before Moldova&#x27;s Independence Day on 27 August 2005. Moldova is currently interested in expanding their wisent population, and began talks with Belarus in 2019 regarding a bison exchange programme between the two countries.

== Economy ==
=== Overview ===

The economy of Moldova is an emerging upper-middle income economy, with a high Human Development Index. Since the country gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1992, it has steadily transitioned to a market economy. According to the World Bank, despite a strong economic performance over the past two decades, Moldova remains among the poorest nations in Europe. Growth has remained relatively high since the 1990s, with low levels of unemployment and falling levels of poverty, but a combination of demographic factors, especially an ageing population and significant levels of emigration, and recent regional events, especially Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine, have posed serious economic challenges to the Moldovan economy, particularly due to inflation and rising energy prices. Productivity growth has remained poor, and a significant proportion of the population are reliant on government pensions and social assistance. Due to Moldova&#x27;s historic reliance upon Russian oil and natural gas, the energy sector has posed a particular challenge to the country&#x27;s economy.

GDP per capita has almost doubled from $2,749 (USD) in 2015 to $5,562 in 2022. Following the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdowns, annual GDP growth rebounded to 13.9% in 2021, before Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine, energy and refugee crises caused growth to collapse to −5.9%. , unemployment remains low at 2.3%, but inflation had dramatically increased to 28.7% due to the energy crisis caused by the invasion. In recent years the country has received significant economic assistance from the European Union, IMF, and World Bank, particularly after Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine. The IMF predicts that in 2023 the economy will improve from a 1.5% contraction to a growth of 1.5%.

Moldova remains highly vulnerable to fluctuations in remittances from workers abroad (which constitute 25 percent of GDP), exports to the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and European Union (EU) (88 per cent of total exports), and donor support (about 10 per cent of government spending). The main transmission channels through which adverse exogenous shocks could impact the Moldovan economy are remittances (also due to potentially returning migrants), external trade, and capital flows.

The economy&#x27;s primary exports are agriculture, apparel, and sports equipments. In 2021, Moldova exported $140 million in wine and is the 21st largest exporter of wine in the world, with wine exports being the country&#x27;s fifth largest export. With its 300 days of sunshine per year, the climate in Moldova is ideal for agriculture and particularly vineyards. The wine industry is a major economic sector, representing three percent of Moldova&#x27;s GDP and eight percent of the country&#x27;s total exports, according to government data. In 2021, the EU became the main purchaser of Moldovan wines. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is one of the most promising economic sectors in Moldova, accounting for more than 10 percent of GDP. More than 2,000 students graduate with a degree in computing or a related field per year. IT companies export about 80 percent of their total production to the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Romania.



===Energy===
=== Tourism ===

Moldova is one of the least visited countries in Europe, and tourism consequently plays a relatively minor role in the country&#x27;s overall economy. Despite the impact of Russia&#x27;s invasion of neighbouring Ukraine, Moldova saw more foreign visitors in the first quarter of 2022 than pre-pandemic, going from 31,000 non-resident tourists in 2019 to 36,100 in 2022. This still makes it one of the least-visited countries in Europe, however in recent years a number of Western media outlets have begun to highlight Moldova and its capital city Chișinău as an attractive tourism destination due to its picturesque natural landscapes, 300 days of sunshine per year, low prices, ancient wine culture, and mix of regional cultural influences. Tourism in Moldova has focused on the country&#x27;s natural landscapes, historical sites, and historic wine tradition. The government promotes international tourism within the country through its Moldova Travel brand. Moldova is internationally connected by plane via Chișinău International Airport, with direct flights to and from many European destinations, including Amsterdam Schiphol, Berlin Brandenburg, London Stansted, Paris–Charles de Gaulle, Tel Aviv&#x27;s Ben Gurion Airport, Rome–Fiumicino Airport, Istanbul Airport, and Dubai International Airport. Rail links connect it via direct overnight trains to neighbouring Bucharest, Kyiv, Odesa, and formerly Moscow. Moldovan citizens also enjoy visa-free travel across the Schengen Area.

As a major exporter of wine with more than 142 wineries and the largest wine cellar in the world, vineyard tours are offered to tourists across the country. Major sites include the Cricova winery, whose wine cellar stretches more than ; Castel Mimi, a 19th-century chateau with vineyards, a museum, art gallery, spa, hotel, and restaurant; and Mileștii Mici, which boasts the world&#x27;s largest collection of wine. As a country with a deep history of Eastern Orthodox Christianity, the country also has more than 50 monasteries and 700 churches. Among the most famous and well-visited are the Old Orhei Cave Monastery, carved into a cliff face in the 13th century and still in use today, and the 19th century Nativity Cathedral in the centre of Chișinău. UNESCO includes both the Old Orhei Archaeological Landscape, which features evidence of settlements dating back to at least the 12th century, and the typical Chernozem soil on the Bălți Steppe of Moldova (the most arable soil on the planet) on its Tentative List of World Heritage Sites. The capital city of Chișinău hosts most of the country&#x27;s national museums, including the National Museum of Fine Arts, Moldova State University, Brancusi Gallery, the National Museum of History of Moldova with over 236,000 exhibits, as well as bustling markets in the north of the city, including the house where Alexander Pushkin once resided while in exile from the Russian Tsar, and which has since been turned into a museum. Every year on 3–4 October, the country celebrates National Wine Day, where wine producers open up their wineries to the general public and provide shuttle buses between locations.

===Wine industry===
With its 300 days of sunshine per year, the climate in Moldova is ideal for agriculture and particularly vineyards. The wine industry is a major economic sector, representing three percent of Moldova&#x27;s GDP and eight percent of the country&#x27;s total exports, according to government data. Moldovan wine is being exported into over 70 states worldwide. Although Moldova is barely larger than Belgium, the country has 122,000 hectares of vineyards and is among the 20 largest producers in the world, according to a report by the International Organisation of Vine and Wine (OIV).

Before Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine and Moldova&#x27;s pivot towards Europe, a majority of its wine exports went to Russia, but this has now changed: &quot;Russia accounted for only 10 percent of Moldovan wine exports in 2021, down from 80 percent in the early 2000s, according to figures from the Moldovan Ministry of Agriculture.&quot; The EU liberalised its market for Moldovan wines and has signed a bilateral free trade deal with Moldova, with the result that in 2021 the country exported more than 120 million litres of wine to European countries, compared to 8.6 million litres to Russia.

Many families have their own recipes and grape varieties that have been passed down through the generations. There are 3 historical wine regions: Valul lui Traian (south west), Stefan Voda (south east) and Codru (centre), destined for the production of wines with protected geographic indication. Mileștii Mici is the home of the largest wine cellar in the world. It stretches for (though only is in use) and holds some two million or more bottles of wine. It has retained the Guinness World Record for largest wine cellar by number of bottles since 2005. The earliest wines in its collection date to 1969. Mimi Castle in the south east is a winery and architectural monument, which was built at the end of the 19th century in the village of Bulboaca in the district Anenii Noi, and is thought to be the first winery in Bessarabia. It has since also become a tourist complex with a museum, art gallery, hotel, spa, and wine tasting rooms.

===Agriculture===
Moldova is an agrarian-industrial state, with agricultural land occupying 2,499,000 hectares in a total area of 3,384,600 hectares. It is estimated that 1,810,500 of these hectares are arable. It is among the most arable countries in Europe, with the Chernozem soil across the Bălți Steppe being among the most fertile soils anywhere in the world. With more than 300 days of sunshine per year supporting the cultivation of vineyards, Moldova is also one of the largest wine producers in the world. Moldova&#x27;s agricultural sector benefits from a geographical proximity to large markets, especially the European Union. , agriculture made up 12% of Moldova&#x27;s overall exports and 21% of overall employment. Its most exported foods are maize, wheat, sunflower seeds, grapes, apples, sugar beets, milk, potatoes, barley, plums/sloes, while relevant and important domestic industries include sugar processing, vegetable oil, food processing, and agricultural machinery. Between 2015 and 2022, agricultural production has almost doubled, particularly in vegetable and fruit production. In July 2023, a network of 20 seed libraries comprising over 1,000 seeds were created across Moldova with the assistance of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic, NGOs, and the United Nations Development Programme, with the aim is to improve local agricultural biodiversity, climate resilience, and the capacity of local government and farmers to respond effectively to changing environmental conditions.

Nevertheless, the country&#x27;s agricultural sector faces serious long-term challenges. Despite having relatively modest per capita greenhouse gas emissions, and lower than the world average, Moldova is highly vulnerable to climate change and related environmental disasters which already cost the country 2.13% of annual GDP. According to Climate-KIC, run by the European Institute of Innovation and Technology, &quot;The same region in Moldova can experience intense droughts and devastating floods in the course of a few months, which is the primary concern of local people when they talk about climate. But the irregular nature of these events made it difficult to sustain long term interest from Moldovan people or to channel money from donors.&quot;

===Transport infrastructure===
The main means of transportation in Moldova are railways and a highway system ( overall, including of paved surfaces). Rail links connect it via direct overnight trains to neighbouring Bucharest, Kyiv, Odesa, and also Moscow.

The Giurgiulești terminal on the Danube is compatible with small seagoing vessels. Shipping on the lower Prut and Nistru rivers plays only a modest role in the country&#x27;s transportation system.

The sole international air gateway of Moldova is the Chișinău International Airport. with direct flights to and from many European destinations.

=== Telecommunications ===

Internet in Moldova is among the fastest and least expensive in the world . The country ranks 3rd in the world by gigabit coverage with around 90% of the population having the option to subscribe to a gigabit-speed fibre-optic broadband plan. The United Nations Development Programme has judged it to have a highly developed digital infrastructure, with 98% 4G coverage of its territory. By July 2022, there were more than 3 million internet users in Moldova, constituting some 76% of the population. Moldova is considering a bid to begin rolling out 5G in 2024, with testing beginning in 2019. Starlink launched in Moldova in August 2022. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is one of the most promising economic sectors in Moldova, accounting for more than 10 percent of GDP. More than 2,000 Moldovan students per year graduate with a degree in computing or a related field.

The ITU&#x27;s Global Cybersecurity Index ranks Moldova on the 33rd place in Europe and the 63rd place in the world. The country&#x27;s joining in 2009 of the Convention on Cybercrime of the Council of Europe and adoption of the National Cyber Security Programme for 2016–2020 have established the legislative parameters for a safer digital environment. Since Russia&#x27;s invasion of neighbouring Ukraine and their campaign of cyberwarfare against Moldova, the Moldovan government has invested significant money and resources in developing stronger cybersecurity practices and regulations with assistance from the European Union and United States. The European Union has also set up and funded the Moldova Cybersecurity Rapid Assistance Unit to improve the cyber resilience of Moldova&#x27;s public sector organisations and key critical infrastructure sectors. Moldova has adopted new legislation partially drafted by the unit which will go into effect on 1 January 2025. The country has also passed legislation in order to more closely align with the EU&#x27;s GDPR regulations, and is currently mostly compliant.

===Banking===

The National Bank of Moldova is responsible for the financial system and has a responsibility to the management and control of all banks in Moldova. It is accountable to the Parliament of Moldova.

== Demographics ==

The most up-to-date and reliable information is available from the National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova&#x27;s website which is continuously updated on a monthly and yearly basis. The most recent national census of Moldova was carried out in 2014 (not including Transnistria). The next national census is due to be carried out in 2024.

=== Overview ===
Moldova has an estimated population of approx. 2,423,300 . Moldova is relatively urbanised, with 43.4% of Moldovans living in urban areas and an urbanisation rate of 0.09%. About one-third of the Moldovan population live in the capital city Chișinău&#x27;s metropolitan area. , the country&#x27;s population density is 82.8 inhabitants per 1 km2, and average life expectancy was 71.5 years (67.2 for males, and 75.7 for females). There are 100 women per 90 men in Moldova, and employed women have significantly higher levels of education, though women continued to earn 13.6% less than men on average. The number of elderly people (60 years and over) per 100 inhabitants in Moldova has increased year-on-year. The national language is Romanian, a Romance language, though approximately 15% of the Moldovan population also speak Russian .

The country has been suffering from long-term population decline due to high levels of emigration (in 2022, 43,000 more people left the country than came) as well as low fertility rates. According to Balkan Insight, the population has fallen by almost 33% since 1990, and by 2035 the total population may be half what it was in 1990. Since 2018, the number of deaths has exceeded the levels of live-births, though the gap has been reduced since 2021. , the average number of children per women of childbearing age was 1.69, well below the replacement rate of 2.1, as compared to 1.78 in 2019. The total number of deaths fell by 20.5% in 2022 compared to 2019. Unemployment has remained low at about 3% in 2022.

According to the 2014 national census, ethnic Moldovans made up approx. 75% of the country&#x27;s population, while Romanians (7%), Ukrainians (6.57%), Gagauzians (4.57%), and Russians (4.06%) made up the most substantial ethnic minorities. Smaller populations include Bulgarians (1.88%), Romani (0.34%), Belarusians (0.10%), Jews (0.06%), and Poles (0.05%).

=== Language ===

, the only official language of Moldova is Romanian, and all references to the Moldovan language in the constitution and legal bills have been amended to refer to Romanian. The 2014 Moldovan census for the first time collected information about the languages spoken by residents in Moldova. There is a controversy about whether or not Moldovan and Romanian should be considered distinct languages, and the Moldovan government rejects any distinction, however the census allowed for respondents to respond with their preferred label. The results were Moldovan (54.6%), Romanian (24.0%), Russian (14.5%), Ukrainian (2.7%), Gagauz (2.7%), Bulgarian (1.7%), and Other (0.5%).

=== Diaspora and emigration ===

Emigration is a mass phenomenon in Moldova and has a major impact on the country&#x27;s demographics and economy. It is estimated that more than between 1.2 and 2 million Moldovan citizens (over 25% of the population) are living and working abroad. The Moldovan economy is still heavily reliant on their remittance payments. Moldovans are found across the Balkan region, Western Europe, and North America. Among the most notable Moldovan diaspora populations are: 285,000 in Romania (2020), 258,600 in Ukraine (2002) 156,400 in Russia (2010), 188,923 in Italy (2019), 122,000 in Germany (2022), 26,300 in France (2019), and 20,470 in Canada (2021).

Current trends indicate that the population of Moldova will continue to fall with emigration remaining both chronic and higher than immigration or natural birth rates. In 2020, net emigration fell to a low of 7,000 , but by 2022, 43,000 more people left the country than came, though this is slightly down from net emigration of 45,000 in 2021. Russia&#x27;s invasion of neighbouring Ukraine and the economic impact on Moldova may have been a key contributing factor in the rise from 2020 to 2022. However, there are indications that the invasion of Ukraine and the country&#x27;s moves towards accession to the European Union may have led to a rise in the number of Moldovan emigrants returning to their country of birth, seeking to help the country join the EU. The Moldovan diaspora also had significant influence on recent Moldovan elections, voting overwhelmingly for Maia Sandu as president in 2020 and for her Party of Action and Solidarity in the 2021 parliamentary election.

=== Religion ===
Moldova&#x27;s constitution provides for freedom of religion and complete separation of church and state, though the constitution cites the &quot;exceptional importance&quot; of Eastern Orthodox Christianity. Discrimination on the basis of religious affiliation is illegal, and incitement to religious and ethnic hatred was made illegal in May 2022. Religion in Moldova is dominated by the Eastern Orthodox branch of Christianity. According to the 2014 Moldovan census, 90% of the country reported to be of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith. Of this number, approx. 80–90% of Orthodox Moldovans belong to the Moldovan Orthodox Church (formally known as Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova) which is subordinate to the Russian Orthodox Church, and has played a powerful role in deepening Russia&#x27;s influence in Moldova. The remaining 10–20% of Orthodox Moldovans belong to the Metropolis of Bessarabia, which is subordinate to the Romanian Orthodox Church.

Of the non-Orthodox population of Moldova, the United States Department of State estimates that , approx. 7% identify with no religion; Baptists, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and Pentecostals number between 15,000 and 30,000 each; the Jewish Community of the Republic of Moldova organisation estimates the Jewish population to be approx. 20,000; and the Islamic League of Moldova (an NGO recognised by the Moldovan Ministry of Justice in 2011 as representing Moldovan Muslims) estimates the number of Muslims to be approx. 15,000–17,000. There are six synagogues in Chișinău, one in Orhei, one in Soroca, and one in Tiraspol, and one mosque in Chișinău. The remaining less than 5% of the Moldovan population are Seventh-day Adventists, Evangelical Christians, Roman Catholics, Lutherans, and atheists. The Transnistrian authorities estimate that 80% of the population belong to the Moldovan Orthodox Church.

=== Health and fertility ===
Moldova provides universal healthcare through a mandatory health insurance scheme. According to the most recent 2022 official data, per 10,000 inhabitants there are 48.4 doctors and 91 units of average medical staff. Approx. 53% of those aged 16 and over in urban areas described their own health as &#x27;good&#x27; or &#x27;very good&#x27;, compared to approx. 33% of people of the same age in rural areas. The country has 86 hospitals, 1,524 pharmacies and branches, 12,600 physicians, 23,687 paramedical personnel, and 17,293 hospital beds. Moldova spends 6% of its annual GDP on health care, up from 4.9% in 2019.

As of 2022 the average life expectancy was 71.5 years (67.2 for males, and 75.7 for females), slightly lower than comparable countries such as Albania, Bulgaria, Latvia, and Ukraine. The number of elderly people (aged 60 years and over) per 100 inhabitants in Moldova has increased year-on-year. The total fertility rate per woman in 2022 was 1.69, a fall from 1.78 in 2019, and below the replacement rate of 2.1. There were 10.6 live births per 1,000 inhabitants in 2022, a drop from 12.2 in 2019, and 14.2 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants, an increase from 13.7 in 2019 but a significant fall from 17.5 in 2019. Infant mortality per 1,000 live-births was 9.0, a slight increase on 8.7 in 2020.

The overall number of deaths in 2022 fell by 20.5% compared to 2021. According to the National Agency for Public Health, the major causes of death in 2022 were diseases of the circulatory system (58%), cancerous tumours (15.8%), diseases of the digestive tract (7.5%), external causes (4.8%), and other causes (13.9%). More specifically, the leading causes of death in 2019 were Ischaemic heart disease, strokes, hypertensive heart disease, cirrhosis of the liver, and trachea, bronchus, and lung cancers.

On 19 December 2016, the Moldovan parliament approved raising the retirement age to 63 years from the current level of 57 for women and 62 for men, a reform that is part of a 3-year-old assistance programme agreed with the International Monetary Fund. The retirement age will be lifted gradually by a few months every year until it is fully in effect in 2028.

=== Education ===
As of the academic year 2022/23, Moldova had 1,218 primary and secondary schools, 90 vocational schools, and 21 higher education institutions, as well as 12 private higher education institutions. There were a total of 437,000 pupils and students. , Romania allocates 5,000 scholarships in high schools and universities for Moldovan students. Likewise, more than half of preschool children in Moldova benefit from Romania funded programme to renovate and equip kindergartens. Almost all the population is literate: the literacy rate of the population aged 15 and over is estimated at 99.6%.

The main higher education institutions in Moldova are the Moldova State University (est. 1946) and the Academy of Sciences of Moldova (est. 1961), both of which are located in Chișinău. The Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova (est. 1991) has featured on the Times Higher Education World University Rankings and has educated a number of national leaders including current President of Moldova Maia Sandu and leader of the opposition Igor Dodon. Other important universities include the Ion Creangă State Pedagogical University of Chișinău (est. 1940), Nicolae Testemițanu State University of Medicine and Pharmacy (est. 1945), and the Technical University of Moldova (est. 1964). Women account for 59.1% of students in higher education, and 70.1% of all foreign students in doctoral programmes in Moldova. 32.3% of employed women in Moldova have received higher education, compared to 24.5% of men, and 16.9% specialised secondary education compared to 11.3% of men.

=== Regional differences and tensions ===

Since independence, Moldova characterised by a substantial range of profound regional differences across its internationally recognised territory. Since independence, the country has struggled with issues of national identity, geopolitical strategy, and alliances, often torn between Romania and the European Union to the west and the Russian Federation to the east. Most notably, in eastern Moldova is the unrecognised breakaway state of Transnistria, which lies on the eastern bank of the Dniester river and borders Ukraine, which has pursued close diplomatic, military, and economic ties with Russia since 1992, with more than a thousand Russian soldiers stationed in the region. This has proved particularly difficult following Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, as Transnistria&#x27;s position on Ukraine&#x27;s south-western flank and its hosting of more than a thousand Russian soldiers poses a potential threat to Ukraine&#x27;s war efforts. The European Union&#x27;s High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Josep Borrell has confirmed that the pathway to accession does not depend upon a resolution of the Transnistria conflict.
There is further the issue of the autonomous territorial unit of Gagauzia. The Gagauz people are a Turkic-speaking people spread between southern Moldova and the south-west of Ukraine. While their exact origin is considered obscure, they have a strong sense of ethnic identity distinct from that of Moldova, Romania, and Ukraine, with a distinctive language and cultural traditions. They are nevertheless a heavily Russified group. Support for integration with Romania and the European Union is substantially lower among Gagauzians than among the broader Moldovan population. In 2014, shortly before the Republic of Moldova signed its EU Association Agreement, nearly 99 per cent of Gagauzians voted in a referendum &quot;to reject closer links with Europe in favour of joining the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union.&quot; In 2015, &quot;just over half of Gagauzians voted for the Russian-backed socialist candidate Irina Vlakh as governor.&quot; Gagauzia continues to represent a serious challenge both to Moldova&#x27;s territorial sovereignty and political stability due to Russia&#x27;s systemic involvement in the region, especially by backing pro-Russian local parties and leadership candidates. The European Centre for Minority Issues has also highlighted the role of supposedly-neutral NGO groups in Gagauzia as a new front in Russia&#x27;s hybrid-war against both Moldova and Ukraine. The region&#x27;s current local leader, Evghenia Guțul, in July 2023 thanked the fugitive Moldovan oligarch Ilan Shor, leader of the outlawed Moldovan pro-Russian opposition Șor Party, for his personal and financial support and his &quot;willingness to do what it takes so that we may fulfil our election promises&quot;, and expressed a desire for deeper diplomatic ties with Russia.

There is also substantial controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova concerning whether the Moldovan language and Moldovan people constitute separate linguistic and ethnic groups to the Romanian language and Romanian people. The possibility of the unification of Moldova and Romania has remained a popular topic in both countries since Moldova&#x27;s independence in 1991. Romania and Moldova enjoy exceptionally strong diplomatic relations. Romania supports Moldova&#x27;s rapid accession to the European Union, provides vast economic assistance to Moldova&#x27;s struggling economy, and provided up to 90% of Moldova&#x27;s energy needs via discounted capped prices as Moldova sought to reduce its reliance on Russian oil and natural gas. Relations have strengthened further since Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine. Up to 74% of the Romanian public and more than 40% of the Moldovan public would support Moldova being integrated into Romania in one form or another, though most in either country believe that &#x27;now is not the right time&#x27;. A 2022 survey during the Russian invasion of Ukraine indicated that only 11% of Romania&#x27;s population supports an immediate union, while over 42% think it is not the moment.

==Culture==

Moldova&#x27;s cultural tradition has been influenced primarily by the Romanian origins of its majority population, the roots of which go back to the second century AD, the period of Roman colonisation in Dacia. Located geographically at the crossroads of Latin, Slavic and other cultures, Moldova has enriched its own culture adopting and maintaining traditions of neighbouring regions and of other influential sources. The largest ethnic group, which had come to identify itself widely as &quot;Moldovan&quot; by the 14th century, played a significant role in the shaping of classical Romanian culture. The culture has been also influenced by the Byzantine culture, the neighbouring Magyar and Slavic populations, and later by the Ottoman Turks. A strong Western European influence in Moldovan literature and arts was prevalent in the 19th century. During the periods 1812–1917 and 1944–89, Moldovans were influenced by Russian and Soviet administrative control as well and by ethnic Russian immigration.

The country&#x27;s cultural heritage was marked by numerous churches and monasteries built by the Moldavian ruler Stephen the Great in the 15th century, by the works of the later renaissance Metropolitans Varlaam and Dosoftei, and those of scholars such as Grigore Ureche, Miron Costin, Nicolae Milescu, Dimitrie Cantemir and Ion Neculce. In the 19th century, Moldavians from the territories of the medieval Principality of Moldavia, divided into Bessarabia, Bukovina, and Western Moldavia (after 1859, Romania), made a significant contribution to the formation of the modern Romanian culture. Among these were many Bessarabians, such as Alexandru Donici, Alexandru Hâjdeu, Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu, Constantin Stamati, Constantin Stamati-Ciurea, Costache Negruzzi, Alecu Russo, Constantin Stere.

Mihai Eminescu, a late Romantic poet, and Ion Creangă, a writer, are the most influential Romanian language artists, considered national writers both in Romania and Moldova.

===Cuisine===

Moldova&#x27;s fertile soil (&quot;chernozem&quot;) produces plentiful grapes, fruits, vegetables, grains, meat, and milk products, all of which have found their uses in the national cuisine. The fertile black soil combined with the use of traditional agricultural methods permits the growth of a wide range of foods in Moldova. Moldovan cuisine is similar to neighbouring Romania, Ukraine, and Poland, and the regions share many traditional dishes, often with regional variations. Moldovan cuisine has historically been particularly influenced by elements of Russian, Turkish, and Ukrainian cuisine. Main dishes often include beef, pork, potatoes, cabbage, and a variety of cereals. Popular alcoholic beverages are &quot;divin&quot; (Moldovan brandy), beer, and wine—for which the country is known due to its high-quality offerings.

There are several traditional Moldovan dishes. Plăcinte are stuffed and deep-fried pastries with fillings such as soft cheese (often Urdă), cabbage, potatoes, apples, sour cherries and others, both sweet and savoury. Sarmale is a typical Moldovan dish usually consisting of cabbage leaves stuffed with rice, peppers, carrots, meat, and baked in oil. Regional variations can also be found in other former parts of the Ottoman Empire. Mămăligă, a kind of porridge made from yellow maize flour, is another staple. It is popular in other countries as polenta and is often served with sheep&#x27;s cheese and sour cream. Another traditional dish, plachyndy, is a kind of flatbread often made with kefir or buttermilk, wrapped around herbs, and pan-fried in oil. Zeamă is a thin chicken soup, typically consisting of homemade chicken broth prepared with a smaller whole chicken, water, thin homemade egg noodles (tăiței de casă), and a variety of finely chopped vegetables and herbs. Brynza is a soft sheep/goat cheese with a crumbly texture and tangy taste, mostly produced and popular in Slovakia, Romania, and Moldova, and often used in salads, pies, and dumplings.

Borscht, a sour Eastern European soup made from beetroots, meat stock, and vegetables, is also popular and commonly served in Moldova. As with other parts of the region, pierogi (known as &quot;chiroște&quot; in Moldova) are another traditional staple and are often stuffed with a soft cheese in Moldova. The dough is made with wheat flour and is boiled in salted water, pan-fried in oil, or baked in the oven. Medovik, a cake of Russian origin (and called Tort Smetanik in Moldova) is a popular layered cake with honey and smetana (sour cream) or condensed milk.

Total recorded adult alcohol consumption is approximately evenly split between spirits, beer, and wine. Notably, Moldova has among the highest alcohol consumption per capita in world, at of pure alcohol imbibed in 2016. This has fallen somewhat in recent years, but it remains a serious ongoing health concern.

=== Holidays ===

Most retail businesses close on New Year&#x27;s Day and Independence Day, but remain open on all other holidays. Christmas is celebrated either on 7 January, the traditional date in Old Calendarists Eastern Orthodox Churches, or on 25 December, with both dates being recognised as public holidays.

On 1 March features &quot;mărțișor&quot; gifting, which is a tradition that females are gifted with a type of talisman that is given for good luck.

===Music===
Among Moldova&#x27;s most prominent composers are Gavriil Musicescu, Ștefan Neaga and Eugen Doga.

In the field of pop music, Moldova has produced the band O-Zone, who came to prominence in 2003, with their hit song &quot;Dragostea Din Tei&quot;, which topped multiple notable single charts. Moldova has been participating in the Eurovision Song Contest since 2005. Another popular band from Moldova is Zdob și Zdub that represented the country in the 2005 Eurovision Song Contest, finishing sixth, also in 2021, with a similar result.

In May 2007, Natalia Barbu represented Moldova in Helsinki at the Eurovision Song Contest 2007 with her entry &quot;Fight&quot;. Natalia squeezed into the final by a very small margin. She took tenth place with 109 points.
Then Zdob și Zdub again represented Moldova in the 2011 Eurovision Song Contest finishing 12th.

The band SunStroke Project with Olia Tira represented the country in the 2010 Eurovision Song Contest with their hit song &quot;Run Away&quot;. Their performance gained international notoriety as an internet meme due to the pelvic thrusting and dancing of Sergey Stepanov, the band saxophonist. He has been dubbed &quot;Epic Sax Guy&quot;. SunStroke Project featured again in the 2017 Eurovision entry &quot;Hey Mama&quot; which got third place.

In 2015 a new musical project by the name of Carla&#x27;s Dreams has risen in popularity around Moldova. Carla&#x27;s Dreams reached the top charts in multiple countries in Europe with the release of their song &quot;Sub Pielea Mea&quot; in 2016. The song received a lot of airplay and reached number one place on the charts in Moldova as well as Russia. The group is still active and released their latest album in 2017. The theme of the musical group is &quot;Anonymous&quot; as they perform with painted faces, hoodies and sunglasses. The identity of the group members is still unknown.

Among most prominent classical musicians in Moldova are Maria Bieșu, one of the leading world&#x27;s sopranos and the winner of the Japan International Competition; pianist Mark Zeltser, winner of the USSR National Competition, Long-Thibaud-Crespin Competition in Paris and Busoni Competition in Bolzano, Italy.

===Media===

The right to freedom of speech and right to information are guaranteed by the Moldovan constitution. Reporters Without Borders improved Moldova&#x27;s Press Freedom Index ranking to 28th in 2023 from 89th in 2020, partly due to government legal reforms which made it easier for journalists to access official information. However, they cautioned that &quot;Moldova&#x27;s media are diverse but extremely polarised, like the country itself, which is marked by political instability and excessive influence by oligarchs.&quot; Moldova&#x27;s media are divided into pro-Russian and pro-Western camps and on party political lines. Oligarchs and political leaders strongly influence their editorial stances.

Television remains the most popular and trusted medium, while online social media is exerting increasing influence. Most private FM radio networks rebroadcast output from Russian and Romanian stations. The first publicly funded national radio broadcaster, Radio Moldova, has been broadcasting since 1939 from the capital city, Chişinău. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty is also widely available. Moldova&#x27;s state-owned national radio-TV broadcaster is Teleradio-Moldova (TRM), which broadcasts the TV channel Moldova 1.

There were 3 million internet users by July 2022, approximately 76% of the population, and digital infrastructure is well-developed, with 98% 4G coverage of territory. There are a number of daily and weekly newspapers published in Moldova, among the most popular being &quot;Timpul de dimineață&quot; and &quot;Moldova Suverană,&quot; but print media has an overall small audience in Moldova&quot;.&quot; Independent media are struggling to ensure financial sustainability in the face of diminishing advertisement revenues due to inflation, economic stagnation and uncertainty caused by Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine.

In 2022, the government removed the broadcasting licenses from six television stations for broadcasting pro-Russian propaganda and disinformation about Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine in violation of the country&#x27;s Audiovisual Services Code. The government stated that this was done in order to &quot;prevent the risk of disinformation or attempts to manipulate public opinion&quot;. All six were either owned or affiliated with Ilan Șhor, a fugitive pro-Russian politician and businessman who fled to Israel in 2019 after being convicted of fraud and money-laundering and sentenced to 15 years in prison &quot;in absentia&quot;. In October 2023 Orizont TV, ITV, Prime, Publika TV, Canal 2 and Canal 3 were also banned for undermining the local elections as well as blocking a number of Russian media outlets which includes the news agencies TASS and Interfax.

The cinema of Moldova developed in the 1960s during the Soviet period, nurturing a small but lively film industry. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and Moldova&#x27;s independence, the country&#x27;s economic stagnation and poverty has hampered the Moldovan film industry. Nevertheless, some films have seen some international success. Perhaps best-known are &quot;Lăutarii&quot; (1972), written and directed by Moldovan film-maker Emil Loteanu, and &quot;Wedding in Bessarabia&quot; (2009), which was co-produced by Romania, Moldova, and Luxembourg. In recent years Moldovan cinema has gained greater international attention. &quot;Carbon&quot; (2022), directed by Ion Borş, received positive acclaim by magazines such as Variety. It was the winner of the Transilvania International Film Festival&#x27;s Audience Award. For the 37th edition of the Fribourg International Film Festival, Moldova was featured in its &#x27;New Territory&#x27; section, which celebrates little-known film-making cultures. In July 2022, the United Nations Development Programme announced that it would be using state-of-the-art equipment to transfer more than 1,600 films from the Moldova-Film archive for posterity and cultural preservation. The United States assisted by equipping in 2021 a digitisation laboratory to restore and preserve its archive feature and documentary films, representing an important part of Moldova&#x27;s historical, cultural, and artistic heritage, and many of the films were broadcast on national TV with Romanian subtitles.

===Sports===

 Association football is the most popular team sport in Moldova. The governing body is the Moldovan Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA. The Moldova national football team played its first match in 1994, but never qualified to the UEFA European Championship. The most successful football club is Sheriff Tiraspol, the first and only Moldovan club to qualify for the group stage of the Champions League and the Europa League. Other winners of the Moldovan National Division include Zimbru Chișinău, Dacia Chișinău, FC Tiraspol and Milsami Orhei.

&quot;Trîntă&quot; (a form of wrestling) is the national sport in Moldova. Rugby union is popular as well. More than 10,000 supporters turn out for home internationals. Since 2004, playing numbers at all levels have more than doubled to 3,200. Despite the hardships and deprivations the national team are ranked 34th in the world. The most prestigious cycling race is the Moldova President&#x27;s Cup, which was first run in 2004. In chess, the Republic of Moldova has several international masters, among which can be mentioned Viorel Iordăchescu, Dmitry Svetushkin, and Viorel Bologan.

Radu Albot is one of the most successful Moldovan tennis players, with ATP singles (2019 Delray Beach Open) and doubles (2015 Istanbul Open) titles.

Athletes from Moldova have won European medals in athletics, biathlon, football, and gymnastics; world medals in archery, judo, swimming, and taekwondo; as well as Olympic medals in boxing, canoeing, shooting, weightlifting, and wrestling. Moldova made its Olympic debut at the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer. Olympic medalists include Sergei Mureiko, Oleg Moldovan, Vitalie Grușac, Veaceslav Gojan, and Serghei Tarnovschi. Nicolae Juravschi represented the Soviet Union at the 1988 Seoul Games, winning two medals.

==See also==

* Outline of Moldova

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* S.Res.148 – A resolution to express the sense of the Senate that the United States should support the right to self-determination of the people of the Republic of Moldavia and northern Bucovina 
* Moldova . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Moldova, Republic of from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;.
* Moldova profile from the BBC News.
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Moldova from International Futures.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="0" end="7" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="24" end="43" title="Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="50" end="60" title="Landlocked country" label="landlocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="72" end="86" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="122" end="129" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="254" end="261" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="278" end="285" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="321" end="349" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="unrecognised breakaway state"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="353" end="365" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="382" end="390" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="461" end="468" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="469" end="482" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="483" end="497" title="Representative democracy" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="538" end="546" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="667" end="691" title="Principality of Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849286" start="738" end="743" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1812)" label="ceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="751" end="765" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="773" end="787" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560551" start="813" end="825" title="Vassal and tributary states of the Ottoman Empire" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="847" end="857" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="950" end="959" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q958291" start="968" end="975" title="United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="1061" end="1079" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="1110" end="1126" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="autonomous state"/>
<link wikidata="Q139319" start="1138" end="1154" title="Russian Republic" label="Russian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="1311" end="1324" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="1364" end="1377" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="1391" end="1420" title="Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian autonomous republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="1525" end="1548" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="1562" end="1612" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="compelled to cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1620" end="1632" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="1665" end="1700" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1745" end="1776" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895819" start="1809" end="1830" title="Moldovan Declaration of Independence" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450299" start="2040" end="2063" title="constitution of Moldova" label="constitution of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="2110" end="2132" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="2140" end="2149" title="President of Moldova" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2153" end="2166" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="2173" end="2187" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="2191" end="2209" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="2235" end="2245" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029101" start="2247" end="2262" title="2020 Moldovan presidential election" label="elected in 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2346" end="2360" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q124652347" start="2497" end="2560" title="Moldovan neutrality" label="Moldova&amp;#x27;s constitutional commitment to military neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2597" end="2601" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="2625" end="2647" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2664" end="2671" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640215" start="2689" end="2748" title="List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="second poorest country in Europe by GDP per official capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="2803" end="2817" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="2844" end="2867" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="2954" end="2977" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="3033" end="3050" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="3056" end="3080" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="3086" end="3137" title="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q326816" start="3143" end="3199" title="GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development" label="GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q380340" start="3205" end="3255" title="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation" label="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107117898" start="3265" end="3281" title="Association Trio" label="Association Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q539053" start="3347" end="3360" title="Moldova (river)" label="Moldova River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338106" start="3438" end="3448" title="founding of Moldavia" label="foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="3456" end="3480" title="Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="3600" end="3617" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q592030" start="3622" end="3636" title="Grigore Ureche" label="Grigore Ureche"/>
<link wikidata="Q654356" start="3645" end="3651" title="Dragoș, Voivode of Moldavia" label="Dragoș"/>
<link wikidata="Q168903" start="3682" end="3689" title="aurochs" label="aurochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="3919" end="3953" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="4048" end="4079" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="4261" end="4281" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="4283" end="4290" title="Ancient history" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4295" end="4303" title="Medieval history" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="4352" end="4364" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="4467" end="4478" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="4480" end="4487" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4515" end="4524" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4529" end="4540" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="4545" end="4554" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="4622" end="4631" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="4633" end="4638" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="4640" end="4644" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4687" end="4692" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4697" end="4706" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="4729" end="4753" title="Principality of Moldavia" label="Principality of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338106" start="4754" end="4774" title="founding of Moldavia" label="emerged in the 1350s"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4829" end="4836" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="4878" end="4895" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="4914" end="4926" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4934" end="4948" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="5004" end="5039" title="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)" label="one of several Russian–Turkish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="5079" end="5089" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5110" end="5124" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="5238" end="5267" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="Moldavian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="5342" end="5349" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5402" end="5414" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="5483" end="5496" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="5530" end="5543" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="5607" end="5630" title="dissolution of the USSR" label="dissolution of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895819" start="5646" end="5667" title="Moldovan Declaration of Independence" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="5685" end="5701" title="Transnistria War" label="Transnistria War"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="5736" end="5749" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5942" end="5956" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029101" start="6018" end="6053" title="2020 Moldovan presidential election" label="November 2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="6093" end="6103" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q104821709" start="6217" end="6252" title="2024 Moldovan presidential election" label="November 2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="6370" end="6393" title="Republic" label="constitutional republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="6401" end="6411" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="6412" end="6432" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="6464" end="6485" title="Multi-party system" label="multi-party elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="6531" end="6542" title="Legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="6578" end="6587" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="6600" end="6620" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="6626" end="6635" title="President of Moldova" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="6650" end="6663" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769526" start="6726" end="6740" title="Prime Minister of Moldova" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="6755" end="6773" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="6807" end="6817" title="Parliament of Moldova" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q110300851" start="6877" end="6884" title="Cabinet of Moldova" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="6971" end="6992" title="Parliament of Moldova" label="Parliament of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q355844" start="7062" end="7073" title="party lists" label="party lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724238" start="7139" end="7168" title="Presidential Palace, Chișinău" label="Presidential Palace, Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="7361" end="7412" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q64505846" start="7428" end="7456" title="2021 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="2021 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="7501" end="7521" title="Fundamental rights" label="fundamental freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909066" start="7550" end="7580" title="Party of Action and Solidarity" label="Party of Action and Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994954" start="7671" end="7694" title="Constitution of Moldova (1994)" label="Constitution of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450299" start="7822" end="7845" title="Constitution of Moldova" label="Constitution of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="8239" end="8250" title="Judicial independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231512" start="8251" end="8271" title="Constitutional Court of Moldova" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="8382" end="8394" title="Magistrate" label="Magistrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="8529" end="8544" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="8554" end="8572" title="Act of Parliament" label="acts of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="8579" end="8598" title="presidential decree" label="presidential decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="8610" end="8632" title="Treaty" label="international treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231512" start="8950" end="8970" title="Constitutional Court of Moldova" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="9156" end="9172" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="9173" end="9188" title="direct election" label="direct election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288851" start="9460" end="9491" title="CIS Interparliamentary Assembly" label="CIS Interparliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="9564" end="9581" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="9640" end="9692" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="9705" end="9739" title="North Atlantic Cooperation Council" label="North Atlantic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="9745" end="9755" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="9761" end="9788" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="9797" end="9845" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="9896" end="9900" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="9908" end="9929" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="9960" end="9972" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="9986" end="10010" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="10028" end="10056" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q846490" start="10224" end="10287" title="European Union Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine" label="European Union Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="10595" end="10614" title="War of Transnistria" label="War of Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294406" start="10857" end="10884" title="foreign minister of Moldova" label="foreign minister of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q502593" start="10886" end="10900" title="Andrei Stratan" label="Andrei Stratan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626213" start="11116" end="11138" title="2012 Moldova security zone incident" label="security zone incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="11230" end="11249" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q57478" start="12036" end="12051" title="Nicolae Timofti" label="Nicolae Timofti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722563" start="12074" end="12094" title="Moldovan presidential election, 2011–2012" label="his election in 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="12133" end="12140" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426710" start="12160" end="12181" title="European Union Association Agreement" label="association agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="12251" end="12270" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="12329" end="12343" title="Traian Băsescu" label="Traian Băsescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="12477" end="12511" title="unification of Moldova and Romania" label="unification of Moldova and Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630181" start="12871" end="12887" title="energy blackmail" label="energy blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="13174" end="13197" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288851" start="13663" end="13694" title="CIS Interparliamentary Assembly" label="CIS Interparliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576279" start="14239" end="14272" title="Security and Intelligence Service of Moldova" label="Security and Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="14336" end="14339" title="Federal Security Service" label="FSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="14571" end="14579" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q814923" start="14795" end="14811" title="Potential enlargement of the European Union" label="candidate status"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="15000" end="15072" title="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy" label="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312901" start="15073" end="15086" title="Josep Borrell" label="Josep Borrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q82973" start="15172" end="15193" title="Transnistria conflict" label="Transnistria conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="15338" end="15369" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q117447415" start="16453" end="16483" title="European Union Partnership Mission in Moldova" label="Partnership Mission in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="16496" end="16530" title="Common Security and Defence Policy" label="Common Security and Defence Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="16670" end="16702" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="17170" end="17177" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="17179" end="17185" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="17187" end="17196" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="17207" end="17213" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="17227" end="17241" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="17243" end="17251" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="17253" end="17260" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="17266" end="17273" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="17391" end="17401" title="separatism" label="separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064785" start="17700" end="17713" title="Moldovan Ground Forces" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988547" start="17718" end="17727" title="Moldovan Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q834195" start="17999" end="18044" title="Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe" label="Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="18262" end="18286" title="Non-Proliferation Treaty" label="Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="18414" end="18448" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="18456" end="18477" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991240" start="18600" end="18620" title="Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms" label="UN Firearms Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q986826" start="18622" end="18665" title="Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe" label="Stability Pact Regional Implementation Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="18709" end="18713" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="18860" end="18867" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="18869" end="18887" title="Ivory Coast" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="18889" end="18894" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="18900" end="18907" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217046" start="18973" end="18980" title="Humvees" label="Humvees"/>
<link wikidata="Q111034766" start="19576" end="19599" title="European Peace Facility" label="European Peace Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="19999" end="20032" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942756" start="20053" end="20091" title="Russian military presence in Transnistria" label="1,500 Russian soldiers in Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195578" start="20186" end="20192" title="Unmanned combat aerial vehicle" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="20203" end="20240" title="Explosive ordnance disposal" label="explosive ordnance disposal equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503265" start="20275" end="20290" title="Moldovan Police" label="Moldovan police"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="20464" end="20477" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="20661" end="20681" title="Freedom of assembly" label="freedoms of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="20683" end="20689" title="Freedom of speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="20695" end="20703" title="Freedom of religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951901" start="20739" end="20759" title="Corruption in Moldova" label="pervasive corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="20965" end="20991" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="21008" end="21036" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="21084" end="21109" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="21134" end="21153" title="World Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="21407" end="21428" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314138" start="21730" end="21735" title="Intersex and LGBT" label="LGBTI"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="22082" end="22094" title="Pride parade" label="Pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164262" start="22268" end="22287" title="United States&amp;#x27; Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" label="Human Rights Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="22295" end="22328" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="23000" end="23014" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="23131" end="23150" title="Istanbul Convention" label="Istanbul Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="23234" end="23244" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064559" start="23389" end="23406" title="Venice Commission" label="Venice Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992941" start="23514" end="23565" title="Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights" label="Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="24288" end="24293" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826865" start="24331" end="24349" title="autonomous territorial unit" label="autonomous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="24351" end="24359" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q648767" start="24368" end="24393" title="Administrative-Territorial Units of the Left Bank of the Dniester" label="Left Bank of the Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q82973" start="24432" end="24440" title="Disputed status of Transnistria" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q241122" start="24528" end="24534" title="Comrat" label="Comrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="24539" end="24547" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="24619" end="24638" title="municipiu" label="municipality status"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="25108" end="25137" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="unrecognised breakaway region"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="25141" end="25153" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503265" start="25279" end="25306" title="Moldovan Police" label="General Police Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294302" start="25323" end="25351" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs (Moldova)" label="Ministry of Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q542797" start="25858" end="25872" title="Administrative divisions of Moldova" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328976" start="25977" end="26018" title="Special Forces Brigade &amp;quot;Fulger&amp;quot;" label="Special Forces Brigade &amp;quot;Fulger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20430087" start="26443" end="26465" title="Moldovan Border Police" label="Moldovan Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576279" start="26971" end="27004" title="Security and Intelligence Service of Moldova" label="Security and Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="27060" end="27077" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388514" start="27108" end="27120" title="Intelligence analysis" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="27125" end="27145" title="Counterintelligence" label="counter-intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="27732" end="27758" title="emergency medical services" label="emergency medical services"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="27760" end="27777" title="search and rescue" label="search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q897825" start="27797" end="27817" title="Firefighting" label="firefighting service"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="27948" end="27953" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019727" start="27955" end="27962" title="Briceni" label="Briceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q503469" start="27964" end="27969" title="Cahul" label="Cahul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014367" start="27975" end="27983" title="Călărași, Moldova" label="Călărași"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="28037" end="28063" title="mandatory health insurance" label="mandatory health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451763" start="28109" end="28134" title="Women&amp;#x27;s shelter" label="domestic violence shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="28382" end="28389" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="28397" end="28412" title="Black Sea Basin" label="Black Sea Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256191" start="28432" end="28435" title="45th parallel north" label="45°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="28440" end="28445" title="49th parallel north" label="49° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137519" start="28476" end="28479" title="26th meridian east" label="26°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277379" start="28484" end="28489" title="30th meridian east" label="30° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="28559" end="28579" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="28599" end="28606" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="28626" end="28633" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="28834" end="28838" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="28881" end="28889" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="29010" end="29020" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="29080" end="29108" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="unrecognised breakaway state"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="29112" end="29124" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="29401" end="29407" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="29465" end="29477" title="Giurgiulești" label="Giurgiulești"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231147" start="29528" end="29538" title="Port of Giurgiulești" label="river port"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="29568" end="29588" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="29612" end="29621" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q158821" start="29683" end="29692" title="Drohobych" label="Drohobych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974485" start="29896" end="29910" title="Dniester Liman" label="Dniester Liman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47940" start="30068" end="30082" title="Dealul Bălănești" label="Bălănești Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634276" start="30121" end="30138" title="Moldavian Plateau" label="Moldavian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021974" start="30346" end="30358" title="Bălți Steppe" label="Bălți Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493018" start="30433" end="30438" title="Codri" label="Codri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986154" start="30607" end="30619" title="Bugeac Plain" label="Bugeac Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q928120" start="30703" end="30719" title="Podolian Plateau" label="Podolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="30738" end="30753" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="30789" end="30798" title="Chernozem" label="Chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="30910" end="30918" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q843343" start="31132" end="31135" title="Bîc" label="Bîc"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="31156" end="31164" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="31204" end="31212" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="31287" end="31316" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="unrecognised breakaway region"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="31320" end="31332" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37801" start="31375" end="31380" title="Bălți" label="Bălți"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807338" start="31511" end="31515" title="Răut River" label="Răut"/>
<link wikidata="Q241122" start="31588" end="31594" title="Comrat" label="Comrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="31631" end="31648" title="autonomous region" label="autonomous region"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="31652" end="31660" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="31754" end="31763" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021260" start="32422" end="32429" title="Camenca" label="Camenca"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="32541" end="32560" title="Phytogeography" label="Phytogeographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q191862" start="32591" end="32610" title="East European Plain" label="East European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="32619" end="32640" title="Pontic–Caspian steppe" label="Pontic–Caspian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="32648" end="32667" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="32679" end="32693" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28658718" start="32739" end="32769" title="Central European mixed forests" label="Central European mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q723601" start="32771" end="32798" title="East European forest steppe" label="East European forest steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="32804" end="32817" title="Pontic steppe" label="Pontic steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="32938" end="32970" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="33063" end="33071" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="33073" end="33081" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="33086" end="33095" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333217" start="33443" end="33473" title="Ecological Movement of Moldova" label="Ecological Movement of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="33553" end="33599" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="33754" end="33771" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="33776" end="33812" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="United Nations Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="33870" end="33883" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="33914" end="33927" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="33933" end="33939" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="33958" end="33963" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="33979" end="34000" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q126683" start="34002" end="34008" title="Saiga antelope" label="saigas"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="34218" end="34225" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="34250" end="34256" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81091" start="34557" end="34563" title="wisent" label="wisent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192666" start="34640" end="34657" title="Białowieża Forest" label="Białowieża Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016022" start="34688" end="34719" title="Independence Day of the Republic of Moldova" label="Moldova&amp;#x27;s Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="34972" end="34980" title="Emerging market" label="emerging"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="35022" end="35045" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016022" start="35072" end="35084" title="Independence Day of the Republic of Moldova" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="35094" end="35106" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="35150" end="35164" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="35183" end="35193" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q439112" start="35485" end="35502" title="Population ageing" label="ageing population"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="35580" end="35613" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057397" start="36036" end="36050" title="Measures of national income and output" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="36540" end="36554" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="36635" end="36638" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="36785" end="36795" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="36870" end="36904" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="36915" end="36929" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="37587" end="37595" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="37839" end="37879" title="Information and communications technology" label="Information and Communication Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="38204" end="38215" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="38221" end="38228" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="38436" end="38482" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of neighbouring Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="38556" end="38564" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="38810" end="38818" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q844951" start="39274" end="39304" title="Chișinău International Airport" label="Chișinău International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="39376" end="39394" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam Schiphol"/>
<link wikidata="Q160556" start="39396" end="39414" title="Berlin Brandenburg Airport" label="Berlin Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="39416" end="39431" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London Stansted"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="39433" end="39456" title="Charles de Gaulle Airport" label="Paris–Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="39458" end="39466" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q181479" start="39474" end="39492" title="Ben Gurion Airport" label="Ben Gurion Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19101" start="39494" end="39516" title="Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport" label="Rome–Fiumicino Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661908" start="39518" end="39534" title="Istanbul Airport" label="Istanbul Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q193439" start="39540" end="39567" title="Dubai International Airport" label="Dubai International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="39635" end="39644" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="39646" end="39650" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="39652" end="39657" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="39737" end="39750" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212003" start="39934" end="39941" title="Cricova (winery)" label="Cricova"/>
<link wikidata="Q105969627" start="39990" end="40001" title="Mimi Castle" label="Castel Mimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15625039" start="40097" end="40110" title="Mileștii Mici (winery)" label="Mileștii Mici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="40206" end="40235" title="Eastern Orthodox Christianity" label="Eastern Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382751" start="40348" end="40357" title="Old Orhei" label="Old Orhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420960" start="40358" end="40372" title="List of cave monasteries" label="Cave Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813126" start="40464" end="40482" title="Nativity Cathedral, Chișinău" label="Nativity Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="40510" end="40516" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="40668" end="40677" title="Chernozem" label="Chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021974" start="40690" end="40702" title="Bălți Steppe" label="Bălți Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="40776" end="40795" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="40818" end="40826" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974468" start="40892" end="40920" title="National Museum of Fine Arts, Chișinău" label="National Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097810" start="40922" end="40946" title="Moldova State University" label="Moldova State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736098" start="40970" end="41007" title="National Museum of History of Moldova" label="National Museum of History of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="41116" end="41133" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="41171" end="41183" title="Tsar" label="Russian Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="41538" end="41546" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="41831" end="41838" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317185" start="41967" end="42010" title="International Organisation of Vine and Wine" label="International Organisation of Vine and Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="42026" end="42059" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294692" start="42322" end="42354" title="Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (Moldova)" label="Moldovan Ministry of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357585" start="42662" end="42677" title="grape varieties" label="grape varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140375" start="42827" end="42832" title="Codru (wine)" label="Codru"/>
<link wikidata="Q15625039" start="42918" end="42931" title="Mileștii Mici (winery)" label="Mileștii Mici"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="43098" end="43119" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q105969627" start="43228" end="43239" title="Mimi Castle" label="Mimi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065736" start="43274" end="43296" title="Cultural property" label="architectural monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436854" start="43363" end="43371" title="Bulboaca, Anenii Noi" label="Bulboaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q769224" start="43388" end="43398" title="Anenii Noi District" label="Anenii Noi"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="43764" end="43770" title="Arable land" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021974" start="43856" end="43868" title="Bălți Steppe" label="Bălți Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="44184" end="44198" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445636" start="44696" end="44710" title="Seed library" label="seed libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867005" start="44790" end="44839" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Czech Republic)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="44841" end="44845" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="44855" end="44891" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q397284" start="44926" end="44951" title="agricultural biodiversity" label="agricultural biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072637" start="44953" end="44971" title="climate resilience" label="climate resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="45217" end="45241" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="45309" end="45323" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q993120" start="45449" end="45496" title="European Institute of Innovation and Technology" label="European Institute of Innovation and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="46058" end="46067" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="46069" end="46073" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="46075" end="46080" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528087" start="46104" end="46116" title="Giurgiulești" label="Giurgiulești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="46133" end="46139" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="46205" end="46209" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="46214" end="46220" title="Nistru" label="Nistru"/>
<link wikidata="Q844951" start="46352" end="46382" title="Chișinău International Airport" label="Chișinău International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="46674" end="46687" title="Gigabit Ethernet" label="gigabit-speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="46688" end="46699" title="Optical fiber" label="fibre-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="46720" end="46756" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="47068" end="47076" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="47113" end="47153" title="Information and communications technology" label="Information and Communication Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838788" start="47331" end="47340" title="Bachelor of Computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="47366" end="47369" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093069" start="47521" end="47545" title="Convention on Cybercrime" label="Convention on Cybercrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="47553" end="47570" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197870" start="47791" end="47803" title="Cyberwarfare by Russia" label="cyberwarfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="47913" end="47926" title="cybersecurity" label="cybersecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="48426" end="48430" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="GDPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636071" start="48499" end="48523" title="National Bank of Moldova" label="National Bank of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="48669" end="48690" title="Parliament of Moldova" label="Parliament of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314923" start="48780" end="48836" title="National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova" label="National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="48929" end="48944" title="National Census" label="national census"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739149" start="48975" end="48979" title="2014 Moldovan census" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="48995" end="49007" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="49328" end="49336" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q248559" start="49344" end="49361" title="Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="49822" end="49830" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="49834" end="49850" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797605" start="50013" end="50023" title="Emigration from Moldova" label="emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851082" start="50126" end="50140" title="Balkan Insight" label="Balkan Insight"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="50465" end="50481" title="replacement rate" label="replacement rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739149" start="50655" end="50675" title="2014 Moldovan census" label="2014 national census"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="50684" end="50693" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="50754" end="50763" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="50770" end="50780" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="50790" end="50800" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauzians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="50814" end="50822" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="50907" end="50917" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="50927" end="50933" title="Romania" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="50943" end="50954" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="50982" end="50987" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="51027" end="51044" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450299" start="51120" end="51132" title="Constitution of Moldova" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038479" start="51318" end="51329" title="Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="51351" end="51359" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="51364" end="51372" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="51566" end="51574" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="51584" end="51592" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="51619" end="51628" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="51637" end="51643" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="51652" end="51661" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="51810" end="51822" title="demographics" label="demographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="52078" end="52084" title="Balkans" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="52160" end="52168" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="52197" end="52204" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="52224" end="52231" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="52717" end="52739" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111082103" start="52967" end="52998" title="Accession of Moldova to the European Union" label="accession to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="53245" end="53255" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029101" start="53272" end="53276" title="2020 Moldovan presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909066" start="53289" end="53319" title="Party of Action and Solidarity" label="Party of Action and Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q64505846" start="53327" end="53354" title="2021 Moldovan parliamentary election" label="2021 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="53552" end="53581" title="Eastern Orthodox Christianity" label="Eastern Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029282" start="53583" end="53597" title="Religious discrimination" label="Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="53652" end="53693" title="Hate speech" label="incitement to religious and ethnic hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="53764" end="53780" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q248559" start="54030" end="54068" title="Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova" label="Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="54098" end="54121" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300999" start="54260" end="54284" title="Metropolis of Bessarabia" label="Metropolis of Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="54314" end="54338" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="54388" end="54421" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="54477" end="54485" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="54487" end="54511" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="54517" end="54529" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q549381" start="54573" end="54616" title="Jewish Community of the Republic of Moldova" label="Jewish Community of the Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294862" start="54744" end="54772" title="Ministry of Justice (Moldova)" label="Moldovan Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469749" start="54797" end="54813" title="Islam in Moldova" label="Moldovan Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q111911849" start="54890" end="54900" title="List of synagogues in Moldova" label="synagogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q248559" start="54904" end="54912" title="Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q423258" start="54921" end="54926" title="Orhei" label="Orhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q853785" start="54935" end="54941" title="Soroca" label="Soroca"/>
<link wikidata="Q132572" start="54954" end="54962" title="Tiraspol" label="Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q248559" start="54982" end="54990" title="Metropolis of Chișinău and All Moldova" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="55050" end="55072" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="55074" end="55096" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55098" end="55113" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="55115" end="55124" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="55130" end="55138" title="Atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375985" start="55144" end="55169" title="Government of Transnistria" label="Transnistrian authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="55293" end="55313" title="Universal health care" label="universal healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="55324" end="55350" title="mandatory health insurance" label="mandatory health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107184" start="55721" end="55731" title="Pharmacy (shop)" label="pharmacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q330204" start="55772" end="55781" title="paramedic" label="paramedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q142259" start="55806" end="55818" title="hospital bed" label="hospital bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="56039" end="56046" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="56048" end="56056" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="56058" end="56064" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="56196" end="56216" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239894" start="56326" end="56337" title="Live birth rate" label="live births"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="56506" end="56522" title="Infant mortality" label="Infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="56749" end="56783" title="Cardiovascular disease" label="diseases of the circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="56791" end="56807" title="cancerous tumour" label="cancerous tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="56818" end="56849" title="Gastrointestinal disease" label="diseases of the digestive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="56968" end="56991" title="Coronary artery disease" label="Ischaemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8775887" start="57002" end="57028" title="hypertensive heart disease" label="hypertensive heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="57030" end="57039" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="57319" end="57346" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="57632" end="57639" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="57724" end="57731" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="57935" end="57947" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="57993" end="58006" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097810" start="58124" end="58148" title="Moldova State University" label="Moldova State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338761" start="58169" end="58199" title="Academy of Sciences of Moldova" label="Academy of Sciences of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="58242" end="58250" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671448" start="58256" end="58294" title="Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova" label="Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="58327" end="58375" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="58440" end="58460" title="President of Moldova" label="President of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="58461" end="58471" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164146" start="58501" end="58511" title="Igor Dodon" label="Igor Dodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146913" start="58554" end="58606" title="Ion Creangă State Pedagogical University of Chișinău" label="Ion Creangă State Pedagogical University of Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146986" start="58620" end="58681" title="Nicolae Testemițanu State University of Medicine and Pharmacy" label="Nicolae Testemițanu State University of Medicine and Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098106" start="58703" end="58734" title="Technical University of Moldova" label="Technical University of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="58842" end="58861" title="Postgraduate education" label="doctoral programmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016022" start="59232" end="59244" title="Independence Day of the Republic of Moldova" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="59363" end="59370" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="59379" end="59393" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="59414" end="59432" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="59518" end="59530" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="59570" end="59578" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="59597" end="59604" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q285280" start="59682" end="59692" title="Transnistria War" label="since 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="59811" end="59844" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="60063" end="60135" title="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy" label="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312901" start="60136" end="60149" title="Josep Borrell" label="Josep Borrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q82973" start="60235" end="60256" title="Transnistria conflict" label="Transnistria conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826865" start="60292" end="60319" title="autonomous territorial unit" label="autonomous territorial unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="60323" end="60331" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="60337" end="60350" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz people"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="60357" end="60372" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="60595" end="60615" title="Gagauz language" label="distinctive language"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="60673" end="60682" title="Russification" label="Russified"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731069" start="61176" end="61187" title="Irina Vlah" label="Irina Vlakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378220" start="61466" end="61501" title="European Centre for Minority Issues" label="European Centre for Minority Issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953349" start="61609" end="61619" title="Hybrid warfare" label="hybrid-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q118378361" start="61694" end="61708" title="Evghenia Guțul" label="Evghenia Guțul"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="61753" end="61761" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526147" start="61762" end="61771" title="Ilan Shor" label="Ilan Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624010" start="61828" end="61837" title="Șor Party" label="Șor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038479" start="62053" end="62076" title="Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova" label="substantial controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="62147" end="62164" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q487796" start="62169" end="62184" title="Moldovans" label="Moldovan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="62241" end="62258" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q852483" start="62303" end="62337" title="unification of Moldova and Romania" label="unification of Moldova and Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895855" start="62475" end="62495" title="Moldova–Romania relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="63130" end="63157" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062762" start="63368" end="63384" title="Origin of the Romanians" label="Romanian origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="63480" end="63485" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="63502" end="63507" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="63553" end="63558" title="Italic peoples" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="63560" end="63566" title="Slavic people" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63874" end="63900" title="Culture of Romania#Classical age" label="classical Romanian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="63946" end="63955" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="64419" end="64436" title="Stephen the Great" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973334" start="64510" end="64517" title="Varlaam, Metropolitan of Moscow" label="Varlaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600496" start="64522" end="64530" title="Dosoftei" label="Dosoftei"/>
<link wikidata="Q592030" start="64562" end="64576" title="Grigore Ureche" label="Grigore Ureche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604582" start="64578" end="64590" title="Miron Costin" label="Miron Costin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918880" start="64592" end="64607" title="Nicolae Milescu" label="Nicolae Milescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="64609" end="64626" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q897677" start="64631" end="64642" title="Ion Neculce" label="Ion Neculce"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="64729" end="64737" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="64752" end="64762" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="64764" end="64772" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q209754" start="64778" end="64794" title="Western Moldavia" label="Western Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166292" start="64943" end="64959" title="Alecu Donici" label="Alexandru Donici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001046" start="64961" end="64977" title="Alexandru Hâjdeu" label="Alexandru Hâjdeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389145" start="64979" end="65003" title="Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu" label="Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026018" start="65005" end="65023" title="Constantin Stamati" label="Constantin Stamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439303" start="65025" end="65050" title="Constantin Stamati-Ciurea" label="Constantin Stamati-Ciurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q868839" start="65052" end="65069" title="Costache Negruzzi" label="Costache Negruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442975" start="65071" end="65082" title="Alecu Russo" label="Alecu Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025879" start="65084" end="65100" title="Constantin Stere" label="Constantin Stere"/>
<link wikidata="Q184935" start="65103" end="65117" title="Mihai Eminescu" label="Mihai Eminescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="65126" end="65134" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204810" start="65145" end="65156" title="Ion Creangă" label="Ion Creangă"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="65193" end="65210" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="65328" end="65337" title="chernozem" label="chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="65364" end="65370" title="grapes" label="grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="65372" end="65378" title="fruits" label="fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="65392" end="65398" title="Food grain" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q265309" start="65666" end="65673" title="Romanian cuisine" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="65675" end="65682" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="65688" end="65694" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12505" start="65853" end="65860" title="Russian cuisine" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="65862" end="65869" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503789" start="65875" end="65892" title="Ukrainian cuisine" label="Ukrainian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="65932" end="65940" title="potatoes" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="65942" end="65949" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="65968" end="65975" title="cereals" label="cereals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66015" end="66020" title="Moldovan wine#Divin" label="divin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="66037" end="66043" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759568" start="66056" end="66060" title="Moldovan wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372494" start="66175" end="66183" title="Plăcintă" label="Plăcinte"/>
<link wikidata="Q655654" start="66261" end="66265" title="Urdă" label="Urdă"/>
<link wikidata="Q13434162" start="66345" end="66352" title="Sarma (food)" label="Sarmale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="66545" end="66559" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518603" start="66561" end="66569" title="Mămăligă" label="Mămăligă"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="66581" end="66589" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="66675" end="66682" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411808" start="66708" end="66727" title="Sheep milk cheese" label="sheep&amp;#x27;s cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="66732" end="66742" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q185749" start="66820" end="66825" title="kefir" label="kefir"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="66829" end="66839" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q698632" start="67106" end="67112" title="Bryndza" label="Brynza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546121" start="67118" end="67122" title="Soft cheese" label="soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411808" start="67123" end="67128" title="Sheep milk cheese" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q198815" start="67129" end="67140" title="goat cheese" label="goat cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="67212" end="67220" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551" start="67292" end="67299" title="Borscht" label="Borscht"/>
<link wikidata="Q697800" start="67462" end="67469" title="pierogi" label="pierogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249305" start="67620" end="67631" title="wheat flour" label="wheat flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390483" start="67703" end="67710" title="Medovik" label="Medovik"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="67806" end="67811" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q326061" start="67816" end="67823" title="Smetana (dairy product)" label="smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830455" start="67840" end="67854" title="condensed milk" label="condensed milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016022" start="68243" end="68259" title="Independence Day of the Republic of Moldova" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q358010" start="68369" end="68385" title="Old Calendarists" label="Old Calendarists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="68386" end="68409" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212214" start="68512" end="68520" title="mărțișor" label="mărțișor"/>
<link wikidata="Q459023" start="68697" end="68714" title="Gavriil Musicescu" label="Gavriil Musicescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343027" start="68716" end="68728" title="Ștefan Neaga" label="Ștefan Neaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632350" start="68733" end="68743" title="Eugen Doga" label="Eugen Doga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562" start="68803" end="68809" title="O-Zone" label="O-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161407" start="68869" end="68886" title="Dragostea Din Tei" label="Dragostea Din Tei"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="68977" end="69000" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q169146" start="69050" end="69062" title="Zdob și Zdub" label="Zdob și Zdub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="69099" end="69127" title="2005 Eurovision Song Contest" label="2005 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q231048" start="69197" end="69210" title="Natalia Barbu" label="Natalia Barbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10153" start="69250" end="69278" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2007" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319459" start="69300" end="69305" title="Fight (Natalia Barbu song)" label="Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q169146" start="69412" end="69424" title="Zdob și Zdub" label="Zdob și Zdub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10160" start="69458" end="69486" title="2011 Eurovision Song Contest" label="2011 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q683473" start="69513" end="69530" title="SunStroke Project" label="SunStroke Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q237084" start="69536" end="69545" title="Olia Tira" label="Olia Tira"/>
<link wikidata="Q10158" start="69577" end="69605" title="2010 Eurovision Song Contest" label="2010 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672585" start="69632" end="69640" title="Run Away (SunStroke Project and Olia Tira song)" label="Run Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="69703" end="69716" title="internet meme" label="internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740674" start="69824" end="69836" title="Epic Sax Guy" label="Epic Sax Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12723448" start="69996" end="70015" title="Carla&amp;#x27;s Dreams" label="Carla&amp;#x27;s Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q12723448" start="70056" end="70075" title="Carla&amp;#x27;s Dreams" label="Carla&amp;#x27;s Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636312" start="70598" end="70609" title="Maria Bieșu" label="Maria Bieșu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190547" start="70715" end="70727" title="Mark Zeltser" label="Mark Zeltser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631114" start="70770" end="70802" title="Long-Thibaud-Crespin Competition" label="Long-Thibaud-Crespin Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="70881" end="70898" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084" start="70903" end="70923" title="right to information" label="right to information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994954" start="70946" end="70967" title="Moldovan constitution" label="Moldovan constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="70969" end="70994" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="71019" end="71038" title="World Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="71701" end="71718" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM radio networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="71784" end="71826" title="Public broadcasting" label="publicly funded national radio broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030978" start="71828" end="71841" title="Radio Moldova" label="Radio Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="71909" end="71940" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q612637" start="72027" end="72044" title="Teleradio-Moldova" label="Teleradio-Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626256" start="72084" end="72093" title="Moldova 1" label="Moldova 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="72238" end="72240" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807665" start="72371" end="72390" title="Timpul de dimineață" label="Timpul de dimineață"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496085" start="72407" end="72423" title="Moldova Suverană" label="Moldova Suverană"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017523" start="72501" end="72518" title="Independent media" label="Independent media"/>
<link wikidata="Q20092524" start="72823" end="72845" title="Propaganda in Russia" label="pro-Russian propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="72871" end="72904" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526147" start="73154" end="73163" title="Ilan Shor" label="Ilan Șhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120784" start="73591" end="73608" title="cinema of Moldova" label="cinema of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268293" start="73962" end="73970" title="Lăutarii" label="Lăutarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610508" start="74029" end="74041" title="Emil Loteanu" label="Emil Loteanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979104" start="74053" end="74074" title="Wedding in Bessarabia" label="Wedding in Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586192" start="74354" end="74394" title="Transilvania International Film Festival" label="Transilvania International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667724" start="74446" end="74482" title="Fribourg International Film Festival" label="Fribourg International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="74617" end="74653" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300318" start="74757" end="74769" title="Moldova-Film" label="Moldova-Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993143" start="74796" end="74817" title="cultural preservation" label="cultural preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q843958" start="74869" end="74881" title="digitization" label="digitisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q738074" start="75237" end="75265" title="Moldovan Football Federation" label="Moldovan Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="75284" end="75288" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191142" start="75294" end="75324" title="Moldova national football team" label="Moldova national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="75384" end="75410" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q210768" start="75449" end="75465" title="FC Sheriff Tiraspol" label="Sheriff Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="75538" end="75554" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="75563" end="75576" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q384531" start="75599" end="75625" title="Moldovan National Division" label="Moldovan National Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q203513" start="75634" end="75649" title="FC Zimbru Chișinău" label="Zimbru Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q635644" start="75651" end="75665" title="FC Dacia Chișinău" label="Dacia Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q775469" start="75667" end="75678" title="FC Tiraspol" label="FC Tiraspol"/>
<link wikidata="Q423115" start="75683" end="75696" title="FC Milsami Orhei" label="Milsami Orhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q327248" start="75705" end="75711" title="Trîntă" label="Trîntă"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="75729" end="75738" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="75774" end="75785" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="76051" end="76063" title="cycling race" label="cycling race"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895792" start="76071" end="76099" title="Moldova President&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Moldova President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468090" start="76228" end="76246" title="Viorel Iordăchescu" label="Viorel Iordăchescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774368" start="76248" end="76265" title="Dmitry Svetushkin" label="Dmitry Svetushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q728179" start="76271" end="76285" title="Victor Bologan" label="Viorel Bologan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281705" start="76288" end="76298" title="Radu Albot" label="Radu Albot"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="76359" end="76362" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q61744086" start="76372" end="76394" title="2019 Delray Beach Open – Singles" label="2019 Delray Beach Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q19832739" start="76409" end="76427" title="2015 Istanbul Open – Doubles" label="2015 Istanbul Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="76488" end="76497" title="track and field" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="76499" end="76507" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="76509" end="76517" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="76551" end="76558" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="76580" end="76589" title="taekwondo" label="taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="76620" end="76626" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856109" start="76628" end="76636" title="canoeing" label="canoeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="76638" end="76646" title="shooting sports" label="shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q83462" start="76648" end="76661" title="Olympic weightlifting" label="weightlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q838089" start="76667" end="76676" title="amateur wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9663" start="76716" end="76736" title="1994 Winter Olympics" label="1994 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q724851" start="76779" end="76793" title="Sergei Mureiko" label="Sergei Mureiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355730" start="76795" end="76808" title="Oleg Moldovan" label="Oleg Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633027" start="76810" end="76824" title="Vitalie Grușac" label="Vitalie Grușac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779240" start="76826" end="76841" title="Veaceslav Gojan" label="Veaceslav Gojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21001048" start="76847" end="76865" title="Serghei Tarnovschi" label="Serghei Tarnovschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953047" start="76867" end="76884" title="Nicolae Juravschi" label="Nicolae Juravschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="76921" end="76937" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Seoul Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112364" start="76976" end="76994" title="Outline of Moldova" label="Outline of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="77256" end="77274" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="77282" end="77309" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="77401" end="77409" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="77459" end="77480" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19261" wikidata="Q235" url="?curid=19261" title="Monaco">
<text>Monaco, officially the Principality of Monaco, is a sovereign city-state and microstate on the French Riviera a few kilometres west of the Italian region of Liguria, in Western Europe, on the Mediterranean Sea. It is a semi-enclave bordered by France to the north, east and west. The principality is home to nearly 39,000 residents as of the 2020s, of whom about 9,500 are Monégasque nationals. It is recognised as one of the wealthiest and most expensive places in the world. The official language of Monaco is French. Monégasque, English and Italian are also spoken and understood by many residents.

With an area of , Monaco is the second-smallest sovereign state in the world, after Vatican City. Its population of 38,367 in 2023 makes it the most densely populated sovereign state. Monaco has the world&#x27;s shortest national coastline: . The principality is about from the border with Italy and consists of nine administrative wards, the largest of which is Monte Carlo.

The principality is governed under a form of constitutional monarchy, with Prince Albert II as head of state, who wields political power despite his constitutional status. The prime minister, who is the head of government, can be either a Monégasque or French citizen; the monarch consults with the Government of France before an appointment. Key members of the judiciary are detached French magistrates. The House of Grimaldi has ruled Monaco, with brief interruptions, since 1297. The state&#x27;s sovereignty was officially recognised by the Franco-Monégasque Treaty of 1861, with Monaco becoming a full United Nations voting member in 1993. Despite Monaco&#x27;s independence and separate foreign policy, its defence is the responsibility of France, besides maintenance of two small military units.

Monaco&#x27;s economic development was spurred in the late 19th century with the opening of the state&#x27;s first casino, the Monte Carlo Casino, and a rail connection to Paris. Monaco&#x27;s mild climate, scenery, and gambling facilities have contributed to its status as a tourist destination and recreation centre for the rich. Monaco has become a major banking centre and sought to diversify into the services sector and small, high-value-added, non-polluting industries. Monaco is a tax haven; it has no personal income tax (except for French citizens) and low business taxes. Over 30% of residents are millionaires, with real estate prices reaching €100,000 ($116,374) per square metre in 2018. Monaco is a global hub of money laundering, and in June 2024 the Financial Action Task Force placed Monaco under increased monitoring to combat money laundering and terrorist financing.

Monaco is not part of the European Union (EU), but participates in certain EU policies, including customs and border controls. Through its relationship with France, Monaco uses the euro as its sole currency. Monaco joined the Council of Europe in 2004 and is a member of the (OIF). It hosts the annual motor race, the Monaco Grand Prix, one of the original Grands Prix of Formula One. The local motorsports association gives its name to the Monte Carlo Rally, hosted in January in the French Alps. The principality has a club football team, AS Monaco, which competes in French Ligue 1 and has been French champions on multiple occasions, as well as a basketball team, which plays in the EuroLeague. A centre of research into marine conservation, Monaco is home to one of the world&#x27;s first protected marine habitats, an Oceanographic Museum, and the International Atomic Energy Agency Marine Environment Laboratories, the only marine laboratory in the UN structure.

==History==
Monaco&#x27;s name comes from the nearby 6th-century BC Phocaean Greek colony. Referred to by the Ligurians as &quot;Monoikos&quot;, from the Greek &quot;μόνοικος&quot;, &quot;single house&quot;, from &quot;μόνος&quot; (&quot;monos&quot;) &quot;alone, single&quot; + &quot;οἶκος&quot; (&quot;oikos&quot;) &quot;house&quot;. According to an ancient myth, Hercules passed through the Monaco area and turned away the previous gods. As a result, a temple was constructed there. Because this &quot;House&quot; of Hercules was the only temple in the area, the city was called Monoikos. It ended up in the hands of the Holy Roman Empire, which gave it to the Genoese in 1191, in return for cracking down on pirates. By the Early 1200s, the Genoese had built a castle on the rock, and were utilizing the port.

An ousted branch of a Genoese family, the Grimaldi, captured it in 1297 by posing as monks but then had to contest it for a century before gaining official control. Though the Republic of Genoa would last until the 19th century, it allowed the Grimaldi family to keep Monaco. Likewise, both France and Spain left it alone for hundreds of years due to agreements with either of them, especially for defense. France annexed it in the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century, but after the defeat of Napoleon it was put under the care of the Kingdom of Sardinia.

In the 19th century, when Sardinia became a part of Italy, the region came under French influence but France allowed it to remain independent and it escaped being incorporated into Italy. However, it shrunk considerably when it traded two nearby towns, in exchange for sovereignty from France. Monaco relied on tourism from the late 19th century to remain financially solvent, and it was at this time the famous casino and hotels were established. Monaco was overrun by the Axis powers in the 1940s during the Second World War and for a short time was administered by Italy, then Nazi Germany, before being liberated. Although the occupation lasted for just a short time, it resulted in the deportation of the Jewish population and execution of several French Resistance members from Monaco. Since then Monaco has been independent. It has taken some steps towards integration with the European Union.

===Arrival of the Grimaldi family===

Following a grant of land from Emperor Henry VI in 1191, Monaco was refounded in 1215 as a colony of Genoa. Monaco was first ruled by a member of the House of Grimaldi in 1297, when Francesco Grimaldi, known as &quot;Malizia&quot; (translated from Italian either as &quot;The Malicious One&quot; or &quot;The Cunning One&quot;), and his men captured the fortress protecting the Rock of Monaco while dressed as Franciscan friars – a &quot;monaco&quot; in Italian – although this is a coincidence as the area was already known by this name.

Francesco was evicted a few years later by the Genoese forces, and the struggle over &quot;the Rock&quot; continued for another century. The Grimaldi family was Genoese and the struggle was something of a family feud. The Genoese engaged in other conflicts, and in the late 1300s Genoa lost Monaco after fighting the Crown of Aragon over Corsica. Aragon eventually became part of a united Spain, and other parts of the land grant came to be integrated piecemeal into other states. Between 1346 and 1355, Monaco annexed the towns of Menton and Roquebrune, increasing its territory by almost ten times.

===1400–1800===

In 1419, the Grimaldi family purchased Monaco from the Crown of Aragon and became the official and undisputed rulers of &quot;the Rock of Monaco&quot;. In 1612, Honoré II began to style himself &quot;Prince&quot; of Monaco. In the 1630s, he sought French protection against the Spanish forces and, in 1642, was received at the court of Louis XIII as a &quot;duc et pair étranger&quot;.

The princes of Monaco became vassals of the French kings while at the same time remaining sovereign princes. Though successive princes and their families spent most of their lives in Paris, and intermarried with French and Italian nobilities, the House of Grimaldi is of Genoese origin. The principality continued its existence as a protectorate of France until the French Revolution.

===19th century===

In 1793, Revolutionary forces captured Monaco and until 1814 it was occupied by the French (in this period much of Europe had been overrun by the French armies under the command of Napoleon Bonaparte). The principality was reestablished in 1814 under the Grimaldis. It was designated a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia by the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Monaco remained in this position until 1860 when, by the Treaty of Turin, the Sardinian forces pulled out of the principality; the surrounding County of Nice (as well as Savoy) was ceded to France. Monaco became a French protectorate once again. Italian was the official language in Monaco until 1860, when it was replaced by French.

Before this time there was unrest in Menton and Roquebrune, where the townspeople had become weary of heavy taxation by the Grimaldi family. They declared their independence as the Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune, hoping for annexation by Sardinia. France protested. The unrest continued until Charles III of Monaco gave up his claim to the two mainland towns (some 95% of the principality at the time) that had been ruled by the Grimaldi family for over 500 years.

These were ceded to France in return for 4,100,000 francs. The transfer and Monaco&#x27;s sovereignty were recognised by the Franco-Monégasque Treaty of 1861. In 1869, the principality stopped collecting income tax from its residents — an indulgence the Grimaldi family could afford to entertain thanks solely to the extraordinary success of the casino. This made Monaco a playground for the rich and a favoured place for them to live.

===20th century===
Until the Monégasque Revolution of 1910 forced the adoption of the 1911 Constitution of Monaco, the princes of Monaco were absolute rulers. The new constitution slightly reduced the autocratic rule of the Grimaldi family and Prince Albert I suspended it during the First World War.

In July 1918, a new Franco-Monégasque Treaty was signed, providing for limited French protection over Monaco. The treaty, endorsed in 1919 by the Treaty of Versailles, established that Monégasque international policy would be aligned with French political, military and economic interests. It also resolved the Monaco succession crisis.

In 1943, the Italian Army invaded and occupied Monaco, forming a fascist administration. In September 1943, after Mussolini&#x27;s fall from power, the German Wehrmacht occupied Italy and Monaco, and the Nazi deportation of the Jewish population began. René Blum, the prominent French Jew who founded the Ballet de l&#x27;Opéra in Monte Carlo, was arrested in his Paris home and held in the Drancy deportation camp outside the French capital before being transported to Auschwitz, where he was later murdered. Blum&#x27;s colleague Raoul Gunsbourg, the director of the Opéra de Monte-Carlo, helped by the French Resistance, escaped arrest and fled to Switzerland. In August 1944, the Germans executed René Borghini, Joseph-Henri Lajoux and Esther Poggio, who were Resistance leaders.

Rainier III, succeeded to the throne on the death of his grandfather, Prince Louis II, in 1949, and ruled until 2005. On 19 April 1956, Prince Rainier married the American actress Grace Kelly, an event that was widely televised and covered in the popular press, focusing the world&#x27;s attention on the tiny principality.

A 1962 amendment to the constitution abolished capital punishment, provided for women&#x27;s suffrage and established a Supreme Court of Monaco to guarantee fundamental liberties. In 1963, a crisis developed when Charles de Gaulle blockaded Monaco, angered by its status as a tax haven for wealthy French citizens.

In 1993, the Principality of Monaco became a member of the United Nations, with full voting rights.

===21st century===

In 2002, a new treaty between France and Monaco specified that, should there be no heirs to carry on the Grimaldi dynasty, the principality would still remain an independent nation rather than revert to France. Monaco&#x27;s military defense is still the responsibility of France.

On 31 March 2005, Rainier III, who was too ill to exercise his duties, relinquished them to his only son and heir, Albert. He died six days later, after a reign of 56 years, with his son succeeding him as Albert II, Sovereign Prince of Monaco. Following a period of official mourning, Prince Albert II formally assumed the princely crown on 12 July 2005, in a celebration that began with a solemn Mass at Saint Nicholas Cathedral, where his father had been buried three months earlier. His accession to the Monégasque throne was a two-step event with a further ceremony, drawing heads of state for an elaborate reception, held on 18 November 2005, at the historic Prince&#x27;s Palace in Monaco-Ville. On 27 August 2015, Albert II apologised for Monaco&#x27;s role during World War II in facilitating the deportation of a total of 90 Jews and resistance fighters, of whom only nine survived. &quot;We committed the irreparable in handing over to the neighbouring authorities women, men and a child who had taken refuge with us to escape the persecutions they had suffered in France,&quot; Albert said at a ceremony in which a monument to the victims was unveiled at the Monaco cemetery. &quot;In distress, they came specifically to take shelter with us, thinking they would find neutrality.&quot;

In 2015, Monaco unanimously approved a modest land reclamation expansion intended primarily to accommodate desperately needed housing and a small green/park area. Monaco had previously considered an expansion in 2008, but had called it off. The plan is for about six hectares (15 acres) of apartment buildings, parks, shops and offices to a land value of about 1 billion euros. The development will be adjacent to the Larvotto district and also will include a small marina. There were four main proposals, and the final mix of use will be finalised as the development progresses. The name for the new district is Anse du Portier.

On 29 February 2020, Monaco announced its first case of COVID-19, a man who was admitted to the Princess Grace Hospital Centre then transferred to Nice University Hospital in France.

On 3 September 2020, the first Monégasque satellite, OSM-1 CICERO, was launched into space from French Guiana aboard a Vega rocket. The satellite was built in Monaco by Orbital Solutions Monaco.

==Government==
===Politics===
Monaco has been governed under a constitutional monarchy since 1911, with the Sovereign Prince of Monaco as head of state. The executive branch consists of a Prime Minister as the head of government, who presides over the other five members of the Council of Government. Until 2002, the Prime Minister was a French citizen appointed by the prince from among candidates proposed by the Government of France; since a constitutional amendment in 2002, the Prime Minister can be French or Monégasque. On 2 September 2024, Prince Albert II appointed a French citizen, Didier Guillaume, to the office.

Under the 1962 Constitution of Monaco, the prince shares his veto power with the unicameral National Council. The 24 members of the National Council are elected for five-year terms; 16 are chosen through a majority electoral system and 8 by proportional representation. All legislation requires the approval of the National Council. Following the 2023 Monegasque general election, all 24 seats are held by the pro-monarchist Monegasque National Union.

The principality&#x27;s city affairs are managed by the Municipality of Monaco. The municipality is directed by the Communal Council, which consists of 14 elected members and is presided over by a mayor. Georges Marsan has been mayor since 2003. Unlike the National Council, communal councillors are elected for four-year terms and are strictly non-partisan; oppositions inside the council frequently form.

Members of the judiciary of Monaco are appointed by the Sovereign Prince. Key positions within the judiciary are held by French magistrates, proposed by the Government of France. Monaco currently has three examining magistrates.

===Security===
The wider defence of the nation is provided by France. Monaco has no navy or air force, but on both a per-capita and per-area basis, Monaco has one of the largest police forces (515 police officers for about 38,000 people) and police presences in the world. Its police includes a special unit which operates patrol and surveillance boats jointly with the military. Police forces in Monaco are commanded by a French officer.

There is also a small military force. This consists of a bodyguard unit for the prince and his palace in Monaco-Ville called the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince (Prince&#x27;s Company of Carabiniers); together with the militarised, armed fire and civil defence corps (Sapeurs-Pompiers) it forms Monaco&#x27;s total forces. The Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince was created by Prince Honoré IV in 1817 for the protection of the principality and the princely family. The company numbers exactly 116 officers and men; while the non-commissioned officers and soldiers are local, the officers have generally served in the French Army. In addition to their guard duties as described, the carabiniers patrol the principality&#x27;s beaches and coastal waters.

==Geography==

Monaco is a sovereign city-state, with five quarters and ten wards, located on the French Riviera in Western Europe. It is bordered by France&#x27;s Alpes-Maritimes department on three sides, with one side bordering the Mediterranean Sea. Its centre is about from Italy and only northeast of Nice.

It has an area of , or , and a population of 38,400, making Monaco the second-smallest and the most densely populated country in the world. The country has a land border of only , a coastline of , a maritime claim that extends , and a width that varies between .

Jurassic limestone is a prominent bedrock which is locally karstified. It hosts the &quot;Grotte de l&#x27;Observatoire&quot;, which has been open to the public since 1946.

The highest point in the country is at the access to the &quot;Patio Palace&quot; residential building on the Chemin des Révoires (ward Les Révoires) from the D6007 (&quot;Moyenne Corniche&quot; street) at above sea level. The lowest point in the country is the Mediterranean Sea.

Saint-Jean brook is the longest flowing body of water, around in length, and Fontvieille is the largest lake, approximately in area. Monaco&#x27;s most populated &quot;quartier&quot; is Monte Carlo, and the most populated ward is Larvotto/Bas Moulins.

After the expansion of Port Hercules, Monaco&#x27;s total area grew to or ; subsequently, new plans were approved to extend the district of Fontvieille by or , with land reclaimed from the Mediterranean Sea. Land reclamation projects include extending the district of Fontvieille. There are two ports in Monaco, Port Hercules and Port Fontvieille. There is a neighbouring French port called Cap d&#x27;Ail that is near Monaco. Monaco&#x27;s only natural resource is fishing; with almost the entire country being an urban area, Monaco lacks any sort of commercial agriculture industry.
A small residential expansion formerly called Le Portier was nearing completion in 2023, and additionally a new esplanade was added at Larvatto beach which also had some maintenance.

===Administrative divisions===
Monaco is the second-smallest country by area in the world; only Vatican City is smaller. Monaco is the most densely populated country in the world. The state consists of only one municipality (&quot;commune&quot;), the Municipality of Monaco. There is no geographical distinction between the State and City of Monaco, although responsibilities of the government (state-level) and of the municipality (city-level) are different. According to the constitution of 1911, the principality was subdivided into three municipalities:

*Monaco-Ville, the old city and seat of government of the principality on a rocky promontory extending into the Mediterranean, known as the Rock of Monaco, or simply &quot;The Rock&quot;;
*Monte Carlo, the principal residential and resort area with the Monte Carlo Casino in the east and northeast;
*La Condamine, the southwestern section including the port area, Port Hercules.

The municipalities were merged into one in 1917, and they were accorded the status of &quot;Wards&quot; or &quot;Quartiers&quot; thereafter.

*Fontvieille was added as a fourth ward, a newly constructed area claimed from the sea in the 1970s;
*Moneghetti became the fifth ward, created from part of La Condamine;
*Larvotto became the sixth ward, created from part of Monte Carlo;
*La Rousse/Saint Roman (including Le Ténao) became the seventh ward, also created from part of Monte Carlo.

Subsequently, three additional wards were created, but then again were dissolved in 2013:

*Saint Michel, created from part of Monte Carlo;
*La Colle, created from part of La Condamine;
*Les Révoires, also created from part of La Condamine.

Most of Saint Michel became part of Monte Carlo again in 2013. La Colle and Les Révoires were merged the same year as part of a redistricting process, where they became part of the larger Jardin Exotique ward. An additional ward was planned by new land reclamation to be settled beginning in 2014 but Prince Albert II announced in his 2009 New Year Speech that he had ended plans due to the economic climate at the time. Prince Albert II in mid-2010 firmly restarted the programme. In 2015, a new development called Anse du Portier was announced.

====Traditional quarters and modern geographic areas====
The four traditional &quot;quartiers&quot; of Monaco are Monaco-Ville, La Condamine, Monte Carlo and Fontvieille. The suburb of Moneghetti, the high-level part of La Condamine, is generally seen today as an effective fifth &quot;Quartier&quot; of Monaco, having a very distinct atmosphere and topography when compared with low-level La Condamine.

====Wards====

For town planning purposes, a sovereign ordinance in 1966 divided the principality into reserved sectors, &quot;whose current character must be preserved&quot;, and wards. The number and boundaries of these sectors and wards have been modified several times. The latest division dates from 2013 and created two reserved sectors and seven wards. A new 6-hectare district, Le Portier, has been built by land reclaimed from the sea and was opened in December 2024.

&quot;Note: for statistical purposes, the Wards of Monaco are further subdivided into 178 city blocks (îlots), which are comparable to the census blocks in the United States&quot;.

*Another possibility was Fontvieille II Development to commence in 2013

===Architecture===

Monaco exhibits a wide range of architecture, but the principality&#x27;s signature style, particularly in Monte Carlo, is that of the Belle Époque. It finds its most florid expression in the 1878–9 Casino and the Salle Garnier created by Charles Garnier and Jules Dutrou. Decorative elements include turrets, balconies, pinnacles, multi-coloured ceramics, and caryatids. These were blended to create a picturesque fantasy of pleasure and luxury, and an alluring expression of how Monaco sought and still seeks, to portray itself. This capriccio of French, Italian, and Spanish elements were incorporated into hacienda villas and apartments. Following major development in the 1970s, Prince Rainier III banned high-rise development in the principality. His successor, Prince Albert II, overturned this Sovereign Order. In recent years the accelerating demolition of Monaco&#x27;s architectural heritage, including its single-family villas, has created dismay. The principality has no heritage protection legislation.

==Climate==
Monaco has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Csa&quot;), with strong maritime influences, with some resemblances to the humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;). As a result, it has balmy warm, dry summers and mild, rainy winters. The winters are very mild considering the city&#x27;s latitude, being as mild as locations located much further south in the Mediterranean Basin. Cool and rainy interludes can interrupt the dry summer season, the average length of which is also shorter. Summer afternoons are infrequently hot (indeed, temperatures greater than are rare) as the atmosphere is temperate because of constant sea breezes. On the other hand, the nights are very mild, due to the fairly high temperature of the sea in summer. Generally, temperatures do not drop below in this season. In the winter, frosts and snowfalls are extremely rare and generally occur once or twice every ten years. On 27 February 2018, both Monaco and Monte Carlo experienced snowfall.

==Economy==

Monaco has the world&#x27;s highest GDP nominal per capita at US$185,742, GDP PPP per capita at $132,571 and GNI per capita at $183,150. It also has an unemployment rate of 2%, with over 48,000 workers who commute from France and Italy each day. According to the CIA World Factbook, Monaco has the world&#x27;s lowest poverty rate and the highest number of millionaires and billionaires per capita in the world. For the fourth year in a row, Monaco in 2012 had the world&#x27;s most expensive real estate market, at $58,300 per square metre. Although the average price went down in 2020, to an average price of $53,378 per square metre, Monaco remains one of the most expensive places in the world to buy property. By 2024, Monaco allows Visa-free travel from 86 countries around the world.
The world&#x27;s most expensive apartment is located in Monaco, a penthouse at the Odeon Tower valued at $335 million according to &quot;Forbes&quot; in 2016.

One of Monaco&#x27;s main sources of income is tourism. Each year many foreigners are attracted to its casinos and pleasant climate. It has also become a major banking centre, holding over €100 billion worth of funds. Banks in Monaco specialise in providing private banking, asset and wealth management services. Monaco is the only place in Europe where credit card points are not redeemable. Hotel points are not able to be accumulated nor are transactions recorded, allowing for an increase in privacy that is sought by many of the locals. The principality has successfully sought to diversify its economic base into services and small, high-value-added, non-polluting industries, such as cosmetics.

The state retains monopolies in numerous sectors, including tobacco and the postal service. The telephone network (Monaco Telecom) used to be fully owned by the state. Its monopoly now comprises only 45%, while the remaining 55% is owned by Cable &amp; Wireless Communications (49%) and Compagnie Monégasque de Banque (6%). Living standards are high, roughly comparable to those in prosperous French metropolitan areas.

Monaco is not a member of the European Union, but very closely linked via a customs union with France. As such, its currency is the same as that of France, the euro. Before 2002, Monaco minted its own coins, the Monegasque franc. Monaco has acquired the right to mint euro coins with Monegasque designs on its national side.

===Gambling industry===
The plan for casino gambling was drafted during the reign of Florestan I in 1846. Under Louis-Philippe&#x27;s petite-bourgeois regime a dignitary such as the Prince of Monaco was not allowed to operate a gambling house. All this changed in the dissolute Second French Empire under Napoleon III. The House of Grimaldi was in dire need of money.

The towns of Menton and Roquebrune, which had been the main sources of income for the Grimaldi family for centuries, were now accustomed to a much-improved standard of living and lenient taxation thanks to the Sardinian intervention and clamoured for financial and political concession, even for separation. The Grimaldi family hoped the newly legal industry would help alleviate the difficulties they faced, above all the crushing debt the family had incurred, but Monaco&#x27;s first casino would not be ready to operate until after Charles III assumed the throne in 1856.

The grantee of the princely concession (licence) was unable to attract enough business to sustain the operation and, after relocating the casino several times, sold the concession to French casino magnates François and Louis Blanc for 1.7 million francs.

The Blancs had already set up a highly successful casino (in fact the largest in Europe) in Bad-Homburg in the Grand Duchy of Hesse-Homburg, a small German principality comparable to Monaco, and quickly petitioned Charles III to rename a depressed seaside area known as &quot;Les Spelugues (Den of Thieves)&quot; to &quot;Monte Carlo (Mount Charles).&quot; They then constructed their casino in the newly dubbed &quot;Monte Carlo&quot; and cleared out the area&#x27;s less-than-savoury elements to make the neighbourhood surrounding the establishment more conducive to tourism.

The Blancs opened Le Grand Casino de Monte Carlo in 1858 and the casino benefited from the tourist traffic the newly built French railway system created. Due to the combination of the casino and the railroads, Monaco finally recovered from the previous half-century of economic slump and the principality&#x27;s success attracted other businesses. In the years following the casino&#x27;s opening, Monaco founded its Oceanographic Museum and the Monte Carlo Opera House, 46 hotels were built and the number of jewellers operating in Monaco increased by nearly five-fold. In an apparent effort not to overtax citizens, it was decreed that the Monégasque citizens were prohibited from entering the casino unless they were employees. By 1869, the casino was making such a vast sum of money that the principality could afford to end tax collection from the Monegasques—a masterstroke that was to attract affluent residents from all over Europe in a policy that still exists today.

Today, Société des bains de mer de Monaco, which owns Le Grand Casino, still operates in the original building that the Blancs constructed and has since been joined by several other casinos, including the Le Casino Café de Paris, the Monte Carlo Sporting Club &amp; Casino and the Sun Casino. The most recent addition in Monte Carlo is the Monte Carlo Bay Casino, which sits on 4 hectares of the Mediterranean Sea; among other things, it offers 145 slot machines, all equipped with &quot;ticket-in, ticket-out&quot; (TITO). It is the first Mediterranean casino to use this technology.

===Low taxes===

Monaco has a 20% VAT plus high social-insurance taxes, payable by both employers and employees. The employers&#x27; contributions are between 28% and 40% (averaging 35%) of gross salary, including benefits, and employees pay a further 10% to 14% (averaging 13%).

Monaco has never levied income tax on individuals, and foreigners are thus able to use it as a &quot;tax haven&quot; from their own country&#x27;s high taxes, because as an independent country, Monaco is not obliged to pay taxes to other countries.

The absence of a personal income tax has attracted many wealthy &quot;tax refugee&quot; residents from European countries, who derive the majority of their income from activity outside Monaco. Celebrities, such as Formula One drivers, attract most of the attention but the vast majority are lesser-known business people.

Per a bilateral treaty with France, French citizens who reside in Monaco must still pay income and wealth taxes to France. The principality also actively discourages the registration of foreign corporations, charging a 33 per cent corporation tax on profits unless they can show that at least three-quarters of turnover is generated within Monaco. Unlike classic tax havens, Monaco does not offer offshore financial services.

In 1998, the Centre for Tax Policy and Administration, part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), issued a first report on the consequences of the financial systems of known tax havens. Monaco did not appear in the list of these territories until 2004, when the OECD became indignant regarding the Monegasque situation and denounced it in a report, along with Andorra, Liechtenstein, Liberia, and the Marshall Islands. The report underlined Monaco&#x27;s lack of co-operation regarding financial information disclosure and availability. Later, Monaco overcame the OECD&#x27;s objections and was removed from the &quot;grey list&quot; of uncooperative jurisdictions. In 2009, Monaco went a step further and secured a place on the &quot;white list&quot; after signing twelve information exchange treaties with other jurisdictions.

In 2000, the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) stated: &quot;The anti-money laundering system in Monaco is comprehensive. Difficulties have been encountered with Monaco by countries in international investigations on serious crimes that appear to be linked also with tax matters. In addition, the FIU of Monaco (SICCFIN) suffers a great lack of adequate resources. The authorities of Monaco have stated that they will provide additional resources to SICCFIN.&quot;

Also in 2000, a report by French politicians Arnaud Montebourg and Vincent Peillon stated that Monaco had relaxed policies with respect to money laundering including within its casino and that the Government of Monaco had been placing political pressure on the judiciary so that alleged crimes were not being properly investigated. In its Progress Report of 2005, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) identified Monaco, along with 36 other territories, as a tax haven, but in its FATF report of the same year it took a positive view of Monaco&#x27;s measures against money-laundering.

The Council of Europe also decided to issue reports naming tax havens. Twenty-two territories, including Monaco, were thus evaluated between 1998 and 2000 on a first round. Monaco was the only territory that refused to perform the second round, between 2001 and 2003, whereas the 21 other territories had planned to implement the third and final round, planned between 2005 and 2007.

In June 2024, the FATF added Monaco to its &quot;grey list&quot;, which includes countries needing &quot;increased monitoring&quot; due to statewide issues of money laundering and terrorist financing.

===Numismatics===
Monaco issued its own coins in various devaluations connected to the écu already in the seventeenth century, but its first decimal coins of the Monégasque franc were issued in 1837 continued until 2001.

Although Monaco is not a European Union member, it is allowed to use the euro as its currency by arrangement with the Council of the European Union; it is also granted the right to use its own designs on the national side of the euro coins, which was introduced in 2002. In preparation for this date, the minting of the new euro coins started as early as 2001. Like Belgium, Finland, France, the Netherlands, and Spain, Monaco decided to put the minting date on its coins. This is why the first euro coins from Monaco have the year 2001 on them, instead of 2002, like the other countries of the Eurozone that decided to put the year of first circulation (2002) on their coins. Three different designs were selected for the Monégasque coins. The design was changed in 2006 after Prince Rainier&#x27;s death to feature the effigy of Prince Albert.
==Demographics==

Monaco&#x27;s total population was 38,400 in 2015, and estimated by the United Nations to be 36,297 as of 1 July 2023. Monaco&#x27;s population is unusual in that the native Monégasques are a minority in their own country: the largest group are French nationals at 28.4%, followed by Monégasque (21.6%), Italian (18.7%), British (7.5%), Belgian (2.8%), German (2.5%), Swiss (2.5%) and U.S. nationals (1.2%). According to 2019 studies, 31% of Monaco&#x27;s population is reported to be millionaires equalling up to 12,248 individuals

Citizens of Monaco, whether born in the country or naturalised, are called &quot;Monégasque&quot;. Monaco has the world&#x27;s highest life expectancy at nearly 90 years.

===Language===

The main and official language of Monaco is French, while Italian is spoken by the principality&#x27;s sizeable community from Italy. French and Italian are in fact more spoken in the principality today than Monégasque, its historic vernacular language. A variety of Ligurian, Monégasque is not recognised as an official language; nevertheless, some signage appears in both French and Monégasque, and the language is taught in schools. English is also used.

Italian was the official language in Monaco until 1860, when it was replaced by French. This was due to the annexation of the surrounding County of Nice to France following the Treaty of Turin (1860).

The Grimaldi, princes of Monaco, are of Ligurian origin; thus, the traditional national language is Monégasque, a variety of Ligurian, now spoken by only a minority of residents and as a common second language by many native residents. In Monaco-Ville, street signs are printed in both French and Monégasque.

===Religion===

Christians comprise a total of 86% of Monaco&#x27;s population.

According to Monaco 2012 International Religious Freedom Report, Roman Catholics are Monaco&#x27;s largest religious group, followed by Protestant Christians. The Report states that there is a Greek Orthodox church and two Protestant churches, an Anglican church and a Reformed church. There are also various other Evangelical Protestant communities that gather periodically..

The official religion is Catholicism, with freedom of other religions guaranteed by the constitution. There are five Roman Catholic parish churches in Monaco and one cathedral, which is the seat of the archbishop of Monaco..
The diocese, which has existed since the mid-19th century, was raised to a non-metropolitan archbishopric in 1981 as the Archdiocese of Monaco and remains exempt (i.e. immediately subject to the Holy See). The patron saint is Saint Devota

Monaco&#x27;s 2012 International Religious Freedom Report states that there is one Greek Orthodox church in Monaco. The Russian Orthodox Parish of the Holy Royal Martyrs meets in the Reformed Church&#x27;s Rue Louis Notari building..

There is one Anglican church (St Paul&#x27;s Church), located in the Avenue de Grande Bretagne in Monte Carlo. The church was dedicated in 1925. In 2007 this had a formal membership of 135 Anglican residents in the principality but was also serving a considerably larger number of Anglicans temporarily in the country, mostly as tourists. The church site also accommodates an English-language library of over 3,000 books. The church is part of the Anglican Diocese in Europe.

There is one Reformed church, which meets in a building located in Rue Louis Notari. The building dates from 1958 to 1959. The church is affiliated with the United Protestant Church of France (Église Protestante Unie de France, EPUF), a group that incorporates the former Reformed Church of France (Église Réformée de France). Through this affiliation with EPUF, the church is part of the World Communion of Reformed Churches. The church acts as a host church to some other Christian communities, allowing them to use its building..

The Monaco Parish of the Charismatic Episcopal Church (Parish of St Joseph) dates from 2017 and meets in the Reformed Church&#x27;s Rue Louis Notari building.

The Muslim population of Monaco consists of about 280 people, most of whom are residents, not citizens. The majority of the Muslim population of Monaco are Arabs, though there is a Turkish minority as well. Monaco does not have any official mosques.
According to the Monaco Statistics database (IMSEE), there are around 100 Hindus living in the country.
The Association Culturelle Israélite de Monaco (founded in 1948) is a converted house containing a synagogue, a community Hebrew school, and a kosher food shop, located in Monte Carlo. The community mainly consists of retirees from Britain (40%) and North Africa. Half of the Jewish population is Sephardic, mainly from North Africa, while the other half is Ashkenazi.

==Sports==
Two important sports for Monaco are football and racing, but there are a number of other sports played;sports are also a part of Monaco&#x27;s economy and culture. Monaco has competed in the Olympic Games, and also hosted competitive athletic sporting events. 

See Monaco at the Olympics for more on Monaco&#x27;s participation at the Olympic Games. Monaco has competed to varying degrees in every Olympic games except 1932, 1956, and 1980.

===Racing===
In addition to Formula One, the Circuit de Monaco hosts several support series, including FIA Formula 2, Porsche Supercup and Formula Regional Europe. It has in the past also hosted Formula Three and Formula Renault.
====Formula One====

Since 1929, the Monaco Grand Prix has been held annually in the streets of Monaco. It is widely considered to be one of the most prestigious automobile races in the world. The erection of the Circuit de Monaco takes six weeks to complete and the removal after the race takes another three weeks.

The circuit is narrow and tight and its tunnel, tight corners and many elevation changes make it perhaps the most demanding Formula One track.

One of most famous turns and slowest turns in all of F1 Racing is the &quot;Loews hairpin&quot;, later renamed &quot;Fairmont hairpin&quot; turn for the hotel at its bend.

====Formula E====
Starting in 2015 Formula E started racing biennially with the Historic Grand Prix of Monaco on the Monaco ePrix and used a shorter configuration of the full Formula 1 circuit, keeping it around Port Hercules until 2021.

ROKiT Venturi Racing is the only motor racing team based in the principality, headquartered in Fontvieille. The marque competes in Formula E and was one of the founding teams of the fully-electric championship. Managed by former racing drivers Susie Wolff (CEO) and Jérôme d&#x27;Ambrosio (Team Principal), the outfit holds 16 podiums in the series to date including five victories. 1997 Formula One World Champion Jacques Villeneuve and eleven-time Formula One race winner Felipe Massa have raced for the team previously. Ten-time Macau winner and 2021 vice World Champion Edoardo Mortara and Season 3 Formula E champion Lucas di Grassi currently race for the team.

====Monte Carlo Rally====
Since 1911 part of the Monte Carlo Rally has been held in the principality, originally held at the behest of Prince Albert I. Like the Grand Prix, the rally is organised by Automobile Club de Monaco. It has long been considered to be one of the toughest and most prestigious events in rallying and from 1973 to 2008 was the opening round of the World Rally Championship (WRC). From 2009 until 2011, the rally served as the opening round of the Intercontinental Rally Challenge. The rally returned to the WRC calendar in 2012 and has been held annually since. Due to Monaco&#x27;s limited size, all but the ending of the rally is held on French territory.
====Tour de France====
The 2009 Tour de France, the world&#x27;s premier cycle race, started from Monaco with a closed-circuit individual time trial starting and finishing there on the first day, and the second leg starting there on the following day and ending in Brignoles, France.

===Football===
Monaco hosts two major football teams in the principality: the men&#x27;s football club, AS Monaco FC, and the women&#x27;s football club, OS Monaco. AS Monaco plays at the Stade Louis II and competes in Ligue 1, the first division of French football. The club is historically one of the most successful clubs in the French league, having won Ligue 1 eight times (most recently in 2016–17) and competed at the top level for all but six seasons since 1953. The club reached the 2004 UEFA Champions League Final, with a team that included Dado Pršo, Fernando Morientes, Jérôme Rothen, Akis Zikos and Ludovic Giuly, but lost 3–0 to Portuguese team FC Porto. French World Cup-winners Thierry Henry, Fabien Barthez, David Trezeguet, and Kylian Mbappe have played for the club. The Stade Louis II also played host to the annual UEFA Super Cup from 1998 to 2012 between the winners of the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Europa League.

The women&#x27;s team, OS Monaco, competes in the women&#x27;s French football league system. The club plays in the local regional league, deep down in the league system. It once played in the Division 1 Féminine, in the 1994–95 season, but was quickly relegated.

The Monaco national football team represents the nation in association football and is controlled by the Monégasque Football Federation, the governing body for football in Monaco. Monaco is one of two sovereign states in Europe (along with the Vatican City) that is not a member of UEFA and so does not take part in any UEFA European Football Championship or FIFA World Cup competitions. They are instead affiliated with CONIFA, where they compete against other national teams that are not FIFA members. The team plays its home matches in the Stade Louis II.
===Other sports and events===
The Monte-Carlo Masters is held annually in neighbouring Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France, as a professional tournament for men as part of tennis&#x27;s ATP Masters Series. The tournament has been held since 1897. Golf&#x27;s Monte Carlo Open was also held at the Monte Carlo Golf Club at Mont Agel in France between 1984 and 1992.

Monaco has a national Davis Cup team, which plays in the European/African Zone.

Monaco has also competed in the Olympic Games, although, no athlete from Monaco has ever won an Olympic medal. At the Youth Olympic Winter Games, Monaco won a bronze medal in bobsleigh.

Monaco has also staged part of the Global Champions Tour (International Show-jumping). In 2009, the Monaco stage of the Global Champions tour took place between 25 and 27 June.

The Monaco Marathon is the only marathon in the world to pass through three countries, those of Monaco, France and Italy, before the finish at the Stade Louis II.

The Monaco Ironman 70.3 triathlon race is an annual event with over 1,000 athletes competing and attracts top professional athletes from around the world. The race includes a swim, bike ride and run.

Since 1993, the headquarters of the International Association of Athletics Federations, the world governing body of athletics, is located in Monaco. An IAAF Diamond League meet is annually held at Stade Louis II.

A municipal sports complex, the Rainier III Nautical Stadium in the Port Hercules district consists of a heated saltwater Olympic-size swimming pool, diving boards and a slide. The pool is converted into an ice rink from December to March.

From 10 to 12 July 2014 Monaco inaugurated the Solar1 Monte Carlo Cup, a series of ocean races exclusively for solar-powered boats.,

The women team of the chess club CE Monte Carlo won the European Chess Club Cup several times.

;Rugby

Monaco&#x27;s national rugby team, as of April 2019, is 101st in the World Rugby Rankings.

;Basketball
Multi-sport club AS Monaco owns AS Monaco Basket which was founded in 1928. They play in the top-tier European basketball league, the EuroLeague, and the French top flight, the LNB Pro A. They have three Pro A Leaders Cup, two Pro B (2nd-tier), and one NM1 (3rd-tier) championship. They play in Salle Gaston Médecin, which is part of Stade Louis II.

;Professional boxing
Due in part to its position both as a tourist and gambling centre, Monaco has staged major professional boxing world title and non-title fights from time to time; those include the Carlos Monzon versus Nino Benvenuti rematch, Monzon&#x27;s rematch with Emile Griffith, Monzon&#x27;s two classic fights with Rodrigo Valdes, Davey Moore versus Wilfredo Benitez, the double knockout-ending classic between Lee Roy Murphy and Chisanda Mutti (won by Murphy), and Julio César Chávez Sr. versus Rocky Lockridge. All of the aforementioned contests took place at the first Stade Louis II or the second Stade Louis II stadiums.

==Culture==

===Cuisine===
The cuisine of Monaco is a Mediterranean cuisine shaped by the cooking style of Provence and the influences of nearby northern Italian and southern French cooking, in addition to Monaco&#x27;s own culinary traditions.

Two famous restaurants in Monaco include the Le Louis XV, currently with three Michelin stars, and the Café de Paris. The Café de Paris is next to the Casino and first opened in 1868, though it has been renovated several times over its lifetime.

===Music===
Monaco has an opera house, a symphony orchestra and a classical ballet company. Monaco participated regularly in the Eurovision Song Contest between 1959–1979 and 2004–2006, winning in 1971, although none of the artists participating for the principality was originally Monegasque. French-born Minouche Barelli, however, acquired Monegasque citizenship in 2002, 35 years after her representing the principality in 1967.

===Visual arts===
Monaco has a national museum of contemporary visual art at the New National Museum of Monaco. In 1997, the Audiovisual Institute of Monaco was founded aimed to preserve audiovisual archives and show how the Principality of Monaco is represented in cinema. The country also has numerous works of public art, statues, museums, and memorials (see list of public art in Monaco).

===Museums in Monaco===

*Monaco Top Cars Collection
*Napoleon Museum (Monaco)
*Oceanographic Museum
*Museum of Stamps and Coins
*Monaco Naval Museum(&quot;Musee Naval&quot;)
===Events, festivals, and shows===
The Principality of Monaco hosts major international events such as : 
*International Circus Festival of Monte-Carlo
*Mondial du Théâtre
*Monte-Carlo Television Festival
*Golden Nymph Awards

===Bread Festival===
Monaco also has an annual bread festival on 17 September every year.

===Parks and Gardens===

There is several gardens in Monaco, which are in a variety of styles and purpose. There is an exotic plant garden, Saint Martin garden, African plants garden, Casino Gardens, Princess Grace Rose Garden, and a Japanese Gardens.

==Education==
===Primary and secondary schools===

Monaco has ten state-operated schools, including: seven nursery and primary schools; one secondary school, Collège Charles III; one &quot;lycée&quot; that provides general and technological training, Lycée Albert 1er; and one lycée that provides vocational and hotel training, Lycée technique et hôtelier de Monte-Carlo. There are also two grant-aided denominational private schools, Institution François d&#x27;Assise Nicolas Barré and Ecole des Sœurs Dominicaines, and one international school, the International School of Monaco, founded in 1994.

===Colleges and universities===
There is one university located in Monaco, namely the International University of Monaco (IUM), an English-language university specialising in business education and operated by the &quot;Institut des hautes études économiques et commerciales&quot; (INSEEC) group.

==Flag==
The flag of Monaco is one of the world&#x27;s oldest national flag designs. Adopted by Monaco on 4 April 1881, it is based on the Monaco Royal colors going back to the 14th century. The ISO code for the Flag is MC, which produces: 🇲🇨

The flag has similarities to the flags of German state of Hesse, Thuringia, Indonesia, Singapore, and Poland in the modern times.

==Transport==

One of the most important modes of local transportation is walking, and the city is expanding its pedestrian network in the 2020s to be more pedestrian friendly. This includes plans for a new pedestrian bridge in Fontvieille that connects to the new Wurtemberg footbridge.

The Monaco-Monte Carlo station is served by the SNCF, the French national rail system. The train station is the only one in Monaco, and connects the City-State by rail to French cities along the Riveria such as Nice, Cannes, and Marseille, and high-speed TGV trains connect to more distant locations such as Paris: a gateway to the rest of Europe. The current station is built partly underground and was opened in 1999.

The Monaco Heliport provides helicopter service to the closest airport, Côte d&#x27;Azur Airport in Nice, France. The heliport its located in the southwestern edge of Monaco.

The Monaco bus company (CAM) covers all the tourist attractions, museums, Exotic garden, business centres, and the Casino or the Louis II Stadium.

There is about 77 km (48 miles) of roads in Monaco, many sections of which are also used for automotive and other races.

==Relations with other countries==

Monaco is so old that it has outlived many of the nations and institutions that it has had relations with. The Crown of Aragon and Republic of Genoa became a part of other countries, as did the Kingdom of Sardinia. Honoré II, Prince of Monaco secured recognition of his independent sovereignty from Spain in 1633, and then from Louis XIII of France by the Treaty of Péronne (1641).

Monaco made a special agreement with France in 1963 in which French customs laws apply in Monaco and its territorial waters. Monaco uses the euro but is not a member of the European Union. Monaco shares a border with France but also has about of coastline with the Mediterranean sea. Two important agreements that support Monaco&#x27;s independence from France include the Franco-Monégasque Treaty of 1861 and the French Treaty of 1918 (see also Kingdom of Sardinia). The United States CIA Factbook records 1419 as the year of Monaco&#x27;s independence.
France and Italy have embassies within Monaco, while most other nations represented via operations in Paris. There are about another 30 or so consulates. By the 21st century Monaco maintained embassies in Belgium (Brussels), France (Paris), Germany (Berlin), the Vatican, Italy (Rome), Portugal (Lisbon), Spain (Madrid), Switzerland (Bern), United Kingdom (London) and the United States (Washington).

 nearly two-thirds of the residents of Monaco were foreigners. In 2015 the immigrant population was estimated at 60% It is reported to be difficult to gain citizenship in Monaco, or at least in relative number there are not many people who do so. In 2015 an immigration rate of about 4 people per 1,000 was noted, or about 100–150 people a year. The population of Monaco went from 35,000 in 2008 to 36,000 in 2013, and of that about 20 per cent were native Monegasque (see also Nationality law of Monaco).

A recurring issue Monaco encounters with other countries is the attempt by foreign nationals to use Monaco to avoid paying taxes in their own country. Monaco actually collects a number of taxes including a 20% VAT and 33% on companies unless they make over 75% of their income inside Monaco. Monaco does not allow dual citizenship but does have multiple paths to citizenship including by declaration and naturalisation. In many cases the key issue for obtaining citizenship, rather than attaining residency in Monaco, is the person&#x27;s ties to their departure country. For example, French citizens must still pay taxes to France even if they live full-time in Monaco unless they resided in the country before 1962 for at least 5 years. In the early 1960s there was some tension between France and Monaco over taxation.

There are no border formalities entering or leaving France. For visitors, a souvenir passport stamp is available on request at Monaco&#x27;s tourist office. This is located on the far side of the gardens that face the Casino.
==See also==

*Japanese Garden, Monaco
*Outline of Monaco
*Microstates and the European Union
*List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density
*List of rulers of Monaco
*List of diplomatic missions in Monaco
*List of diplomatic missions of Monaco 
*ISO 3166-2:MC

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

; Government
* Official Government Portal 
* Official website of the Prince&#x27;s Palace of Monaco 
*Chief of State and Cabinet Members. (.)
* Monaco Statistics Pocket – Edition 2014 

; General information
*Monaco . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Monaco from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Monaco . Information about Monaco.
*History of Monaco: Primary documents 
* 
*Google Earth view 

; Travel
*Official website for tourism 

; News
* Monaco from the BBC News
* NEWS.MC . English-language Monaco news source and publisher of daily newsletter &quot;Good Morning Monaco&quot;.
* Monacolife.net . English news portal.
* &quot;The Monaco Times&quot;  – A regular feature in &quot;The Riviera Times&quot; is the English language newspaper for the French–Italian Riviera and the Principality of Monaco provides monthly local news and information about the business, art and culture, people and lifestyle, events and also the real estate market.
* Monaco-IQ . Monaco information and news aggregator.

; Other
* Order of the doctors of Monaco </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="0" end="6" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="23" end="45" title="Monaco" label="Principality of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="52" end="61" title="Sovereign state" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="62" end="72" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377650" start="77" end="87" title="European microstates" label="microstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="95" end="109" title="French Riviera" label="French Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="139" end="153" title="Regions of Italy" label="Italian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="157" end="164" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="169" end="183" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="192" end="209" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="219" end="231" title="Enclave and exclave" label="semi-enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="244" end="250" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="284" end="296" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="481" end="498" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="512" end="518" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422" start="520" end="530" title="Monégasque dialect" label="Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="532" end="539" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="544" end="551" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="635" end="650" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="second-smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="687" end="699" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="747" end="769" title="List of countries by population density" label="most densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991288" start="881" end="898" title="France–Italy border" label="border with Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="966" end="977" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1025" end="1048" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="1055" end="1071" title="Prince Albert II" label="Prince Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1075" end="1088" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655971" start="1156" end="1170" title="Minister of State (Monaco)" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="1183" end="1201" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="1279" end="1299" title="Government of France" label="Government of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="1389" end="1406" title="House of Grimaldi" label="House of Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201387" start="1525" end="1557" title="Franco-Monégasque Treaties" label="Franco-Monégasque Treaty of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1587" end="1601" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027788" start="1761" end="1781" title="Military of Monaco" label="small military units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="1911" end="1929" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Monte Carlo Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q802754" start="1937" end="1952" title="Marseille–Ventimiglia railway" label="rail connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757766" start="2217" end="2233" title="High value products" label="high-value-added"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="2273" end="2282" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="2303" end="2313" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361588" start="2347" end="2365" title="Tax rates around the world" label="low business taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="2551" end="2578" title="Financial Action Task Force" label="Financial Action Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2699" end="2713" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897839" start="2724" end="2759" title="Monaco–European Union relations" label="participates in certain EU policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2854" end="2858" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2899" end="2916" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="2991" end="3008" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="3045" end="3056" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="3114" end="3131" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="3158" end="3169" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="3214" end="3223" title="AS Monaco" label="AS Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394" start="3250" end="3257" title="Ligue 1" label="Ligue 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330177" start="3271" end="3287" title="List of French football champions" label="French champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q185982" start="3360" end="3370" title="EuroLeague" label="EuroLeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916831" start="3398" end="3417" title="marine conservation" label="marine conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q851527" start="3497" end="3517" title="Oceanographic Museum of Monaco" label="Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="3527" end="3561" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="3604" end="3621" title="marine laboratory" label="marine laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q428732" start="3712" end="3719" title="Phocaea" label="Phocaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3721" end="3726" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="3754" end="3761" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="4010" end="4018" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4268" end="4285" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="4501" end="4509" title="House of Grimaldi" label="Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="4635" end="4652" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4891" end="4908" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="5007" end="5026" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="5055" end="5063" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="5503" end="5514" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5609" end="5621" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5739" end="5745" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="5782" end="5799" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589382" start="5893" end="5928" title="Microstates and the European Union" label="integration with the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="6008" end="6016" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943431" start="6151" end="6169" title="François Grimaldi" label="Francesco Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351922" start="6347" end="6361" title="Rock of Monaco" label="Rock of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="6379" end="6389" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="6826" end="6841" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="6847" end="6854" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="6856" end="6862" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="7041" end="7047" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="7052" end="7062" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q474802" start="7289" end="7298" title="Honoré II" label="Honoré II"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="7464" end="7474" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7698" end="7703" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7881" end="7898" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="8227" end="8246" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="8254" end="8272" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="8339" end="8354" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="Treaty of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706553" start="8425" end="8439" title="County of Nice" label="County of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="8452" end="8457" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="8654" end="8660" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="8665" end="8675" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559284" start="8798" end="8834" title="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune" label="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q382433" start="8916" end="8937" title="Charles III, Prince of Monaco" label="Charles III of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201387" start="9214" end="9238" title="Franco-Monégasque Treaties" label="Franco-Monégasque Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301694" start="9555" end="9576" title="Monégasque Revolution" label="Monégasque Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q63982" start="9617" end="9639" title="Constitution of Monaco" label="Constitution of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q721851" start="9645" end="9662" title="List of rulers of Monaco" label="princes of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="9668" end="9683" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q159646" start="9770" end="9785" title="Albert I, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201387" start="9848" end="9872" title="Franco-Monégasque Treaties" label="Franco-Monégasque Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="9974" end="9994" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897832" start="10139" end="10163" title="Monaco succession crisis of 1918" label="Monaco succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804988" start="10192" end="10219" title="The invasion and Occupation of Monaco during World War II" label="invaded and occupied Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="10231" end="10238" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="10325" end="10334" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896236" start="10419" end="10428" title="René Blum (ballet)" label="René Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="10530" end="10535" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q247958" start="10557" end="10563" title="Drancy internment camp" label="Drancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="10636" end="10645" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28265" start="10698" end="10713" title="Raoul Gunsbourg" label="Raoul Gunsbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577048" start="10735" end="10755" title="Opéra de Monte-Carlo" label="Opéra de Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="10771" end="10788" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="10817" end="10828" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="10951" end="10962" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="11028" end="11036" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="11131" end="11142" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="11356" end="11377" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743465" start="11396" end="11419" title="Supreme Court of Monaco" label="Supreme Court of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="11489" end="11506" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="11651" end="11665" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="12013" end="12024" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="12200" end="12209" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="12211" end="12237" title="Sovereign Prince of Monaco" label="Sovereign Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q667450" start="12400" end="12424" title="Saint Nicholas Cathedral, Monaco" label="Saint Nicholas Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164788" start="12659" end="12679" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Palace of Monaco" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="12683" end="12695" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484251" start="13339" end="13355" title="Land reclamation in Monaco" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="13560" end="13567" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="13664" end="13668" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088" start="13711" end="13719" title="Larvotto" label="Larvotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55125" start="13906" end="13921" title="Le Portier" label="Anse du Portier"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="13980" end="13988" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886628" start="14020" end="14050" title="Princess Grace Hospital Centre" label="Princess Grace Hospital Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198571" start="14071" end="14086" title="Nice University" label="Nice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="14204" end="14217" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q262629" start="14227" end="14238" title="Vega (rocket)" label="Vega rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="14367" end="14390" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="14412" end="14438" title="Prince of Monaco" label="Sovereign Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="14442" end="14455" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="14461" end="14477" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655971" start="14492" end="14506" title="Minister of State (Monaco)" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="14514" end="14532" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q593887" start="14582" end="14603" title="Council of Government" label="Council of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027038" start="14897" end="14913" title="Didier Guillaume" label="Didier Guillaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q63982" start="14946" end="14968" title="Constitution of Monaco" label="Constitution of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="14992" end="14996" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="15012" end="15022" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127198" start="15023" end="15039" title="National Council (Monaco)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081662" start="15278" end="15310" title="2023 Monegasque general election" label="2023 Monegasque general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q116693824" start="15356" end="15381" title="Monegasque National Union" label="Monegasque National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685392" start="15440" end="15462" title="Municipality of Monaco" label="Municipality of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153951" start="15500" end="15516" title="Communal Council of Monaco" label="Communal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961543" start="15581" end="15586" title="List of mayors of Monaco" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12948937" start="15588" end="15602" title="Georges Marsan" label="Georges Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="15729" end="15741" title="non-partisan" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="15743" end="15754" title="Opposition (politics)" label="oppositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q568997" start="15998" end="16018" title="examining magistrate" label="examining magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027788" start="16484" end="16498" title="Military of Monaco" label="military force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164788" start="16557" end="16563" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Palace of Monaco" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="16567" end="16579" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827639" start="16591" end="16626" title="Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince" label="Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417297" start="16734" end="16750" title="Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco" label="Sapeurs-Pompiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q526345" start="16844" end="16860" title="Honoré IV, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Honoré IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="16993" end="17017" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="17023" end="17030" title="soldier" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="17085" end="17096" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="17259" end="17269" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="17320" end="17334" title="French Riviera" label="French Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="17338" end="17352" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="17386" end="17401" title="Alpes-Maritimes" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="17457" end="17474" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="17501" end="17506" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="17529" end="17533" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="17607" end="17622" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="second-smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="17636" end="17674" title="List of countries by population density" label="densely populated country in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="17694" end="17705" title="land border" label="land border"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="17718" end="17727" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="17735" end="17749" title="Maritime boundary" label="maritime claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="17800" end="17808" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="17809" end="17818" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="17859" end="17864" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069352" start="18084" end="18103" title="Chemin des Révoires" label="Chemin des Révoires"/>
<link wikidata="Q55105" start="18110" end="18122" title="Les Révoires" label="Les Révoires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="18180" end="18195" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="18442" end="18453" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088" start="18486" end="18506" title="Larvotto" label="Larvotto/Bas Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="18532" end="18545" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="18679" end="18688" title="Reclaimed land" label="reclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="18804" end="18808" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q274193" start="18900" end="18914" title="Cap d&amp;#x27;Ail" label="Cap d&amp;#x27;Ail"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="18955" end="18971" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="18975" end="18982" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="19024" end="19034" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="19072" end="19092" title="agriculture" label="agriculture industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="19206" end="19215" title="esplanade" label="esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="19323" end="19354" title="list of sovereign states and dependencies by area" label="second-smallest country by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16502" start="19362" end="19367" title="world" label="world"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="19374" end="19386" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="19418" end="19435" title="list of countries and territories by population density" label="densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="19489" end="19501" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685392" start="19529" end="19551" title="Municipality of Monaco" label="Municipality of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="19781" end="19793" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="19838" end="19850" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351922" start="19977" end="19991" title="Rock of Monaco" label="Rock of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="20026" end="20037" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="20090" end="20108" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Monte Carlo Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095" start="20137" end="20149" title="La Condamine" label="La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="20201" end="20214" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="20309" end="20314" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="Wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="20360" end="20371" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q55108" start="20461" end="20471" title="Moneghetti" label="Moneghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088" start="20531" end="20539" title="Larvotto" label="Larvotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55089" start="20598" end="20619" title="Saint Roman (community)" label="La Rousse/Saint Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55112" start="20798" end="20810" title="Saint Michel, Monaco" label="Saint Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55102" start="20847" end="20855" title="La Colle, Monaco" label="La Colle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55105" start="20893" end="20905" title="Les Révoires" label="Les Révoires"/>
<link wikidata="Q19286504" start="21136" end="21156" title="Jardin Exotique, Monaco" label="Jardin Exotique ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q55125" start="21464" end="21479" title="Le Portier" label="Anse du Portier"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="21610" end="21622" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095" start="21624" end="21636" title="La Condamine" label="La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="21638" end="21649" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="21654" end="21665" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="21671" end="21677" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q55108" start="21681" end="21691" title="Moneghetti" label="Moneghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="22081" end="22086" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="22135" end="22140" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55125" start="22287" end="22297" title="Le Portier" label="Le Portier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348006" start="22469" end="22479" title="city block" label="city block"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058964" start="22518" end="22530" title="census block" label="census block"/>
<link wikidata="Q466887" start="22789" end="22801" title="Belle Époque" label="Belle Époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="22853" end="22859" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577048" start="22868" end="22881" title="Opéra de Monte-Carlo" label="Salle Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q313556" start="22893" end="22908" title="Charles Garnier (architect)" label="Charles Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278308" start="23190" end="23199" title="Capriccio (art)" label="capriccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="23338" end="23356" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="23422" end="23438" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787025" start="23534" end="23556" title="Architectural Heritage" label="architectural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="23697" end="23729" title="hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="23731" end="23760" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="23843" end="23868" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="24082" end="24101" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="24662" end="24673" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="24746" end="24768" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="GDP nominal per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="24784" end="24802" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="GDP PPP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435787" start="24819" end="24833" title="List of countries by GNI (nominal, Atlas method) per capita" label="GNI per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763895" start="24862" end="24879" title="List of countries by unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="24973" end="24991" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606009" start="25021" end="25040" title="List of countries by poverty" label="lowest poverty rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533145" start="25584" end="25595" title="Odeon Tower" label="Odeon Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="25638" end="25644" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935874" start="26479" end="26493" title="Monaco Telecom" label="Monaco Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015620" start="26605" end="26640" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Communications" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990223" start="26651" end="26681" title="Compagnie Monégasque de Banque" label="Compagnie Monégasque de Banque"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26815" end="26829" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="26945" end="26949" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047040" start="26997" end="27013" title="Monegasque franc" label="Monegasque franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q218010" start="27053" end="27063" title="euro coins" label="euro coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q632605" start="27069" end="27087" title="Monegasque euro coins" label="Monegasque designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464971" start="27196" end="27207" title="Florestan I, Prince of Monaco" label="Florestan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q75617" start="27245" end="27261" title="Petite bourgeoisie" label="petite-bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="27293" end="27309" title="Monarchy of Monaco" label="Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="27389" end="27409" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="27416" end="27428" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="27434" end="27451" title="House of Grimaldi" label="House of Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="27493" end="27499" title="Menton, France" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="27504" end="27514" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="27636" end="27654" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q382433" start="28015" end="28026" title="Charles III, Prince of Monaco" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450912" start="28262" end="28270" title="François Blanc" label="François"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165" start="28404" end="28415" title="Bad Homburg" label="Bad-Homburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q694269" start="28438" end="28451" title="Hesse-Homburg" label="Hesse-Homburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="28909" end="28939" title="Le Grand Casino de Monte Carlo" label="Le Grand Casino de Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q851527" start="29308" end="29328" title="Oceanographic Museum" label="Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577048" start="29337" end="29360" title="Monte Carlo Opera House" label="Monte Carlo Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162190" start="29876" end="29910" title="Société des bains de mer de Monaco" label="Société des bains de mer de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322510" start="30209" end="30231" title="Monte-Carlo Bay Hotel &amp;amp; Resort" label="Monte Carlo Bay Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800637" start="30357" end="30378" title="ticket-in, ticket-out" label="ticket-in, ticket-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="30760" end="30770" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="30774" end="30784" title="individual" label="individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="30837" end="30846" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="31179" end="31190" title="Celebrity" label="Celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="31200" end="31211" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="31539" end="31554" title="Corporate tax" label="corporation tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134341" start="31748" end="31788" title="Centre for Tax Policy and Administration" label="Centre for Tax Policy and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="31802" end="31856" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="31941" end="31950" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="32127" end="32134" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="32136" end="32149" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="32151" end="32158" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="32168" end="32184" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="32610" end="32657" title="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering" label="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q737311" start="33129" end="33146" title="Arnaud Montebourg" label="Arnaud Montebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q960643" start="33151" end="33166" title="Vincent Peillon" label="Vincent Peillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="33452" end="33479" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="33543" end="33552" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="33565" end="33569" title="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering" label="FATF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="33675" end="33692" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q273724" start="34345" end="34348" title="écu" label="écu"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="34505" end="34519" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="34553" end="34557" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="34598" end="34627" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q218010" start="34709" end="34719" title="euro coins" label="euro coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="35075" end="35083" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35416" end="35430" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075912" start="35829" end="35840" title="millionaire" label="millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="36013" end="36028" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="36110" end="36116" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="36124" end="36131" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422" start="36274" end="36284" title="Monégasque dialect" label="Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="36333" end="36341" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q706553" start="36663" end="36677" title="County of Nice" label="County of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="36702" end="36724" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="Treaty of Turin (1860)"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="36731" end="36739" title="Grimaldi Family" label="Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q721851" start="36741" end="36758" title="princes of Monaco" label="princes of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422" start="36827" end="36837" title="Monégasque language" label="Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="36852" end="36860" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="36966" end="36978" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="37433" end="37455" title="Evangelical Protestant" label="Evangelical Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="37521" end="37532" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q667450" start="37662" end="37671" title="Cathedral of Our Lady Immaculate" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365079" start="37698" end="37718" title="archbishop of Monaco" label="archbishop of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365079" start="37842" end="37863" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Monaco" label="Archdiocese of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="37931" end="37943" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q469978" start="37947" end="37959" title="Saint Devota" label="Saint Devota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="38044" end="38058" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571098" start="38112" end="38130" title="Canonization of the Romanovs" label="Holy Royal Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="38209" end="38217" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563892" start="38653" end="38670" title="Diocese in Europe" label="Diocese in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586103" start="38830" end="38864" title="United Protestant Church of France" label="United Protestant Church of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246720" start="39062" end="39098" title="World Communion of Reformed Churches" label="World Communion of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735771" start="39232" end="39260" title="Charismatic Episcopal Church" label="Charismatic Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="39371" end="39377" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="39523" end="39528" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="39548" end="39555" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="39608" end="39614" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="39864" end="39870" title="Kashrut" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="39971" end="39983" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="40018" end="40027" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="40079" end="40088" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q755996" start="40368" end="40390" title="Monaco at the Olympics" label="Monaco at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29383721" start="40648" end="40661" title="FIA Formula 2 Championship" label="FIA Formula 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277220" start="40663" end="40679" title="Porsche Supercup" label="Porsche Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60526675" start="40684" end="40707" title="Formula Regional European Championship" label="Formula Regional Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q548230" start="40758" end="40773" title="Formula Renault" label="Formula Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="40812" end="40829" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171400" start="40988" end="41005" title="Circuit de Monaco" label="Circuit de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="41217" end="41228" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="41445" end="41454" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965239" start="41490" end="41519" title="Historic Grand Prix of Monaco" label="Historic Grand Prix of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946292" start="41527" end="41539" title="Monaco ePrix" label="Monaco ePrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="41622" end="41635" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q15299181" start="41649" end="41669" title="Venturi Racing" label="ROKiT Venturi Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q268192" start="41893" end="41904" title="Susie Wolff" label="Susie Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q171996" start="41915" end="41937" title="Jérôme d&amp;#x27;Ambrosio" label="Jérôme d&amp;#x27;Ambrosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q69750" start="42032" end="42063" title="1997 Formula One World Championship" label="1997 Formula One World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172843" start="42064" end="42082" title="Jacques Villeneuve" label="Jacques Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q82652" start="42123" end="42135" title="Felipe Massa" label="Felipe Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536210" start="42181" end="42186" title="Guia Circuit" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q96464938" start="42198" end="42202" title="2020–21 Formula E World Championship" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q475100" start="42223" end="42238" title="Edoardo Mortara" label="Edoardo Mortara"/>
<link wikidata="Q22910703" start="42243" end="42251" title="2016–17 Formula E Championship" label="Season 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q172783" start="42271" end="42286" title="Lucas di Grassi" label="Lucas di Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="42366" end="42383" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q159646" start="42452" end="42467" title="Albert I, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q787490" start="42516" end="42541" title="Automobile Club de Monaco" label="Automobile Club de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="42628" end="42636" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="42688" end="42712" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q848350" start="42787" end="42819" title="Intercontinental Rally Challenge" label="Intercontinental Rally Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q217263" start="43025" end="43044" title="2009 Tour de France" label="2009 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q207584" start="43263" end="43272" title="Brignoles" label="Brignoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="43387" end="43399" title="AS Monaco FC" label="AS Monaco FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q318851" start="43471" end="43485" title="Stade Louis II" label="Stade Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394" start="43502" end="43509" title="Ligue 1" label="Ligue 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478152" start="43533" end="43548" title="French football" label="French football"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683328" start="43679" end="43686" title="2016–17 Ligue 1" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q500728" start="43775" end="43807" title="2004 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2004 UEFA Champions League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q296467" start="43835" end="43844" title="Dado Pršo" label="Dado Pršo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45567" start="43846" end="43864" title="Fernando Morientes" label="Fernando Morientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27649" start="43866" end="43879" title="Jérôme Rothen" label="Jérôme Rothen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419159" start="43881" end="43891" title="Akis Zikos" label="Akis Zikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q219771" start="43896" end="43909" title="Ludovic Giuly" label="Ludovic Giuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="43943" end="43951" title="FC Porto" label="FC Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q45901" start="43978" end="43991" title="Thierry Henry" label="Thierry Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191139" start="43993" end="44007" title="Fabien Barthez" label="Fabien Barthez"/>
<link wikidata="Q183967" start="44009" end="44024" title="David Trezeguet" label="David Trezeguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621995" start="44030" end="44043" title="Kylian Mbappe" label="Kylian Mbappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="44120" end="44134" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="44180" end="44201" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="44210" end="44228" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148179" start="44294" end="44323" title="French football league system" label="French football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231102" start="44424" end="44443" title="Division 1 Féminine" label="Division 1 Féminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q877555" start="44500" end="44529" title="Monaco national football team" label="Monaco national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="44555" end="44575" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091568" start="44601" end="44631" title="Monégasque Football Federation" label="Monégasque Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466300" start="44656" end="44674" title="football in Monaco" label="football in Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="44740" end="44752" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="44778" end="44782" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="44816" end="44851" title="UEFA European Football Championship" label="UEFA European Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="44855" end="44869" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999031" start="44917" end="44923" title="CONIFA" label="CONIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q459528" start="45089" end="45108" title="Monte-Carlo Masters" label="Monte-Carlo Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="45142" end="45163" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="45235" end="45253" title="ATP Tour Masters 1000" label="ATP Masters Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820728" start="45308" end="45324" title="Monte Carlo Open (golf)" label="Monte Carlo Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891756" start="45437" end="45451" title="Monaco Davis Cup team" label="Davis Cup team"/>
<link wikidata="Q755996" start="45512" end="45520" title="Monaco at the Olympics" label="competed"/>
<link wikidata="Q186196" start="45614" end="45640" title="Youth Olympic Games" label="Youth Olympic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126867" start="45718" end="45739" title="Global Champions Tour" label="Global Champions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943961" start="45865" end="45880" title="Monaco Marathon" label="Monaco Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318851" start="46008" end="46022" title="Stade Louis II" label="Stade Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="46262" end="46312" title="International Association of Athletics Federations" label="International Association of Athletics Federations"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="46342" end="46351" title="athletics (sport)" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13385309" start="46472" end="46500" title="Rainier III Nautical Stadium" label="Rainier III Nautical Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="46508" end="46521" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084454" start="46562" end="46588" title="Olympic-size swimming pool" label="Olympic-size swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="46647" end="46655" title="ice rink" label="ice rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q688875" start="46871" end="46894" title="European Chess Club Cup" label="European Chess Club Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608682" start="46919" end="46952" title="Monaco national rugby union team" label="Monaco&amp;#x27;s national rugby team"/>
<link wikidata="Q589794" start="46988" end="47008" title="World Rugby Rankings" label="World Rugby Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="47040" end="47049" title="AS Monaco FC" label="AS Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868091" start="47055" end="47071" title="AS Monaco Basket" label="AS Monaco Basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413602" start="47116" end="47151" title="European professional club basketball system" label="top-tier European basketball league"/>
<link wikidata="Q185982" start="47157" end="47167" title="EuroLeague" label="EuroLeague"/>
<link wikidata="Q25221447" start="47177" end="47183" title="French basketball league system" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062840" start="47200" end="47209" title="LNB Pro A" label="LNB Pro A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601636" start="47227" end="47244" title="LNB Pro A Leaders Cup" label="Pro A Leaders Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424175" start="47250" end="47255" title="LNB Pro B" label="Pro B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950973" start="47276" end="47279" title="Nationale Masculine 1" label="NM1"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936222" start="47318" end="47338" title="Salle Gaston Médecin" label="Salle Gaston Médecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q318851" start="47357" end="47371" title="Stade Louis II" label="Stade Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="47486" end="47505" title="professional boxing" label="professional boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q724670" start="47576" end="47589" title="Carlos Monzon" label="Carlos Monzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800396" start="47597" end="47611" title="Nino Benvenuti" label="Nino Benvenuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q59051" start="47648" end="47662" title="Emile Griffith" label="Emile Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16302322" start="47702" end="47716" title="Rodrigo Valdes" label="Rodrigo Valdes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054718" start="47718" end="47729" title="Davey Moore (boxer, born 1959)" label="Davey Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386541" start="47737" end="47753" title="Wilfred Benitez" label="Wilfredo Benitez"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="47759" end="47774" title="Knockout" label="double knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q540786" start="47798" end="47812" title="Lee Roy Murphy" label="Lee Roy Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189413" start="47817" end="47831" title="Chisanda Mutti" label="Chisanda Mutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q471461" start="47853" end="47875" title="Julio César Chávez" label="Julio César Chávez Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3388866" start="47883" end="47898" title="Rocky Lockridge" label="Rocky Lockridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446217" start="47953" end="47973" title="Stade Louis II (1939)" label="first Stade Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q318851" start="47981" end="48002" title="Stade Louis II" label="second Stade Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="48068" end="48089" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507158" start="48305" end="48316" title="Le Louis XV (restaurant)" label="Le Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932978" start="48363" end="48376" title="Café de Paris (Monaco)" label="Café de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577048" start="48533" end="48544" title="Opéra de Monte-Carlo" label="opera house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914921" start="48548" end="48566" title="Monte-Carlo Philharmonic Orchestra" label="symphony orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881296" start="48573" end="48597" title="Les Ballets de Monte Carlo" label="classical ballet company"/>
<link wikidata="Q255592" start="48636" end="48659" title="Monaco in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q209429" start="48704" end="48708" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q200498" start="48813" end="48829" title="Minouche Barelli" label="Minouche Barelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q205192" start="48933" end="48937" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345073" start="49021" end="49050" title="New National Museum of Monaco" label="New National Museum of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q107097927" start="49065" end="49096" title="Audiovisual Institute of Monaco" label="Audiovisual Institute of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970812" start="49302" end="49330" title="list of public art in Monaco" label="list of public art in Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010845" start="49360" end="49386" title="Monaco Top Cars Collection" label="Monaco Top Cars Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264191" start="49388" end="49412" title="Napoleon Museum (Monaco)" label="Napoleon Museum (Monaco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q851527" start="49414" end="49434" title="Oceanographic Museum" label="Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330282" start="49436" end="49462" title="Museum of Stamps and Coins" label="Museum of Stamps and Coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q90312646" start="49464" end="49483" title="Monaco Naval Museum" label="Monaco Naval Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q607585" start="49616" end="49660" title="International Circus Festival of Monte-Carlo" label="International Circus Festival of Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147084" start="49662" end="49680" title="Mondial du Théâtre" label="Mondial du Théâtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249934" start="49682" end="49713" title="Monte-Carlo Television Festival" label="Monte-Carlo Television Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934343" start="49715" end="49734" title="Golden Nymph Awards" label="Golden Nymph Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384208" start="49946" end="49965" title="Jardin Exotique de Monaco" label="exotic plant garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900477" start="49967" end="49986" title="St Martin Gardens" label="Saint Martin garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970814" start="50011" end="50025" title="Casino Gardens and Terraces" label="Casino Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217983" start="50036" end="50053" title="Fontvieille Park and Princess Grace Rose Garden" label="Grace Rose Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229360" start="50061" end="50077" title="Japanese Garden, Monaco" label="Japanese Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="50187" end="50194" title="Nursery school" label="nursery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="50199" end="50213" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="50220" end="50236" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="50263" end="50280" title="Secondary education in France" label="&amp;quot;lycée&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268559" start="50331" end="50347" title="Lycee Albert Premier" label="Lycée Albert 1er"/>
<link wikidata="Q572835" start="50606" end="50626" title="international school" label="international school"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848166" start="50632" end="50662" title="International School of Monaco" label="International School of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504327" start="50768" end="50802" title="International University of Monaco" label="International University of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661050" start="51282" end="51287" title="Flag of Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q148199" start="51289" end="51298" title="Flag of Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101472" start="51300" end="51309" title="Flag of Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483659" start="51311" end="51320" title="Flag of Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42436" start="51326" end="51332" title="Flag of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068842" start="51631" end="51641" title="footbridge" label="footbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q801195" start="51648" end="51674" title="Monaco-Monte-Carlo station" label="Monaco-Monte Carlo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="51692" end="51696" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q662619" start="52069" end="52084" title="Monaco Heliport" label="Monaco Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q821557" start="52137" end="52161" title="Nice Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur Airport" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121143" start="52245" end="52269" title="Compagnie des Autobus de Monaco" label="Monaco bus company (CAM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384208" start="52315" end="52328" title="Jardin Exotique de Monaco" label="Exotic garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="52658" end="52673" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="52678" end="52695" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="52741" end="52760" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q474802" start="52762" end="52789" title="Honoré II, Prince of Monaco" label="Honoré II, Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="52829" end="52840" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="52846" end="52851" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="52875" end="52885" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837203" start="52903" end="52927" title="Treaty of Péronne (1641)" label="Treaty of Péronne (1641)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="53071" end="53075" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201387" start="53303" end="53327" title="Franco-Monégasque Treaties" label="Franco-Monégasque Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53344" end="53365" title="Monaco succession crisis of 1918#French treaty of 1918" label="French Treaty of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="53376" end="53395" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393020" start="53573" end="53592" title="foreign relations of Monaco" label="operations in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="53627" end="53637" title="consulates" label="consulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336998" start="54365" end="54390" title="Nationality law of Monaco" label="Nationality law of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="55302" end="55310" title="passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229360" start="55458" end="55481" title="Japanese Garden, Monaco" label="Japanese Garden, Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112365" start="55483" end="55500" title="Outline of Monaco" label="Outline of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589382" start="55502" end="55536" title="Microstates and the European Union" label="Microstates and the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="55538" end="55610" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density" label="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q721851" start="55612" end="55636" title="List of rulers of Monaco" label="List of rulers of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616467" start="55638" end="55675" title="List of diplomatic missions in Monaco" label="List of diplomatic missions in Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665543" start="55677" end="55714" title="List of diplomatic missions of Monaco" label="List of diplomatic missions of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55717" end="55730" title="ISO 3166-2:MC" label="ISO 3166-2:MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="56001" end="56019" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="56027" end="56054" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="56270" end="56278" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19262" wikidata="Q1160498" url="?curid=19262" title="History of Monaco">
<text>The early history of [[Monaco]] is primarily concerned with the protective and strategic value of the Rock of Monaco, the area&#x27;s chief geological landmark, which served first as a shelter for ancient peoples and later as a fortress. Part of Liguria&#x27;s history since the fall of the Roman Empire, from the 14th to the early 15th century the area was contested for primarily political reasons. Since that point, excepting a brief period of French occupation, it has remained steadily under the control of the House of Grimaldi. 

The early history of Monaco as a state has its origins in the Republic of Genoa. The Holy Roman Empire granted Monaco to the Genoese. Later, the Genoese family of Grimaldi held it throughout the 13th century and later purchased it to rule as a principality. Over its history, it has enjoyed differing levels of autonomy from a parent state, which at times included the Republic of Genoa, the Crown of Aragon, Spain, and France. It was incorporated into France after the French Revolution, but later regained some autonomy as a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia in the 19th Century. In 1848, the two cities of Menton and Roquebrune (Mentone and Roccabruna) seceded and were later lost to France, but Monaco remained independent. France bought Mentone and Roccabruna, and agreed to respect Monaco&#x27;s sovereignty. Despite the loss of the two towns, from the 1860s onward its economy was focused on tourism and the country enjoyed stability until its territory was occupied by the Axis powers during World War II. After liberation, Monaco worked to secure further independence from France, and was recognized by the UN in 1993. It is not part of the European Union but uses the Euro currency.
==Early history and Ligurian settlement==

Grimaldi man lived here about 30,000 years ago.

According to the accounts of historian Diodorus Siculus and geographer Strabo, the area&#x27;s first permanent settlers were the mountain-dwelling Ligures, who emigrated from their native city of Genoa, in what is now northern Italy. However, the ancient Ligurian language is not directly connected to the Gallo-Italic language spoken by the modern inhabitants of Liguria, of which Monegasque is a dialect.

==Phoenician colonization and Melqart==

&quot;According to some authorities, the Egyptians of the Eighteenth Dynasty, according to others, the early Phoenicians were the first commercial navigators,&quot; who found refuge in the Port of Monaco from the mistral of the sea. The Port and Rock of Monaco were consecrated by the Phoenicians in the name of their deity Melqart. The colony was called &quot;Monoike&quot;. After the Phoenicians, the Greeks wrote about the progress and conquests of the journeys and labors of Heracles. The native Ligurian people asserted that Hercules passed through the area.

==Greek colonization and Herculean legend==
During the 6th-century BC, Phocaeans from Massalia (modern day Marseille) founded the colony of Monoikos. The name of the colony derives from the local veneration of the Greek demigod Heracles, also later adopted by the Romans, who was said to have constructed the ancient path that passed through the region from Spain to Italy. The Roman emperor Julian also wrote of Hercules&#x27;s construction of Monaco&#x27;s port and a coastal road. The road was dotted with altars to Heracles, and a temple dedicated to him was established on the Rock of Monaco. The name Port Hercules was subsequently used for the ancient port. &quot;Monoeci&quot; meaning &quot;Single One&quot; or &quot;Monoikos&quot; meaning &quot;Single House&quot; could be a reference to Hercules or his temple, or the isolated community inhabiting the area around the rock.

According to the &quot;travels of Heracles&quot; theme, also documented by Diodorus Siculus and Strabo, both Greeks and native Ligurian people asserted that Hercules passed through the area.

==Roman rule==

After the Gallic Wars, &quot;Monoecus&quot;, which served as a stopping-point for Julius Caesar on his way to campaign in Greece, fell under Roman control as part of the Maritime Alps province (Gallia Transalpina).

The Roman poet Virgil called it &quot;that castled cliff, Monoecus by the sea&quot;. The commentator Servius&#x27;s use of the passage asserts, under the entry &quot;portus&quot;, that the epithet was derived:
No temple to Hercules has been found at Monaco.

The port is mentioned in Pliny the Elder&#x27;s &quot;Natural History&quot; and in Tacitus&#x27;s &quot;Histories&quot;, when Fabius Valens was forced to put into the port.

==Dark ages to the Genoese==

Monaco remained under Roman control until the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in 476. The city was then under the domain of Odoacer until his fall at the hands of the Ostrogoths in the late 5th century. Monaco was recaptured by the Romans during the reign of Justinian in the mid-6th century and was held until its capture by the Lombards in the 7th century. Monaco then passed hands between the Lombards and Franks. After having been damaged by the Saracens in the 8th century, it was rebuilt by the monks of Saint-Pons in Nice, who held it territorially starting from 1075. The city was further damaged and nearly abandoned as Saracen raids continued after they had put under their control a part of Provence with a base at Fraxinetum. Monaco is again mentioned in the 11th century, when the church of St. Mary was built and a borough rose around it.

In 1191, Holy Roman Emperor Henry VI granted suzerainty over the area to the city of Genoa. On 10 June 1215, a detachment of Genoese Ghibellines led by Fulco del Cassello began the construction of a fortress atop the Rock of Monaco. This date is often cited as the beginning of Monaco&#x27;s modern history.

As the Ghibellines intended their fortress to be a strategic military stronghold and center of control for the area, they set about creating a settlement around the base of the Rock to support the garrison; in an attempt to lure residents from Genoa and the surrounding cities, they offered land grants and tax exemption to new settlers.

== Middle ages : Rise of the Grimaldis ==
The Grimaldis, descended from Otto Canella and taking their name from his son Grimaldo, were an ancient and prominent Guelphic Genoese family.
Members of this family, in the course of the civil strife in Genoa between the Guelphs and Ghibellines, took refuge in Monaco, accompanied by various other Guelphic families, most notably the Fieschis.

Francesco Grimaldi seized the Rock of Monaco in 1297, starting the Grimaldi dynasty, under the sovereignty of the Republic of Genoa. The Grimaldis acquired Menton in 1346 and Roquebrune in 1355, enlarging their possessions. In 1338 Monegasque ships under the command of Carlo Grimaldi participated, along with those of France and Genoa, in the English Channel naval campaign. Plunder from the sack of Southampton was brought back to Monaco, contributing to the principality&#x27;s prosperity.

The Treaty of Burgos in 1524 (or the treaty of Tordesilla of 1524), saw Monaco under the authority of Spain as autonomous state for about a century, and there was a Spanish garrison at the fortress.

Honoré II, Prince of Monaco secured recognition of his independent sovereignty from Spain in 1633, and then from Louis XIII of France by the Treaty of Péronne (1641). Since then the area has remained under the control of the Grimaldi family to the present day, except when under French control during the French Revolution from 1793 to May 17, 1814, as part of the &quot;département&quot; of Alpes-Maritimes.

It was a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia from 1815 to 1860. However, the towns of Mentone and Roccabruna ceded in 1848, and these were annexed by France in 1861. Monaco managed to avoid incorporation into France or Italy, but at the cost of most its territory at that time.

==Fall and rise 1789-1815==
From 1793 to 1814 Monaco was taken over by France.

In 1789, the French sized all the Princely financial assets. The French Revolution progressed, and in 1793 Monaco was seized by the French. The Princely family was put in prison (later freed), the art collections and assets were seized and sold off, and the palace was used as hospital and poor house. In 1814 Napoleon abdicated, and Honore IV was restored to power. However in the Final Act of the Congress of Vienna in 1815, Monaco was made a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia.

==Protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia==

From 1815 to 1860 Monaco was a part of the Kingdom of Sardinia, but was ceded to France in the 1860 Treaty of Turin. Monaco establish autonomy from France, by ceding Mentone and Roccabruna for 4 million France. (these became the French towns of Menton and Roquebrune Cap Martin)

The principality was re-established in 1814, only to be designated a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia by the Congress of Vienna in 1815 and the Treaty of Stupinigi in 1817. Monaco remained in this position until 1860, when by the Treaty of Turin, Sardinia ceded to France the surrounding county of Nice (as well as Savoy).

In 1848 the towns of Mentone and Roccaburna ceded from Monaco, and in 1849 became a separate protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia. (see also Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune)

With the protectorate, that lasted nearly half a century, Italian was the official language of Monaco. The Monégasque dialect is closer to Ligurian than French, but influenced by both.

During this time there was unrest in the towns of Menton and Roquebrune, which declared independence, hoping for annexation by Sardinia and participation in the Italian Risorgimento. The unrest continued until the ruling prince gave up his claim to the two towns (some 95% of the country), and they were ceded to France in return for four million francs. This transfer and Monaco&#x27;s sovereignty was recognised by the Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861.

==After 1860==

Designated as a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna after Napoleon&#x27;s defeat, Monaco&#x27;s sovereignty was confirmed by the Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861. France accepted the existence of the Principality of Monaco, but annexed 95% of its former territory (the areas of Menton and Roquebrune). Monaco&#x27;s military defense since then has been the responsibility of France.

In 1848 the towns of Menton and Roquebrune ceded from Monaco and became protectorates of the Kingdom of Sardinia, this was to the Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune. However when Nice County was ceded to France, they were annexed from Monaco which had still had ownership.

Monaco became surrounded by France, when the Kingdom of Sardina ceded the County of Nice to France in the Treaty of Turin (1860). The next year, in 1861 The Kingdom of Sardinia became a part of the Kingdom of Italy. Monaco had been a Protectorate of Sardinia, and managed to survive these changes, avoiding integration with France or Italy. By the early 1860s it had secured its independence but was now surrounded by France and without Menton or Roquebrune. To make ends meet Monaco would focus on tourism, and built the now famous Monte Carlo casino.

The Casino of Monte Carlo opened in 1863, organized by the Société des bains de mer de Monaco, which also ran the Hotel de Paris. Taxes paid by the S.B.M. have been plowed into Monaco&#x27;s infrastructure. Economic development was spurred in the late 19th century with a railway link to France.

==20th century==

The Prince of Monaco was an absolute ruler until the Monegasque Revolution of 1910 forced him to proclaim a constitution in 1911.

In July 1918, a treaty was signed providing for limited French protection over Monaco. The treaty, written into the Treaty of Versailles, established that Monegasque policy would be aligned with French political, military, and economic interests. One of the motivations for the treaty was the upcoming Monaco Succession Crisis of 1918.

While Prince Louis II&#x27;s sympathies were strongly pro-French, he tried to keep Monaco neutral during World War II but supported the Vichy French government of his old army colleague, Marshal Philippe Pétain.

Nonetheless, his tiny principality was tormented by domestic conflict partly as a result of Louis&#x27;s indecisiveness, and also because the majority of the population was of Italian descent; many of them supported the fascist regime of Italy&#x27;s Benito Mussolini.

On 11 November 1942, the Italian Army invaded and occupied Monaco. 
Soon after in September 1943, following Mussolini&#x27;s fall in Italy, the German Army occupied Monaco and began the deportation of the Jewish population.

Among them was René Blum, the French Jew who founded the Ballet de l&#x27;Opera in Monte Carlo, was arrested in his Paris home and held in the Drancy deportation camp outside the French capital before being transported to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where he was later killed. Blum&#x27;s colleague Raoul Gunsbourg, the director of the Opéra de Monte-Carlo, helped by the French Resistance, escaped arrest and fled to Switzerland. In August 1944, the Germans executed René Borghini, Joseph-Henri Lajoux and Esther Poggio, who were Resistance leaders.
Under Prince Louis&#x27;s secret orders, the Monaco police, often at great risk to themselves, warned in advance those people whom the Gestapo planned to arrest. The country was liberated on 3 September 1944 by Allied forces.

Prince Rainier III ascended to the throne following the death of his grandfather, Prince Louis II, in 1949.

The revised Constitution of Monaco, proclaimed in 1962, abolished capital punishment, provided for female suffrage, established a Supreme Court to guarantee fundamental liberties and made it difficult for a French national to transfer his or her residence there.

In 1993, Monaco became a member of the United Nations with full voting rights.

==21st century==
In 2002, a new treaty between France and Monaco clarified that if there are no heirs to carry on the dynasty, the Principality will remain an independent nation, rather than be annexed by France. Monaco&#x27;s military defence, however, is still the responsibility of France.

Prince Albert II succeeded his father Prince Rainier III in 2005.

Monaco&#x27;s mild climate with historical sites and modern gambling casinos, make Monaco a popular tourism and recreation centre in the 21st century, with 4.1 tourists per resident as of 2020.

On 29 February 2020, Monaco announced its first case of COVID-19, a man who was admitted to the Princess Grace Hospital Centre then transferred to Nice University Hospital in France. The virus was confirmed to have reached Monaco on 29 February 2020.

In the early 2020s there was international news about concerns over government financial accountability in Monaco.

==See also==
*History of Europe
*History of France
*History of Italy
*List of rulers of Monaco
*Politics of Monaco
*Monaco at the Olympics

==References==
==Sources==
* 

==Further reading==
;Published in the 19th century
* 

;Published in the 20th century
* 
* &quot;Histoire de la principauté de Monaco&quot; (1934) by Léon-Honoré Labande 

;Contemporary publications

==External links==

* History of Monaco: Primary Documents
* Google Earth air view of Monaco
*BBC - Monaco Country Profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1160498" start="10" end="31" title="History of Monaco" label="history of [[Monaco]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351922" start="102" end="116" title="Rock of Monaco" label="Rock of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="246" end="253" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="291" end="303" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="447" end="453" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="516" end="533" title="House of Grimaldi" label="House of Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="599" end="616" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="622" end="639" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="864" end="876" title="Controlling state" label="parent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="929" end="944" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1007" end="1024" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="1064" end="1076" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="1084" end="1103" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559284" start="1152" end="1173" title="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune" label="Menton and Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="1524" end="1535" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1543" end="1555" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1659" end="1661" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1693" end="1707" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1721" end="1734" title="Euro" label="Euro currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139762" start="1779" end="1791" title="Grimaldi man" label="Grimaldi man"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="1867" end="1883" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1899" end="1905" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="1975" end="1982" title="Ligures" label="Ligures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2024" end="2029" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2055" end="2060" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36104" start="2083" end="2100" title="Ligurian language (ancient)" label="Ligurian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q516074" start="2134" end="2146" title="Gallo-Italic languages" label="Gallo-Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="2147" end="2155" title="Ligurian language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422" start="2210" end="2220" title="Monégasque dialect" label="Monegasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2386" end="2395" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="2601" end="2608" title="Melqart" label="Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="2756" end="2764" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q428732" start="2913" end="2920" title="Phocaea" label="Phocaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="2949" end="2958" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3056" end="3061" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="3062" end="3069" title="demigod" label="demigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="3070" end="3078" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="3220" end="3233" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="3234" end="3240" title="Julian (emperor)" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="3449" end="3462" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="3802" end="3818" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3823" end="3829" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="3854" end="3862" title="Ligures" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="3884" end="3892" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="3945" end="3956" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="4017" end="4030" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="4057" end="4063" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4076" end="4081" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="4114" end="4118" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="4129" end="4147" title="Gallia Transalpina" label="Gallia Transalpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="4166" end="4172" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="4252" end="4259" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="4435" end="4450" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="4464" end="4479" title="Pliny&amp;#x27;s Natural History" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="4493" end="4500" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247073" start="4514" end="4523" title="Histories (Tacitus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q953748" start="4536" end="4549" title="Fabius Valens" label="Fabius Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="4676" end="4696" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="4743" end="4750" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="4786" end="4796" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="4878" end="4887" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="4949" end="4957" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="5028" end="5034" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="5069" end="5076" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="5143" end="5147" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="5321" end="5329" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q921634" start="5345" end="5355" title="Fraxinetum" label="Fraxinetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="5482" end="5500" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="5501" end="5509" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="5518" end="5528" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="5558" end="5563" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="5606" end="5617" title="Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="6089" end="6092" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="6167" end="6176" title="House of Grimaldi" label="Grimaldis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357798" start="6193" end="6205" title="Otto Canella" label="Otto Canella"/>
<link wikidata="Q629759" start="6241" end="6249" title="Grimaldo Canella" label="Grimaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="6281" end="6289" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411698" start="6498" end="6505" title="Fieschi" label="Fieschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943431" start="6509" end="6527" title="François Grimaldi" label="Francesco Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="6623" end="6640" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="6665" end="6671" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="6684" end="6694" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q942096" start="6779" end="6793" title="Charles I, Lord of Monaco" label="Carlo Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484069" start="6853" end="6883" title="English Channel naval campaign, 1338-1339" label="English Channel naval campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="6910" end="6921" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5855438" start="7007" end="7023" title="Treaty of Tordesillas (1524)" label="Treaty of Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q474802" start="7203" end="7230" title="Honoré II, Prince of Monaco" label="Honoré II, Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="7270" end="7281" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="7287" end="7292" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="7316" end="7326" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837203" start="7344" end="7368" title="Treaty of Péronne (1641)" label="Treaty of Péronne (1641)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7508" end="7525" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="7595" end="7610" title="Alpes-Maritimes" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="8375" end="8393" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="8441" end="8460" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="8877" end="8896" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="8904" end="8922" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q107452064" start="8939" end="8958" title="Treaty of Stupinigi" label="Treaty of Stupinigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="9025" end="9040" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="Treaty of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="9093" end="9097" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="9110" end="9115" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559284" start="9263" end="9299" title="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune" label="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="9360" end="9367" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422" start="9409" end="9427" title="Monégasque dialect" label="Monégasque dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="9441" end="9449" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="9538" end="9544" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="9549" end="9559" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="9657" end="9669" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201387" start="9909" end="9941" title="Franco-Monegasque Treaty" label="Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="9996" end="10015" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="10031" end="10049" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="10056" end="10064" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201387" start="10127" end="10151" title="Franco-Monegasque Treaty" label="Franco-Monegasque Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559284" start="10512" end="10548" title="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune" label="Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="10764" end="10786" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="Treaty of Turin (1860)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="11216" end="11237" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Casino of Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162190" start="11271" end="11305" title="Société des bains de mer de Monaco" label="Société des bains de mer de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279896" start="11326" end="11340" title="Hôtel de Paris Monte-Carlo" label="Hotel de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="11555" end="11563" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301694" start="11580" end="11601" title="Monegasque Revolution" label="Monegasque Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="11774" end="11794" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897832" start="11960" end="11992" title="Monaco Succession Crisis of 1918" label="Monaco Succession Crisis of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="12008" end="12016" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12100" end="12112" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="12131" end="12143" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="12190" end="12205" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="12428" end="12435" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="12459" end="12475" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="12503" end="12515" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804988" start="12516" end="12536" title="The invasion and Occupation of Monaco during World War II" label="invaded and occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="12622" end="12633" title="Wehrmacht" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="12664" end="12700" title="The Holocaust" label="deportation of the Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896236" start="12718" end="12727" title="René Blum (ballet)" label="René Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="12819" end="12824" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q247958" start="12846" end="12852" title="Drancy internment camp" label="Drancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="12929" end="12957" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q28265" start="13008" end="13023" title="Raoul Gunsbourg" label="Raoul Gunsbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577048" start="13045" end="13065" title="Opéra de Monte-Carlo" label="Opéra de Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="13081" end="13098" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="13127" end="13138" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13177" end="13190" title="René Borghini" label="René Borghini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13192" end="13211" title="Joseph-Henri Lajoux" label="Joseph-Henri Lajoux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13216" end="13229" title="Esther Poggio" label="Esther Poggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="13395" end="13402" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="13487" end="13505" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="13576" end="13584" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q63982" start="13608" end="13630" title="Constitution of Monaco" label="Constitution of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743465" start="13726" end="13739" title="Supreme Court of Monaco" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="13899" end="13913" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="14234" end="14250" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="14370" end="14376" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="14401" end="14408" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="14552" end="14560" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886628" start="14592" end="14622" title="Princess Grace Hospital Centre" label="Princess Grace Hospital Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198571" start="14643" end="14658" title="Nice University" label="Nice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="14719" end="14725" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="14878" end="14895" title="History of Europe" label="History of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778" start="14897" end="14914" title="History of France" label="History of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="14916" end="14932" title="History of Italy" label="History of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721851" start="14934" end="14958" title="List of rulers of Monaco" label="List of rulers of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154398" start="14960" end="14978" title="Politics of Monaco" label="Politics of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q755996" start="14980" end="15002" title="Monaco at the Olympics" label="Monaco at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270624" start="15185" end="15204" title="Léon-Honoré Labande" label="Léon-Honoré Labande"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19264" wikidata="Q2345347" url="?curid=19264" title="Demographics of Monaco">
<text>This is a demography of the population of Monaco, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

In 1995, Monaco&#x27;s population was estimated at 30,744, with an estimated average growth rate of 0.59%. Monaco-Ville has a population of 1,151.

French is the official language; Italian, English, and Monégasque also are spoken. The literacy rate is 99%. Roman Catholicism is the official religion, with freedom of other religions guaranteed by the constitution.

== Demographic statistics ==

===Structure of the population===



The following demographic statistics are from the &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot;, unless otherwise indicated.

Age structure:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;0-14 years:&quot;
12.3% (male 1,930/ female 1,841)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;15-64 years:&quot;
60.8% (male 9,317/ female 9,249)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
26.9% (male 3,640/ female 4,562) (2012 estimate) 36% (2022 World Population Data Sheet estimate)

Population growth rate:
−0.066% (2012 estimate)

Birth rate:
6.85 births/1,000 population (2012 estimate)

Death rate:
8.52 deaths/1,000 population (2007 estimate)

Net migration rate:
1.02 migrants/1,000 population (2007 estimate)

Sex ratio:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;at birth:&quot;
1.04 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under 15 years:&quot;
1.05 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;15-64 years:&quot;
1 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
0.81 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total population:&quot;
0.95 male(s)/female (2012 estimate)

Infant mortality rate:
1.8 deaths/1,000 live births (2012 estimate)

Life expectancy at birth (2023 estimate):
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
89.6 years (highest in the world)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;male:&quot;
85.8 years (highest in the world)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;female:&quot;
93.6 years (highest in the world)

Total fertility rate:
1.52 children born/woman in 2018

Nationality:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;noun:&quot;
Monegasque(s) or Monacan(s)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;adjective:&quot;
Monegasque or Monacan

Ethnic groups:
French 47%, Monegasque 16%, Italian 16%, other 21%

Religions:
Roman Catholic 90%, other 10%

Languages:
French (official), English, Italian, Monegasque

Literacy:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;definition:&quot;
NA
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total population:&quot;
99%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;male:&quot;
99%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;female:&quot;
99% (2003 estimate)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="10" end="20" title="demographics" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="42" end="48" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="60" end="78" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="80" end="89" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="219" end="225" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="317" end="329" title="Monaco City" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="358" end="364" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="391" end="398" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="400" end="407" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q56422" start="413" end="423" title="Monégasque language" label="Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="445" end="453" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="467" end="484" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="699" end="717" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19265" wikidata="Q1154398" url="?curid=19265" title="Politics of Monaco">
<text>The politics of Monaco take place within the framework of a semi-constitutional monarchy, with the Prince of Monaco as head of state, with some powers devolved to several advisory and legislative bodies.

==Constitution==
Historically, the princes of the ruling House of Grimaldi were autocrats of an absolute monarchy until the first Constitution of Monaco was adopted in 1911. A second constitution was granted by Prince Rainier III on December 17, 1962, outlining legislative, judicial, and executive branches of government, which consist of several administrative offices and a number of councils. The Prince as head of state retains most of the country&#x27;s governing power; however, the principality&#x27;s judicial and legislative bodies may operate independently of his control.

==Government of Monaco==

===Executive branch===
The Council of Government is under the authority of the prince. The title and position of prince is hereditary, the minister of state was appointed by the monarch from a list of three French or Monegasque national candidates presented by the French government, but is now chosen by the monarch. Until the 2002 amendment to the Monegasque constitution, only French nationals were eligible for the post. The prince is advised by the Crown Council of Monaco.

===Legislative branch===
The unicameral National Council (&quot;Conseil National&quot;) has 24 seats. The members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms. The Council can be disbanded by the Prince of Monaco provided that he hosts elections within 3 months. Uniquely, Monegasque legislators can be members of multiple political parties. Currently the administrative coalition, Monegasque National Union, holds all 24 seats after winning nearly 90% of the vote in the 2023 general election. The coalition consists of the three largest parties in Monaco: Priorité Monaco (centre-right), which won 21 seats in the 2018 general election; Horizon Monaco (right-wing) which won 2 seats in 2018; and Union Monégasque, (centre), which won 1 seat in 2018. The centre-left coalition, New Ideas for Monaco, holds no seats after running candidates in just 13 seats and winning only 10% of the vote.

===Judicial branch===
The supreme courts are the Judicial Court of Revision (&quot;Cour de révision judiciaire&quot;), which hears civil and criminal cases (as well as some administrative cases), and the Supreme tribunal (&quot;tribunal suprême&quot;), which performs judicial review. Both courts are staffed by French judges (appointed among judges of French courts, members of the Conseil d&#x27;État and university professors).

===Political parties and elections===

===Political spectrum===
Monegasque tend to be more conservative due to their alignment with the Catholic Church. There are no official left-wing parties although Union Monégasque is considered the &quot;most liberal&quot; of the three main parties that formed the Monegasque National Union. A new centre-left party, New Ideas for Monaco, was formed in 2022.

==Administrative divisions==
There are no first-order administrative divisions in the principality, which is instead traditionally divided into four quarters (French: &quot;quartiers&quot;, singular &quot;quartier&quot;): Fontvieille, La Condamine, Monaco-Ville and Monte-Carlo, with the suburb Moneghetti (part of La Condamine) colloquially seen as an unofficial, fifth quarter. They have a joint Communal Council of Monaco.

The principality is, for administrative and official purposes, currently divided into ten wards: 
*Monaco-Ville
*Monte Carlo/Spélugues
*Fontvieille
*Moneghetti/Bd de Belgique
*La Condamine
*Larvotto/Bas Moulins
*La Rousse/Saint Roman
*Jardin Exotique
*Ravin de Sainte-Dévote

==International organization participation==

ACCT, ECE, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Civil Aviation Organization, ICRM, IFRCS, IHO, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, International Olympic Committee, ITU, OPCW, OSCE, United Nations, UNCTAD, UNESCO, Universal Postal Union, World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization, World Meteorological Organization, Council of Europe.

==References==
==External links==
* A summary of the principality&#x27;s constitution</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154398" start="4" end="22" title="Politics of Monaco" label="politics of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="60" end="88" title="semi-constitutional monarchy" label="semi-constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="99" end="115" title="Prince of Monaco" label="Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="119" end="132" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="262" end="279" title="House of Grimaldi" label="House of Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="285" end="294" title="autocracy" label="autocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="301" end="318" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="423" end="434" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Rainier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q593887" start="843" end="864" title="Council of Government (Monaco)" label="Council of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687322" start="1270" end="1293" title="Crown Council of Monaco" label="Crown Council of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127198" start="1336" end="1352" title="National Council of Monaco" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="1500" end="1516" title="Prince of Monaco" label="Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q116693824" start="1686" end="1711" title="Monegasque National Union" label="Monegasque National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081662" start="1776" end="1797" title="2023 Monegasque general election" label="2023 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48760874" start="1862" end="1877" title="Priorité Monaco" label="Priorité Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q47483301" start="1920" end="1941" title="2018 Monegasque general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604424" start="1943" end="1957" title="Horizon Monaco" label="Horizon Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053150" start="2002" end="2018" title="Union Monégasque" label="Union Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q116691766" start="2083" end="2103" title="New Ideas for Monaco" label="New Ideas for Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001029" start="2246" end="2272" title="Court of Revision (Monaco)" label="Judicial Court of Revision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743465" start="2401" end="2417" title="Supreme Court of Monaco" label="Supreme tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="2465" end="2480" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="2580" end="2599" title="Council of State (France)" label="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2765" end="2780" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053150" start="2831" end="2847" title="Union Monégasque" label="Union Monégasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q116693824" start="2933" end="2958" title="Monegasque National Union" label="Monegasque National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q116691766" start="2985" end="3005" title="New Ideas for Monaco" label="New Ideas for Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="3082" end="3106" title="administrative divisions" label="administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3177" end="3185" title="Principality of Monaco#Traditional quarters and modern geographic areas" label="quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="3250" end="3261" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095" start="3263" end="3275" title="La Condamine" label="La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="3277" end="3289" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="3294" end="3305" title="Monte-Carlo" label="Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55108" start="3323" end="3333" title="Moneghetti" label="Moneghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153951" start="3426" end="3452" title="Communal Council of Monaco" label="Communal Council of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3545" end="3550" title="Principality of Monaco#Wards" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="3554" end="3566" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="3568" end="3589" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo/Spélugues"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="3591" end="3602" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q55108" start="3604" end="3629" title="Moneghetti" label="Moneghetti/Bd de Belgique"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095" start="3631" end="3643" title="La Condamine" label="La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088" start="3645" end="3665" title="Larvotto" label="Larvotto/Bas Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q55089" start="3667" end="3688" title="Saint Roman (community)" label="La Rousse/Saint Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19286504" start="3690" end="3705" title="Jardin Exotique, Monaco" label="Jardin Exotique"/>
<link wikidata="Q18635826" start="3707" end="3729" title="Ravin de Sainte-Dévote" label="Ravin de Sainte-Dévote"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="3788" end="3822" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="3824" end="3865" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="3873" end="3878" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="3910" end="3918" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="3920" end="3951" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="3953" end="3956" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="3958" end="3962" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="3964" end="3968" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3970" end="3984" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="3986" end="3992" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3994" end="4000" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="4002" end="4024" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="4026" end="4051" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="4053" end="4093" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="World Intellectual Property Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="4095" end="4128" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="4130" end="4147" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19266" wikidata="Q2739577" url="?curid=19266" title="Economy of Monaco">
<text>The economy of Monaco is reliant on tourism and banking. Monaco, situated on the French coast of the Mediterranean Sea, is a popular resort, attracting tourists to its casino and pleasant climate.

The Principality has successfully sought to diversify into services and small, high-value-added, nonpolluting industries. The state has no income tax and low business taxes and thrives as a tax haven both for individuals who have established residence and for foreign companies that have set up businesses and offices. The state retains monopolies in a number of sectors, including gambling, tobacco, the telephone network, and the postal service.

==Background==
Economic development was spurred in the late 19th century with the opening of the rail link to France and the Monte Carlo Casino. Monaco&#x27;s economy is now primarily geared toward finance, services, and real estate.

==Modern times==
Low taxes have drawn many foreign individuals to Monaco and account for around 75% of the $7.78 billion annual GDP income in (2021). Similarly, tourism accounts for close to 15% of the annual revenue, as the Principality of Monaco also has been a major center for tourism ever since the famed Monte Carlo Casino was established in 1856. 

Financial and insurance activities, along with scientific, support-administrative, activities are the main contributors to the GDP of Monaco. Wholesale trades (10%), construction (9.1%) and real estate activities (7.8%) also contribute highly to the country&#x27;s GDP. Monaco real estate is known to be one of the most expensive in the world. Banking sector of Monaco is rather large: in 2015 consolidated banking assets 8.42 times exceeded the country&#x27;s GDP. Banks operating in Monaco traditionally specialize in private banking, asset and wealth management services. Wholesale trade, construction and real estate sectors come afterward in the ranking.

An economic and customs union with France governs customs, postal services, telecommunications, and banking in Monaco. Before the euro, Monaco used the Monegasque franc, which itself was pegged to the French franc. Now part of the Eurozone, but not the EU, Monaco mints its own euro coins.

All residents pay tax in the form of 20% value-added tax on all goods and services.

Monaco is noted for its activity in the field of marine sciences. Its Oceanographic Museum, formerly directed by Jacques-Yves Cousteau, is one of the most renowned institutions of its kind in the world. Monaco import and exports products and services from all over the world. There is no commercial agriculture in Monaco; it is 100% urban.

==Tax haven==
Monaco levies no income tax on individuals. The absence of a personal income tax in the principality has attracted to it a considerable number of wealthy &quot;tax refugee&quot; residents from European countries who derive the majority of their income from activity outside Monaco; celebrities such as Formula One drivers attract most of the attention, but the vast majority of them are less well-known business people.

In 2000, a report by the French parliamentarians, Arnaud Montebourg and Vincent Peillon, alleged that Monaco had lax policies with respect to money laundering, including within its famed casino, and that the government of Monaco had been placing political pressure on the judiciary so that alleged crimes were not properly investigated.

In 1998, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) issued a first report on the consequences of the tax havens&#x27; financial systems. Monaco did not appear in the list of these territories until 2004, when OECD became indignant regarding the Monegasque situation and denounced it in its last report, as well as Andorra, Liechtenstein, Liberia and the Marshall Islands, underlining its lack of co-operation as regards to financial information disclosure and availability.

In 2000, the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) stated: &quot;The anti-money laundering system in Monaco is comprehensive. However, difficulties have been encountered with Monaco by countries in international investigations on serious crimes that appear to be linked also with tax matters. In addition, the FIU of Monaco (SICCFIN) suffers a great lack of adequate resources. The authorities of Monaco have stated that they will provide additional resources to SICCFIN.&quot; The Principality is no longer blamed in the 2005 FATF report, as well as all other territories. In 2003, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has identified Monaco, along with 36 other territories, as a tax haven but Monaco came out of that list in 2009.

In June 2024, due to concerns about money laundering and terror financing, the FATF added Monaco to a list of countries &quot;under increased monitoring.&quot; In a statement, the FATF said that the country needed to &quot;address strategic deficiencies.&quot;

==National enterprises==
Monaco&#x27;s economy is also based on national companies, which combined produce over a billion in profit every year. Among the most profitable and well-known companies outside Monaco are the Société des bains de mer, the bank UBS Monaco, the auction house Monaco Legend Group and the media conglomerate Lagardère News.

==Companies==
In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Monaco is Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 4,497 companies followed by Services with 1,895 and 1,184 companies respectively.

==Public finances==
In 2023 Monaco recorded government revenues of 2.19 billion EUR and expenses of 2.07 billion EUR, for a 126 million EUR budget surplus. 

The state&#x27;s fiscal reserves, the Constitutional Reserve Fund (CRF), reached a balance of 7 billion EUR in 2023, up from 5.7 billion EUR in 2019. 

==See also==
* Department of Finance and Economy (Monaco)
* Economy of Europe

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Guardian article on tax havens, discussion of Monaco
* CIA World Factbook entry on Monaco
* Tax system of Monaco
* GDP / Economy and Finance / IMSEE – Monaco IMSEE
* Common EU list of third country jurisdictions for tax purposes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2739577" start="4" end="21" title="Economy of Monaco" label="economy of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="57" end="63" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="101" end="118" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="202" end="214" title="Principality" label="Principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="337" end="347" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="388" end="397" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="535" end="545" title="Monopoly" label="monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="772" end="790" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Monte Carlo Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="1192" end="1210" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Monte Carlo Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1503" end="1506" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2029" end="2033" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047040" start="2051" end="2067" title="Monegasque franc" label="Monegasque franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="2100" end="2112" title="French franc" label="French franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="2130" end="2138" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q632605" start="2169" end="2187" title="Monegasque euro coins" label="its own euro coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="2231" end="2246" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q851527" start="2345" end="2365" title="Oceanographic Museum" label="Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83233" start="2388" end="2409" title="Jacques-Yves Cousteau" label="Jacques-Yves Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="2718" end="2730" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="2932" end="2943" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q737311" start="3101" end="3118" title="Arnaud Montebourg" label="Arnaud Montebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q960643" start="3123" end="3138" title="Vincent Peillon" label="Vincent Peillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="3402" end="3456" title="OECD" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="3900" end="3927" title="Financial Action Task Force" label="Financial Action Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162190" start="5119" end="5143" title="Société des bains de mer de Monaco" label="Société des bains de mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="5154" end="5164" title="UBS" label="UBS Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209474" start="5170" end="5183" title="auction house" label="auction house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216152" start="5231" end="5245" title="Lagardère News" label="Lagardère News"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944729" start="5792" end="5834" title="Department of Finance and Economy (Monaco)" label="Department of Finance and Economy (Monaco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226947" start="5837" end="5854" title="Economy of Europe" label="Economy of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19268" wikidata="Q1267461" url="?curid=19268" title="Transport in Monaco">
<text>Transport in Monaco is facilitated with road, air (helicopter), rail, and water networks. Rail transport is operated by SNCF with only Monaco Monte Carlo station seeing passenger service and the total length of the line inside the Principality is . Monaco has five bus routes operated by Compagnie des Autobus de Monaco. There are also two other bus routes which connect Monaco with neighboring regions such as Nice and Menton.

==Rail transport==
The railway is totally underground within Monegasque territory, and no trains can be seen at ground level within the nation. It links Marseille to Ventimiglia (Italy) through the principality, and was opened in 1868. Two stations were originally provided, named &#x27;Monaco&#x27; and &#x27;Monte-Carlo&#x27;, but neither remain in current use. The railway line was re-laid, in a new permanent way in tunnels, constructed in two stages. The first, in 1964, was a 3,500 metre tunnel (mostly in French territory) which rendered the original Monte-Carlo station redundant. The second stage, opened in 1999, was a 3 km-long tunnel linked to the first one, allowing the new &quot;underground railway station of Monaco-Monte Carlo&quot; to open. Where the above ground railway was is now available for development, schools, hotels and commercial facilities, can locate here totaling some four hectares. This station is also served by international trains (including the French TGV) and regional trains (&quot;TER&quot;).

==Road transport==
Monaco has 50 km of urban roads which provide access to the A8 autoroute. Monaco buries its highways so that traffic flow can be improved and so more land is available.

There is about 77 km (48 miles) of roads in Monaco, many sections of which are also used for automotive and other races. (see also Circuit de Monaco)

==Urban transport==

===Elevators / travelators===
There are seven main inclined lifts (including Elevators and/or travelators) which provide public transport: 
*between the &quot;Place des Moulins&quot; and the beaches
*between the Princess Grace Hospital Centre and the Exotic Garden
*between the Port Hercules harbor and the &quot;Avenue de la Costa&quot;
*between the &quot;Place Str Dévôte&quot; and the area of Moneghetti
*between the terraces of the Casino and the &quot;Boulevard Louis II&quot;
*between the &quot;Avenue des Citronniers&quot; and the &quot;Avenue Grande-Bretagne&quot;
*between the highway and the &quot;Boulevard Larvotto&quot;

===Bus===

There are six bus routes in Monaco, all operated by Compagnie des Autobus de Monaco (CAM). There are 143 bus stops through the Principality.

*Line 1: Monaco-Ville, Monte-Carlo, Saint Roman and return
*Line 2: Monaco-Ville, Monte-Carlo, Exotic Garden and return
*Line 4: Place d&#x27;Armes, Railway station, Monte-Carlo, Saint Roman and return
*Line 5: Railway station, Fontvieille, Hospital and return
*Line 6: Larvotto Beach, Fontvieille and return
There are four other bus routes which connect Monaco with neighbouring regions.

*Line 11: La Turbie, Monaco and return 
*Line 100: Nice, Monaco, Menton and return 
*Line 100X: Nice, Monaco and return
*Line 110: Nice Airport, Monaco, Menton and return 

There is a ferry service &quot;Bateaubus&quot; which operates between both sides of Monaco port. The boat is powered by electricity and operates under the urban bus system tariff.

===Subway===
A narrow gauge subway line is a perennial project in Monaco, which has not been built thus far.

==Sea transport==

There are two ports in Monaco, one is Port Hercules and the other is in Fontvieille. There are seasonal ferry lines like the one from Nice to Saint-Tropez.

==Air transport==

===Airports===
There is no airport in the Principality of Monaco. The closest airport is Cote d&#x27;Azur Airport in Nice, France, which is connected to Monaco by the Express 110 bus. Alternatively passengers can take Nice tramway lines 2 and 3 to downtown Nice and then a train onward to Monaco. Due to the wealth of many visitors and residents, a significant portion of those flying into Nice for travel to Monaco take a helicopter flight to their final destination (see below).

===Heliports===

A heliport, the Monaco Heliport, is the only aviation facility in the principality. It features shuttle service to and from the international airport at Nice, France. As of May 2005, all Royal Helicopter Service is provided by the James Drabble Aviation Services Committee. This deal sparked a great deal of controversy in the National Council of Monaco, as there was no precedent yet set. Helicopter charter services to French ski resorts are also available.

==References==
==External links==

*Getting Around in Monaco</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1267461" start="0" end="19" title="Transport in Monaco" label="Transport in Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="120" end="124" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q801195" start="135" end="161" title="Monaco Monte Carlo station" label="Monaco Monte Carlo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="249" end="255" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="582" end="591" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q191759" start="595" end="606" title="Ventimiglia, Italy" label="Ventimiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="608" end="613" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="832" end="845" title="permanent way" label="permanent way"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="1419" end="1422" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q205585" start="1451" end="1454" title="TER" label="TER"/>
<link wikidata="Q281357" start="1543" end="1555" title="A8 autoroute" label="A8 autoroute"/>
<link wikidata="Q746984" start="1592" end="1604" title="traffic flow" label="traffic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q171400" start="1784" end="1801" title="Circuit de Monaco" label="Circuit de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="1902" end="1910" title="Elevator" label="Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="1919" end="1929" title="travelator" label="travelator"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088" start="2016" end="2023" title="Larvotto" label="beaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886628" start="2037" end="2067" title="The Princess Grace Hospital Centre" label="Princess Grace Hospital Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384208" start="2076" end="2089" title="Jardin Exotique de Monaco" label="Exotic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="2103" end="2116" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q55108" start="2221" end="2231" title="Moneghetti" label="Moneghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q641406" start="2245" end="2253" title="Terrace (building)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="2261" end="2267" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q316543" start="2292" end="2300" title="Louis II, Prince of Monaco" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="2411" end="2418" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121143" start="2522" end="2553" title="Compagnie des Autobus de Monaco" label="Compagnie des Autobus de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="2621" end="2633" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="2635" end="2646" title="Monte-Carlo" label="Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55089" start="2648" end="2659" title="Saint Roman, Monaco" label="Saint Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="2680" end="2692" title="Monaco-Ville" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="2694" end="2705" title="Monte-Carlo" label="Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384208" start="2707" end="2720" title="Jardin Exotique de Monaco" label="Exotic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2741" end="2759" title=":File:Monaco Place d Armes.jpg" label="Place d&amp;#x27;Armes"/>
<link wikidata="Q837438" start="2761" end="2776" title="Rail transport in Monaco" label="Railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="2778" end="2789" title="Monte-Carlo" label="Monte-Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55089" start="2791" end="2802" title="Saint Roman, Monaco" label="Saint Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q837438" start="2823" end="2838" title="Rail transport in Monaco" label="Railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="2840" end="2851" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886628" start="2853" end="2861" title="The Princess Grace Hospital Centre" label="Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q55088" start="2882" end="2896" title="Larvotto" label="Larvotto Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="2898" end="2909" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q244709" start="3012" end="3021" title="La Turbie" label="La Turbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="3023" end="3029" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="3053" end="3057" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="3059" end="3065" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="3067" end="3073" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="3098" end="3102" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="3104" end="3110" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q821557" start="3133" end="3145" title="Nice Airport" label="Nice Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="3147" end="3153" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="3155" end="3161" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230673" start="3523" end="3536" title="Port Hercules" label="Port Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="3557" end="3568" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q821557" start="3750" end="3774" title="Cote d&amp;#x27;Azur Airport" label="Cote d&amp;#x27;Azur Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="3778" end="3782" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3784" end="3790" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033163" start="3879" end="3891" title="Nice tramway" label="Nice tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q662619" start="4176" end="4191" title="Monaco Heliport" label="Monaco Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127198" start="4487" end="4513" title="National Council of Monaco" label="National Council of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4581" end="4587" title="France" label="French"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19269" wikidata="Q2027788" url="?curid=19269" title="Public Services (Monaco)">
<text>The Public Force () are the military force of Monaco. However, the country has a very limited military capability and depends almost entirely upon its larger neighbour, France, for defence. In total, there are over 250 people employed as military personnel in some form. There is no conscription in Monaco.

Its branches are the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince and the Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco.

==Command==
The Public Services are under the joint command of the &quot;Supreme Commander of the Public Services&quot; (), currently Colonel Tony Varo.

Under the chief commander, each of the two principal military corps is headed by a &quot;Chief of the Corps&quot;, who holds the rank of commandant or lieutenant colonel, according to personal seniority. The military band is commanded by the &quot;Chief of the Orchestra&quot;, with the rank of commandant.

==Border patrol and patrol boats==
Some military roles are assigned to the civil police, such as border patrol and border defence, which are the responsibility of a special police unit officially named the &quot;Maritime and Heliport Police Division,&quot; and which operates on land and sea using patrol boats and high-speed surveillance boats. Four patrol boats are operated by the Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers (fire-fighters) and the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince (prince&#x27;s bodyguards).

==Military branches==
Two full-time militarised armed corps exist under the operational direction of the chief commander, and the political control of the Department of the Interior. One is the Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco, and the other is the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince. Both units are part of both military and civil defence plans and are key to the &quot;ORMOS Red Plan&quot; which makes provision for the evacuation of Monaco in case of natural disaster, or civil emergency.

===Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers===

Describing itself as a military force, the Corps consists of 10 officers, 26 non-commissioned officers and 99 other ranks (with 25 civilian employees), providing fire, hazardous materials, rescue, and emergency medical services. The officers&#x27; ranks (in descending order of seniority) are: Colonel, Lieutenant-Colonel, Commandant, Captain, Lieutenant, and Sub-Lieutenant. There are a further nine ranks of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel. Officers generally have served in the French military&#x27;s fire service. Based at two barracks (one in La Condamine and one in Fontvieille), the Corps is equipped with fire engines, rescue vehicles and a range of specialist vehicles, including a fire boat and sealed tracked vehicles for entering Monaco&#x27;s railway tunnels during an emergency.

Beyond fire-fighting duties, the Corps has an extensive civil defence brief. Its personnel are trained in the use of firearms, and the Corps has a central armoury. Personnel are trained to handle chemical incidents, and have specialist chemical incident vehicles and equipment. They are also equipped with ambulances and personnel have paramedic training.

===Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince===
Literally translated &quot;Company of Carabiniers of the Prince&quot;, the English-language version of the official Government website translates the name as &quot;The Palace Guards&quot;. The force was established in 1817 by Prince Honoré, administrator on behalf of his father, Prince Honoré IV. Originally an infantry unit, in 1904 they replaced the previous (now disbanded) &quot;Guard Company&quot; as the official Palace Guard of the royal family.

The Company is of a similar size to the Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers. At the summer of 2020 the Government reported the total strength of the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince as 124, consisting of 3 officers, 24 non-commissioned officers, and 97 enlisted men (with another 14 civilian employees). Each officer has trained and served with the French military. Its primary duty is the defence of the prince and the Prince&#x27;s Palace in the Monaco-Ville (old town) quartier of Monaco. By extension, it also has a role in guarding members of the judiciary, who administer justice in the name of the prince.

There are a number of specialist units within the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince, which include a motorcycle section (for rapid-response and motorcycle outriding); a bodyguard and protection unit; a diving unit with military, rescue and scientific capabilities; and a military first-aid unit that provides first aid and ambulance cover at public and sporting events.

The ceremonial &quot;changing of the guard&quot; at 11:55am each day attracts large numbers of tourists. The ceremony is more than just a tourist spectacle, as this small military force is the front line of defence of the Monegasque princely family.

===L&#x27;Orchestre militaire===
Despite its title of &quot;military orchestra&quot;, this section, which is attached to the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince, provides a full range of military music, including an orchestra, a ceremonial marching band, and state trumpeters, under the command of a Chef de l&#x27;Orchestre, with the rank of Commandant (Major). The band was established in 1978 and consists of 24 soldiers.

==Rank and insignia==

===Commissioned officer ranks===
The rank insignia of commissioned officers.
===Other ranks===
The rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.
==Department of the Interior==
The minister of the Department of the Interior is appointed by the prince of Monaco for one five-year term, and is mainly responsible for both policing and military activity within Monaco.

Ministers of the Department of the Interior ():
* Philippe Deslandes (2001−2006)
* Paul Masseron (2006–2011)
* Patrice Cellario (2015–2024)
* Lionel Beffre (from 2024)

==References==

==External links==
*Department of the Interior official site
*Corps des Sapeurs-pompiers Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2027788" start="4" end="16" title="Public Services (Monaco)" label="Public Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="46" end="52" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q106880872" start="283" end="305" title="conscription in Monaco" label="conscription in Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827639" start="329" end="364" title="Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince" label="Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417297" start="373" end="409" title="Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco" label="Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="1428" end="1433" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417297" start="1568" end="1604" title="Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco" label="Corps des Sapeurs-Pompiers de Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827639" start="1627" end="1662" title="Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince" label="Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="1705" end="1718" title="civil defence" label="civil defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="1833" end="1849" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095" start="2471" end="2483" title="La Condamine" label="La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098" start="2495" end="2506" title="Fontvieille, Monaco" label="Fontvieille"/>
<link wikidata="Q330204" start="3053" end="3062" title="paramedic" label="paramedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386767" start="3154" end="3164" title="Carabinier" label="Carabinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q705300" start="3342" end="3355" title="Honoré V, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Honoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q526345" start="3396" end="3412" title="Prince Honoré IV" label="Prince Honoré IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164788" start="3985" end="4005" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Palace of Monaco" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55115" start="4013" end="4025" title="Monaco City" label="Monaco-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386767" start="4243" end="4254" title="Carabiniers" label="Carabiniers"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="4461" end="4470" title="First aid" label="first-aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q357983" start="4573" end="4594" title="guard mounting" label="changing of the guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="5306" end="5326" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="5368" end="5392" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379090" start="5398" end="5416" title="Enlisted rank" label="enlisted personnel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5469" end="5495" title="Department of the Interior (Monaco)" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5689" end="5707" title="Philippe Deslandes" label="Philippe Deslandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371797" start="5722" end="5735" title="Paul Masseron" label="Paul Masseron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19924337" start="5750" end="5766" title="Patrice Cellario" label="Patrice Cellario"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147447" start="5781" end="5794" title="Lionel Beffre" label="Lionel Beffre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19271" wikidata="Q711" url="?curid=19271" title="Mongolia">
<text>Mongolia is a landlocked country in East Asia, bordered by Russia to the north and China to the south. It covers an area of , with a population of 3.5 million, making it the world&#x27;s most sparsely populated sovereign state. Mongolia is the world&#x27;s largest landlocked country that does not border a closed sea, and much of its area is covered by grassy steppe, with mountains to the north and west and the Gobi Desert to the south. Ulaanbaatar, the capital and largest city, is home to roughly half of the country&#x27;s population.

The territory of modern-day Mongolia has been ruled by various nomadic empires, including the Xiongnu, the Xianbei, the Rouran, the First Turkic Khaganate, the Second Turkic Khaganate, the Uyghur Khaganate and others. In 1206, Genghis Khan founded the Mongol Empire, which became the largest contiguous land empire in history. His grandson Kublai Khan conquered China proper and established the Yuan dynasty. After the collapse of the Yuan, the Mongols retreated to Mongolia and resumed their earlier pattern of factional conflict, except during the era of Dayan Khan and Tumen Zasagt Khan.

In the 16th century, Tibetan Buddhism spread to Mongolia, being further led by the Manchu-founded Qing dynasty, which absorbed the country in the 17th century. By the early 20th century, almost one-third of the adult male population were Buddhist monks. After the collapse of the Qing dynasty in 1911, Mongolia declared independence, and achieved actual independence from the Republic of China in 1921. Shortly thereafter, the country became a satellite state of the Soviet Union. In 1924, the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic was founded as a socialist state. After the anti-communist revolutions of 1989, Mongolia conducted its own peaceful democratic revolution in early 1990. This led to a multi-party system, a new constitution of 1992, and transition to a market economy.

Approximately 30% of the population is nomadic or semi-nomadic; horse culture remains integral. Buddhism is the majority religion (51.7%), with the nonreligious being the second-largest group (40.6%). Islam is the third-largest religious identification (3.2%), concentrated among ethnic Kazakhs. The vast majority of citizens are ethnic Mongols, with roughly 5% of the population being Kazakhs, Tuvans, and other ethnic minorities, who are especially concentrated in the western regions. Mongolia is a member of the United Nations, Asia Cooperation Dialogue, G77, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, Non-Aligned Movement and a NATO global partner. Mongolia joined the World Trade Organization in 1997 and seeks to expand its participation in regional economic and trade groups.

== Etymology ==
The name Mongolia means the &quot;Land of the Mongols&quot; in Latin. The Mongolian word &quot;Mongol&quot; () is of uncertain etymology. Sükhbataar (1992) and de la Vaissière (2021) proposed it being a derivation from Mugulü, the 4th-century founder of the Rouran Khaganate, first attested as the &#x27;Mungu&#x27;, (Chinese: , &quot;Měngwù&quot;, &quot;Muwngu&quot;), a branch of the Shiwei in an 8th-century Tang dynasty list of northern tribes, presumably related to the Liao-era &quot;Mungku&quot; (Chinese: , &quot;Měnggǔ&quot;, &quot;MuwngkuX&quot;).

After the fall of the Liao dynasty in 1125, the Khamag Mongols became a leading tribe on the Mongolian Plateau. However, their wars with the Jurchen-ruled Jin dynasty and the Tatar confederation had weakened them. The last head of the tribe was Yesügei, whose son Temüjin (Genghis Khan) eventually united all the Shiwei tribes as the Mongol Empire (&quot;Yekhe Monggol Ulus&quot;). In the thirteenth century, the word Mongol grew into an umbrella term for a large group of Mongolic-speaking tribes united under the rule of Genghis Khan.

Since the adoption of the new Constitution of Mongolia on 13 February 1992, the official name of the state is &quot;Mongolia&quot; (&quot;Mongol Uls&quot;).

== History ==
=== Prehistory and antiquity ===
The &quot;Khoit Tsenkher Cave&quot; in Khovd Province shows lively pink, brown, and red ochre paintings (dated to 20,000 years ago) of mammoths, lynx, bactrian camels, and ostriches, earning it the nickname &quot;the Lascaux of Mongolia&quot;. The Venus figurines of Mal&#x27;ta (21,000 years ago) testify to the level of Upper Paleolithic art in northern Mongolia; Mal&#x27;ta is now part of Russia.
Neolithic agricultural settlements (c. 5500–3500 BC), such as those at Norovlin, Tamsagbulag, Bayanzag, and Rashaan Khad, predated the introduction of horse-riding nomadism, a pivotal event in the history of Mongolia which became the dominant culture. The ethnogenesis of Mongolic peoples is largely linked with the expansion of Ancient Northeast Asians. The Mongolian pastoralist lifestyle may in part be derived from the Western Steppe Herders, but without much geneflow between these two groups, suggesting cultural transmission.

Horse-riding nomadism has been documented by archeological evidence in Mongolia during the Copper and Bronze Age Afanasevo culture (3500–2500 BC); this Indo-European culture was active to the Khangai Mountains in Central Mongolia. The wheeled vehicles found in the burials of the Afanasevans have been dated to before 2200 BC. Pastoral nomadism and metalworking became more developed with the later Okunev culture (2nd millennium BC), Andronovo culture (2300–1000 BC) and Karasuk culture (1500–300 BC), culminating with the Iron Age Xiongnu Empire in 209 BC. Monuments of the pre-Xiongnu Bronze Age include deer stones, keregsur kurgans, square slab tombs, and rock paintings.

Although cultivation of crops has continued since the Neolithic, agriculture has always remained small in scale compared to pastoral nomadism. Agriculture may have first been introduced from the west or arose independently in the region. The population during the Copper Age has been described as mongoloid in the east of what is now Mongolia, and as europoid in the west. Tocharians (Yuezhi) and Scythians inhabited western Mongolia during the Bronze Age. The mummy of a Scythian warrior, which is believed to be about 2,500 years old, was a 30- to 40-year-old man with blond hair; it was found in the Altai, Mongolia. As equine nomadism was introduced into Mongolia, the political center of the Eurasian Steppe also shifted to Mongolia, where it remained until the 18th century. The intrusions of northern pastoralists (e.g. the Guifang, Shanrong, and Donghu) into China during the Shang dynasty (1600–1046 BC) and Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BC) presaged the age of nomadic empires.

===Early states===
Since the prehistoric times, Mongolia has been inhabited by nomads who, from time to time, formed great confederations that rose to power and prominence. Common institutions were the office of the Khan, the Kurultai (Supreme Council), left and right wings, imperial army (Keshig) and the decimal military system. The first of these empires, the Xiongnu of undetermined ethnicity, were brought together by Modu Shanyu to form a confederation in 209 BC. Soon they emerged as the greatest threat to the Qin dynasty, forcing the latter to construct the Great Wall of China. It was guarded by up to almost 300,000 soldiers during Marshal Meng Tian&#x27;s tenure, as a means of defense against the destructive Xiongnu raids. The vast Xiongnu empire (209 BC–93 AD) was followed by the Mongolic Xianbei empire (93–234 AD), which also ruled more than the entirety of present-day Mongolia. The Mongolic Rouran Khaganate (330–555), of Xianbei provenance was the first to use &quot;Khagan&quot; as an imperial title. It ruled a massive empire before being defeated by the Göktürks (555–745), an even larger empire.

The Göktürks laid siege to Panticapaeum, present-day Kerch, in 576. They were succeeded by the Uyghur Khaganate (745–840) who were defeated by the Kyrgyz. The Mongolic Khitans, descendants of the Xianbei, ruled Mongolia during the Liao dynasty (907–1125), after which the Khamag Mongol (1125–1206) rose to prominence.

Lines 3–5 of the memorial inscription of Bilge Khagan (684–737) in central Mongolia summarizes the time of the Khagans:
===Mongol empire to early 20th century===


In the chaos of the late 12th century, a chieftain named Temüjin finally succeeded in uniting the Mongol tribes between Manchuria and the Altai Mountains. In 1206, he took the title Genghis Khan, and waged a series of military campaigns – renowned for their brutality and ferocity – sweeping through much of Asia, and forming the Mongol Empire, the largest contiguous land empire in world history. Under his successors it stretched from present-day Poland in the west to Korea in the east, and from parts of Siberia in the north to the Gulf of Oman and Vietnam in the south, covering some , (22% of Earth&#x27;s total land area) and had a population of over 100 million people (about a quarter of Earth&#x27;s total population at the time). The emergence of Pax Mongolica also significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia during its height.

After Genghis Khan&#x27;s death, the empire was subdivided into four kingdoms or Khanates. These eventually became quasi-independent after the Toluid Civil War (1260–1264), which broke out in a battle for power following Möngke Khan&#x27;s death in 1259. One of the khanates, the &quot;Great Khaanate&quot;, consisting of the Mongol homeland and most of modern-day China, became known as the Yuan dynasty under Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan. He set up his capital in present-day Beijing. After more than a century of power, the Yuan dynasty was overthrown by the Ming dynasty in 1368, and the Yuan court fled to the north, thus becoming the Northern Yuan dynasty. As the Ming armies pursued the Mongols into their homeland, they successfully sacked and destroyed the Mongol capital Karakorum and other cities. Some of these attacks were repelled by the Mongols under Ayushridar and his general Köke Temür.

After the expulsion of the Yuan rulers from China proper, the Mongols continued to rule their homeland, known in historiography as the Northern Yuan dynasty. With the division of the Mongol tribes, it was subsequently also known as &quot;The Forty and the Four&quot; (Döčin dörben) among them. The next centuries were marked by violent power struggles among various factions, notably the Genghisids and the non-Genghisid Oirats, as well as by several Ming invasions (such as the five expeditions led by the Yongle Emperor).
In the early 16th century, Dayan Khan and his khatun Mandukhai reunited all Mongol groups under the Genghisids. In the mid-16th century, Altan Khan of the Tümed, a grandson of Dayan Khan – but not a hereditary or legitimate Khan – became powerful. He founded Hohhot in 1557. After he met with the Dalai Lama in 1578, he ordered the introduction of Tibetan Buddhism to Mongolia. (It was the second time this had occurred.) Abtai Khan of the Khalkha converted to Buddhism and founded the Erdene Zuu monastery in 1585. His grandson Zanabazar became the first Jebtsundamba Khutughtu in 1640. Following the leaders, the entire Mongolian population embraced Buddhism. Each family kept scriptures and Buddha statues on an altar at the north side of their yurt. Mongolian nobles donated land, money and herders to the monasteries. As was typical in states with established religions, the top religious institutions, the monasteries, wielded significant temporal power in addition to spiritual power.

The last Khagan of Mongols was Ligden Khan in the early 17th century. He came into conflicts with the Manchus over the looting of Chinese cities, and also alienated most Mongol tribes. He died in 1634. By 1636, most of the Inner Mongolian tribes had submitted to the Manchus, who founded the Qing dynasty. The Khalkha eventually submitted to Qing rule in 1691, thus bringing all of today&#x27;s Mongolia under Manchu rule. After several Dzungar–Qing Wars, the Dzungars (western Mongols or Oirats) were virtually annihilated during the Qing conquest of Dzungaria in 1757 and 1758.
Some scholars estimate that about 80% of the 600,000 or more Dzungar were killed by a combination of disease and warfare. Outer Mongolia was given relative autonomy, being administered by the hereditary Genghisid khanates of Tusheet Khan, Setsen Khan, Zasagt Khan and Sain Noyon Khan. The Jebtsundamba Khutuktu of Mongolia had immense &quot;de facto&quot; authority. The Manchu forbade mass Chinese immigration into the area, which allowed the Mongols to keep their culture. The Oirats who migrated to the Volga steppes in Russia became known as Kalmyks.

The main trade route during this period was the Tea Road through Siberia; it had permanent stations located every , each of which was staffed by 5–30 chosen families.

Until 1911, the Qing dynasty maintained control of Mongolia with a series of alliances and intermarriages, as well as military and economic measures. Ambans, Manchu &quot;high officials&quot;, were installed in Khüree, Uliastai, and Khovd, and the country was divided into numerous feudal and ecclesiastical fiefdoms (which also placed people in power with loyalty to the Qing). Over the course of the 19th century, the feudal lords attached more importance to representation and less importance to the responsibilities towards their subjects. The behavior of Mongolia&#x27;s nobility, together with usurious practices by Chinese traders and the collection of imperial taxes in silver instead of animals, resulted in widespread poverty among the nomads. By 1911 there were 700 large and small monasteries in Outer Mongolia; their 115,000 monks made up 21% of the population. Apart from the Jebtsundamba Khutuktu, there were 13 other reincarnating high lamas, called &#x27;seal-holding saints&#x27; (&quot;tamgatai khutuktu&quot;), in Outer Mongolia.

=== Modern history ===


With the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, Mongolia under the Bogd Khaan declared its independence. However, the newly established Republic of China considered Mongolia to be part of its own territory. Yuan Shikai, the President of the Republic of China, considered the new republic to be the successor of the Qing. Bogd Khaan said that both Mongolia and China had been administered by the Manchu during the Qing, and after the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, the contract of Mongolian submission to the Manchu had become invalid.

The area controlled by the Bogd Khaan was approximately that of the former Outer Mongolia during the Qing period. In 1919, after the October Revolution in Russia, Chinese troops led by warlord Xu Shuzheng occupied Mongolia. Warfare erupted on the northern border. As a result of the Russian Civil War, the White Russian Lieutenant General Baron Ungern led his troops into Mongolia in October 1920, defeating the Chinese forces in Niislel Khüree (now Ulaanbaatar) in early February 1921 with Mongol support.

To eliminate the threat posed by Ungern, Bolshevik Russia decided to support the establishment of a communist Mongolian government and army. This Mongolian army took the Mongolian part of Kyakhta from Chinese forces on 18 March 1921, and on 6 July, Russian and Mongolian troops arrived in Khüree. Mongolia declared its independence again on 11 July 1921. As a result, Mongolia was closely aligned with the Soviet Union over the next seven decades.

==== Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic ====
In 1924, after the Bogd Khaan died of laryngeal cancer or, as some sources claim, at the hands of Russian spies, the country&#x27;s political system was changed. The Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic was established. In 1928, Khorloogiin Choibalsan rose to power. The early leaders of the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic (1921–1952) included many with Pan-Mongolist ideals. However, changing global politics and increased Soviet pressure led to the decline of Pan-Mongol aspirations in the following period.
Khorloogiin Choibalsan instituted collectivization of livestock, began the destruction of the Buddhist monasteries, and carried out Stalinist purges, which resulted in the murders of numerous monks and other leaders. In Mongolia during the 1920s, approximately one-third of the male population were monks. By the beginning of the 20th century, 750 monasteries were functioning in Mongolia and by the end of the 1930s almost all had been looted or razed.

In 1930, the Soviet Union stopped Buryat migration to the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic to prevent Mongolian reunification. All leaders of Mongolia who did not fulfill Stalin&#x27;s demands to perform Red Terror against Mongolians were executed, including Peljidiin Genden and Anandyn Amar. The Stalinist purges in Mongolia, which began in 1937, killed more than 30,000 people. Under Stalinist influence in the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic, an estimated 17,000 monks were killed, official figures show. Choibalsan, who led a dictatorship and organized Stalinist purges in Mongolia between 1937 and 1939, died suspiciously in the Soviet Union in 1952. Comintern leader Bohumír Šmeral said, &quot;People of Mongolia are not important, the land is important. Mongolian land is larger than England, France and Germany&quot;.
After the Japanese invasion of neighboring Manchuria in 1931, Mongolia was threatened on this front. During the Soviet-Japanese Border War of 1939, the Soviet Union successfully defended Mongolia against Japanese expansionism. Mongolia fought against Japan during the Battles of Khalkhin Gol in 1939 and during the Soviet–Japanese War in August 1945 to liberate Inner Mongolia from Japan and Mengjiang.

==== Cold War ====
The February 1945 Yalta Conference provided for the Soviet Union&#x27;s participation in the Pacific War. One of the Soviet conditions for its participation, put forward at Yalta, was that after the war Outer Mongolia would retain its independence. The referendum took place on 20 October 1945, with (according to official numbers) 100% of the electorate voting for independence.

After the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, both countries confirmed their mutual recognition on 6 October 1949. However, the Republic of China used its Security Council veto in 1955, to stop the admission of the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic to the United Nations on the grounds it recognized all of Mongolia —including Outer Mongolia— as part of China. This was the only time the Republic of China ever used its veto. Hence, and because of the repeated threats to veto by the ROC, Mongolia did not join the UN until 1961 when the Soviet Union agreed to lift its veto on the admission of Mauritania (and any other newly independent African state), in return for the admission of Mongolia. Faced with pressure from nearly all the other African countries, the ROC relented under protest. Mongolia and Mauritania were both admitted to the UN on 27 October 1961. (see China and the United Nations)
On 26 January 1952, Yumjaagiin Tsedenbal took power in Mongolia after the death of Choibalsan. Tsedenbal was the leading political figure in Mongolia for more than 30 years. While Tsedenbal was visiting Moscow in August 1984, his severe illness prompted the parliament to announce his retirement and replace him with Jambyn Batmönkh.

==== Post-Cold War ====
The dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 strongly influenced Mongolian politics and youth. Its people undertook the peaceful Democratic Revolution in January 1990 and the introduction of a multi-party system and a market economy.At the same time, the transformation of the former Marxist-Leninist Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party to the current social democratic Mongolian People&#x27;s Party reshaped the country&#x27;s political landscape.

A new constitution was introduced in 1992, and the term &quot;People&#x27;s Republic&quot; was dropped from the country&#x27;s name. The transition to a market economy was often rocky; during the early 1990s the country had to deal with high inflation and food shortages. The first election victories for non-communist parties came in 1993 (presidential elections) and 1996 (parliamentary elections). China has supported Mongolia&#x27;s application for membership in the Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and granting it observer status in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation.

== Geography and climate ==

At , Mongolia is the world&#x27;s 18th-largest country. It is significantly larger than the next-largest country, Peru. It mostly lies between latitudes 41° and 52°N (a small area is north of 52°), and longitudes 87° and 120°E. As a point of reference the northernmost part of Mongolia is on roughly the same latitude as Berlin (Germany) and Saskatoon (Canada), while the southernmost part is on roughly the same latitude as Rome (Italy) and Chicago (USA). The westernmost part of Mongolia is on roughly the same longitude as Kolkata in India, while the easternmost part is on the same longitude as Qinhuangdao and Hangzhou in China, as well as the western edge of Taiwan. Although Mongolia does not share a border with Kazakhstan, its westernmost point is only from Kazakhstan, nearly making a quadripoint.

The geography of Mongolia is varied, with the Gobi Desert to the south and cold, mountainous regions to the north and west. Much of Mongolia consists of the Mongolian-Manchurian grassland, with forested areas accounting for 11.2% of the total land area. The whole of Mongolia is considered to be part of the Mongolian Plateau. The highest point in Mongolia is the Khüiten Peak in the Tavan bogd massif in the far west at . The basin of the Uvs Lake, shared with Tuva Republic in Russia, is a natural World Heritage Site.

=== Climate ===
Mongolia is known as the &quot;Land of the Eternal Blue Sky&quot; or &quot;Country of Blue Sky&quot; (Mongolian: &quot;Mönkh khökh tengeriin oron&quot;) because it has over 250 sunny days a year.
Most of the country is hot in the summer and extremely cold in the winter, with January averages dropping as low as . A vast front of cold, heavy, shallow air comes in from Siberia in winter and collects in river valleys and low basins causing very cold temperatures while slopes of mountains are much warmer due to the effects of temperature inversion (temperature increases with altitude).

In winter the whole of Mongolia comes under the influence of the Siberian Anticyclone. The localities most severely affected by this cold weather are Uvs province (Ulaangom), western Khovsgol (Rinchinlhumbe), eastern Zavkhan (Tosontsengel), northern Bulgan (Hutag) and eastern Dornod province (Khalkhiin Gol). Ulaanbaatar is strongly, but less severely, affected. The cold gets less severe as one goes south, reaching the warmest January temperatures in Omnogovi Province (Dalanzadgad, Khanbogd) and the region of the Altai mountains bordering China. A unique microclimate is the fertile grassland-forest region of central and eastern Arkhangai Province (Tsetserleg) and northern Ovorkhangai Province (Arvaikheer) where January temperatures are on average the same and often higher than the warmest desert regions to the south in addition to being more stable. The Khangai Mountains play a certain role in forming this microclimate. In Tsetserleg, the warmest town in this microclimate, nighttime January temperatures rarely go under while daytime January temperatures often reach to .

The country is subject to occasional harsh climatic conditions known as &quot;zud.&quot; It results in large proportions of the country&#x27;s livestock dying from starvation or freezing temperatures or both, resulting in economic upheaval for the largely pastoral population. The annual average temperature in Ulaanbaatar is , making it the world&#x27;s coldest capital city. Mongolia is high, cold and windy. It has an extreme continental climate with long, cold winters and short summers, during which most of its annual precipitation falls. The country averages 257 cloudless days a year, and it is usually at the center of a region of high atmospheric pressure. Precipitation is highest in the north (average of per year) and lowest in the south, which receives annually. The highest annual precipitation of occurred in the forests of Bulgan Province near the border with Russia and the lowest of occurred in the Gobi Desert (period 1961–1990). The sparsely populated far north of Bulgan Province averages in annual precipitation which means it receives more precipitation than Beijing () or Berlin ().

=== Environmental issues ===
=== Wildlife ===

The name &quot;Gobi&quot; is a Mongol term for a desert steppe, which usually refers to a category of arid rangeland with insufficient vegetation to support marmots but with enough to support camels. Mongols distinguish Gobi from desert proper, although the distinction is not always apparent to outsiders unfamiliar with the Mongolian landscape.

Gobi rangelands are fragile and easily destroyed by overgrazing, which results in expansion of the true desert, a stony waste where not even Bactrian camels can survive. The arid conditions in the Gobi are attributed to the rain shadow effect caused by the Himalayas. Before the Himalayas were formed by the collision of the Indo-Australian plate with the Eurasian plate 10 million years ago, Mongolia was a flourishing habitat for major fauna but still somewhat arid and cold due to distance from sources of evaporation. Sea turtle and mollusk fossils have been found in the Gobi, apart from well-known dinosaur fossils. Tadpole shrimps are still found in the Gobi today. The eastern part of Mongolia including the Onon and Kherlen rivers and Lake Buir form part of the Amur river basin draining to the Pacific Ocean. It hosts some unique species like the Eastern brook lamprey, Daurian crayfish (&quot;cambaroides dauricus&quot;) and Daurian pearl oyster (&quot;dahurinaia dahurica&quot;) in the Onon/Kherlen rivers as well as Siberian prawn (&quot;exopalaemon modestus&quot;) in Lake Buir.

== Demographics ==


Mongolia&#x27;s total population as of January 2015 was estimated by the U.S. Census Bureau to be 3,000,251 people, ranking around 121st in the world. But the U.S. Department of State Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs uses the United Nations (UN) estimations instead of the U.S. Census Bureau estimations. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division estimates Mongolia&#x27;s total population (mid-2007) as 2,629,000 (11% less than the U.S. Census Bureau figure). UN estimates resemble those made by the Mongolian National Statistical Office (2,612,900, end of June 2007). Mongolia&#x27;s population growth rate is estimated at 1.2% (2007 est.). About 59% of the total population is under age 30, 27% of whom are under 14. This relatively young and growing population has placed strains on Mongolia&#x27;s economy.

The first census in the 20th century was carried out in 1918 and recorded a population of 647,500. Since the end of socialism, Mongolia has experienced a decline of total fertility rate (children per woman) that is steeper than in any other country in the world, according to recent UN estimations: in 1970–1975, fertility was estimated to be 7.33 children per woman, dropping to about 2.1 in 2000–2005. The decline ended and in 2005–2010, the fertility value increased to 2.8 in 2013 and stabilised afterwards at a rate of about 2.5-2.6 children per woman around 2020.

The Mongols are moderately homogeneous; ethnic Mongols account for about 95% of the population and consist of Khalkha and other groups, all distinguished primarily by dialects of the Mongol language. The Khalkha make up 86% of the ethnic Mongol population. The remaining 14% include Oirats, Buryats and others. Turkic peoples (Kazakhs and Tuvans) constitute 4.5% of Mongolia&#x27;s population, and the rest are Russian, Chinese, Korean and American nationalities.

=== Languages ===

Mongolia&#x27;s official and national language is Mongolian. A member of the Mongolic language family, the standard dialect is Khalkha Mongol. It coexists with various other, largely mutually intelligible varieties of Mongolic such as Oirat, Buryat, and Khamnigan. Several dialects have been morphing to become more like the central Khalkha dialect in recent years. Most speakers of these dialects are located in the western part of the country, namely Bayan-Ölgii, Uvs, and Khovd. Kazakh, a Turkic language, is the majority language in Bayan-Ölgii, while Tuvan is another Turkic language spoken in Khövsgöl. Mongolian Sign Language is the principal language of the deaf community.

Today, Mongolian is mainly written using the Cyrillic alphabet, introduced during the 1940s. Since the 1990 revolution there has been a minor revival of the historic Mongolian script, which is still the official script used by Mongols in neighboring Inner Mongolia. Although Mongolian script has officially been declared the &quot;national script&quot;, and is taught from the sixth grade onward at schools, it remains mostly confined to ceremonial usage in daily life. In 2025, Mongolia began using both the Cyrillic and traditional Mongolian scripts for legal papers and official documents.

Since 1990, English has quickly supplanted Russian as the most popular foreign language in Mongolia. In the communist era, Russian was a vital language for mobility and professional communication, with a large number of students studying in the Soviet Union as well as a large number of Soviet professionals and soldiers located within Mongolia. Since then, Mongolia&#x27;s education system has reoriented away from the Soviet Union to the West, and English has become the dominant foreign language, aided by liberalized media, international aid agencies, the rise of private education and tutoring, as well as official government policy. In the 2014–2015 academic year, 59% of the overall student population studied English at public secondary schools. In 2023, English was declared the &quot;first foreign language&quot;, and to be taught from the third grade.

As of the 2014–2015 academic year, the most popular foreign language in specialized language courses were (ordered by popularity), English, Chinese, Russian, Japanese, and Korean. Korean in particular has gained popularity as tens of thousands of Mongolians work in South Korea, forming the largest group of Mongolians abroad.

=== Religion ===

According to the 2010 National Census, among Mongolians aged 15 and above, 53% were Buddhists, while 39% were non-religious. 

Mongolian shamanism has been widely practiced throughout the history of what is now Mongolia, with similar beliefs being common among the nomads of central Asia. They gradually gave way to Tibetan Buddhism, but shamanism has left a mark on Mongolian religious culture, and it continues to be practiced. The Kazakhs of western Mongolia, some Mongols, and other Turkic peoples in the country traditionally adhere to Islam.

Throughout much of the 20th century, the communist government repressed religious practices. It targeted the clergy of the Mongolian Buddhist Church, which had been tightly intertwined with the previous feudal government structures (e.g. from 1911 on, the head of the Church had also been the Khan of the country). In the late 1930s, the regime, then led by Khorloogiin Choibalsan, closed almost all of Mongolia&#x27;s over 700 Buddhist monasteries and killed at least 30,000 people, of whom 18,000 were lamas. The number of Buddhist monks dropped from 100,000 in 1924 to 110 in 1990.
The fall of communism in 1991 restored public religious practice. Tibetan Buddhism, which had been the predominant religion prior to the rise of communism, again rose to become the most widely practised religion in Mongolia. The highest-ranking lama of Buddhism in Mongolia, has been vacant since the 9th Jebtsundamba&#x27;s passing in 2012 and the search for the next Jebtsundamba Khutuktu is being complicated by Beijing&#x27;s desire to assert control over Tibetan Buddhism.

The end of religious repression in the 1990s also allowed for other religions to spread in the country. According to the Christian missionary group Barnabas Fund, the number of Christians grew from just four in 1989 to around 40,000 . In May 2013, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) held a cultural program to celebrate twenty years of LDS Church history in Mongolia, with 10,900 members, and 16 church buildings in the country. There are some 1,000 Catholics in Mongolia and, in 2003, a missionary from the Philippines was named Mongolia&#x27;s first Catholic bishop. In 2017 Seventh-day Adventists reported 2,700 members in six churches up from zero members in 1991.

== Government and politics ==

Mongolia is a semi-presidential representative democratic republic with a directly elected President. The people also elect the deputies in the national assembly, the State Great Khural. The president appoints the prime minister, and nominates the cabinet on the proposal of the prime minister. The constitution of Mongolia guarantees a number of freedoms, including full freedom of expression and religion. Mongolia amended its constitution most lately in 2019 transferring some powers from the president to the prime minister. On May 31, 2023, Mongolia&#x27;s parliament approved a constitutional amendment that increased the number of seats from 76 to 126 and changed the electoral system re-introducing proportional party voting.

Mongolia has a number of political parties; the largest are the Mongolian People&#x27;s Party and the Democratic Party. The non-governmental organization Freedom House considers Mongolia to be free.

The People&#x27;s Party – known as the People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party between 1924 and 2010 – formed the government from 1921 to 1996 (in a one-party system until 1990) and from 2000 to 2004. From 2004 to 2006, it was part of a coalition with the Democrats and two other parties, and after 2006 it was the dominant party in two other coalitions. The party initiated two changes of government from 2004 prior to losing power in the 2012 election. The Democrats were the dominant force in a ruling coalition between 1996 and 2000, and an almost-equal partner with the People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party in a coalition between 2004 and 2006. An election of deputies to the national assembly on 28 June 2012 resulted in no party having an overall majority; however, as the Democratic Party won the largest number of seats, its leader, Norovyn Altankhuyag, was appointed prime minister on 10 August 2012. In 2014, he was replaced by Chimediin Saikhanbileg. The MPP won a landslide victory in the 2016 elections and the next prime minister was MPP&#x27;s Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh. In June 2020, MPP won a landslide victory in the election. It took 62 seats and the main opposition DP, 11 of the 76 seats. Before the elections the ruling party had redrawn the electoral map in a way that was beneficial for MPP.
In January 2021, Prime Minister Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh resigned after protests over the treatment of a coronavirus patient. On 27 January 2021, Luvsannamsrai Oyun-Erdene of MPP became new prime minister. He represents a younger generation of leaders that had studied abroad.
The President of Mongolia is able to veto the laws made by parliament, appoint judges and justice of courts and appoint ambassadors. The parliament can override that veto by a two-thirds majority vote. Mongolia&#x27;s constitution provides three requirements for taking office as president; the candidate must be a native-born Mongolian, be at least 45 years old, and have resided in Mongolia for five years before taking office. The president must also suspend their party membership. After defeating incumbent Nambaryn Enkhbayar, Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, a two-time former prime minister and member of the Democratic Party, was elected as president on 24 May 2009 and inaugurated on 18 June that year. The ruling Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (2010) (MPRP) nominated Batbold Sukhbaatar as new Prime Minister in October 2009. Elbegdorj was re-elected on 26 June 2013 and was inaugurated on 10 July 2013 for his second term as president. In June 2017, opposition Democratic Party candidate Khaltmaagiin Battulga won the presidential election. He was inaugurated on 10 July 2017.

In June 2021, former Prime Minister Ukhnaa Khurelsukh, the candidate of the ruling Mongolian People&#x27;s Party (MPP), became the country&#x27;s sixth democratically elected president after winning the presidential election.

Mongolia uses a unicameral legislature, the State Great Khural, with 76 seats, which is chaired by the Speaker of the House. Its members are directly elected, every four years, by popular vote. As per 2023 constitutional amendment the parliament increased the number of seats from 76 to 126.

===Foreign relations===

Mongolia&#x27;s foreign relations traditionally focus on its two large neighbors, Russia and China. Mongolia is economically dependent on these countries: China is Mongolia&#x27;s largest export partner at a 78% share, far above the other top countries (Switzerland at 15%; Singapore 3%). Mongolia receives 36% of imports from China and 29% from Russia. Mongolia is also pursuing a trilateral partnership with China and Russia through the Power of Siberia 2 natural gas pipeline, with a contract to be signed in the &quot;near future&quot; according to Russian Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Novak. Due to China&#x27;s status as Mongolia&#x27;s most important trading partner, Mongolia has been trying to stay out of the current U.S.-China confrontation.

It has begun seeking positive relations with a wider range of other countries especially in cultural and economic matters, focusing on encouraging foreign direct investment and trade. Mongolia has been pursuing a &#x27;third-neighbor&#x27; foreign policy since early 1990s to build deeper relations and partnerships with countries beyond its two surrounding neighbors.

Mongolia has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group&#x27;s founding in 1992.

Then Vice President of the U.S. Joe Biden, visited Mongolia in 2011 supporting Mongolia&#x27;s third neighbor policy.

====Embassies====
Mongolia maintains many diplomatic missions in other countries and has embassies in the following world capitals:

*Ankara
*Astana
*Bangkok
*Beijing
*Berlin
*Brasília
*Brussels
*Budapest
*Cairo
*Canberra
*Hanoi
*Havana
*Jakarta
*Kuala Lumpur
*Kuwait City
*London
*Moscow
*New Delhi
*Ottawa
*Paris
*Prague
*Pyongyang
*Rome
*Seoul
*Singapore
*Sofia
*Stockholm
*Tokyo
*Vienna
*Vientiane
*Warsaw
*Washington, D.C.
=== Military ===

Mongolia supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and has sent several successive contingents of 103 to 180 troops each to Iraq. About 130 troops were deployed to Afghanistan. 200 Mongolian troops are serving in Sierra Leone on a UN mandate to protect the UN&#x27;s special court set up there, and in July 2009, Mongolia decided to send a battalion to Chad in support of MINURCAT.

From 2005 to 2006, about 40 troops were deployed with the Belgian and Luxembourg contingents in Kosovo. On 21 November 2005, George W. Bush became the first-ever sitting U.S. president to visit Mongolia. In 2004, under Bulgarian chairmanship, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) invited Mongolia as its newest Asian partner.

=== Legal system ===
The judiciary of Mongolia is made of a three-tiered court system: first instance courts in each provincial district and each Ulaanbaatar district; appellate courts for each province and also the Capital Ulaanbaatar; and the court of last resort (for non-constitutional matters) at the Supreme Court of Mongolia. For questions of constitutional law there is a separate constitutional court.

A Judicial General Council (JGC) nominates judges which must then be confirmed by the parliament and appointed by the President.

Arbitration centres provide alternative dispute resolution options for commercial and other disputes.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Mongolia is divided into 21 provinces (aimags) and subdivided into 330 districts (sums). Ulaanbaatar is administered separately as a capital city (municipality) with provincial status. The &quot;aimags&quot; are:

* Arkhangai
* Bayan-Ölgii
* Bayankhongor
* Bulgan
* Darkhan-Uul
* Dornod
* Dornogovi
* Dundgovi
* Govi-Altai
* Govisümber
* Khentii
* Khovd
* Khövsgöl
* Ömnögovi
* Orkhon
* Övörkhangai
* Selenge
* Sükhbaatar
* Töv
* Uvs
* Zavkhan
=== Major cities ===
As of 2020, 47.6% of the population lives in Ulaanbaatar, further 21.4% lived in Darkhan, Erdenet, the aimag centers and sum centers, and other permanent settlements, and 31.0% in rural areas.

*Under Ulaanbaatar administration

== Economy ==


Economic activity in Mongolia has long been based on herding and agriculture, although development of extensive mineral deposits of copper, coal, molybdenum, tin, tungsten and gold have emerged as a driver of industrial production. Besides mining (21.8% of GDP) and agriculture (16% of GDP), dominant industries in the composition of GDP are wholesale and retail trade and service, transportation and storage, and real estate activities. Also, Mongolia produces one-fifth of the world&#x27;s raw cashmere.

The informal economy is estimated to be at least one-third the size of the official economy. , 78% of Mongolia&#x27;s exports went to the PRC, and the PRC supplied 36% of Mongolia&#x27;s imports.

The World Bank has stated that Mongolia&#x27;s development prospects are promising due to an expansion of mining and large public investment, although challenges remain from inflation, weaker external demand from China, and persistent fiscal risks due to sizable contingent liabilities. According to the Asian Development Bank, 27.1% of Mongolia&#x27;s population lived below the national poverty line in 2022. In the same year, GDP per capita was estimated at $12,100.

Mongolia&#x27;s real GDP grew by 7% in 2023 due to record-high coal production, driven by strong demand from China. Inflation in early 2024 dropped to 7% due to lower global food and fuel prices. Despite a robust increase in import volumes, Mongolia recorded a current account surplus due to the sharp increase in coal exports. Mining sector growth is expected to continue driving GDP growth, although the International Monetary Fund predicts the current account balance will revert to a sizable deficit due to declining coal prices.

In 2011, Citigroup analysts determined Mongolia to be one of the &quot;global growth generating&quot; countries, which are countries with the most promising growth prospects for 2010–2050. The Mongolian Stock Exchange, established in 1991 in Ulaanbaatar, is among the world&#x27;s smallest stock exchanges by market capitalisation. As of 2024, it has 180 companies listed with a total market capitalization of US$3.2 billion. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) currently ranks Mongolia as 81st globally in its ease of doing business scoring.

=== Mineral industry ===

Minerals represent more than 80% of Mongolia&#x27;s exports, a proportion expected to eventually rise to 95%. Fiscal revenues from mining represented 21% of government income in 2010 and rose to 24% in 2018. About 3,000 mining licences have been issued. Mining continues to rise as a major industry of Mongolia as evidenced by the number of Chinese, Russian and Canadian firms starting mining businesses in Mongolia.

In 2009, the Mongolian government negotiated an agreement with Rio Tinto and Ivanhoe Mines to develop the Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold deposit, the biggest foreign-investment project in Mongolia at the time. The mine is now a major producer of copper and gold, with plans to further develop underground production and reach an output of 500,000 tons of copper per year. Mongolian&#x27;s gold production in 2015 is 15 metric tons. Mongolian lawmakers have also attempted to finance the development of the Tavan Tolgoi area, the world&#x27;s largest untapped coal deposit. However, proposed international partnerships failed in 2011 and 2015, with Mongolia further cancelling an international initial public offering in 2020, citing financial and political difficulties.

In September 2022, Mongolia built and launched a 233-km direct rail link to China, which is a milestone in Mongolia&#x27;s plan to become China&#x27;s leading supplier of high-quality coal from the Tavan Tolgoi mine, which has more than six billion tonnes of coal reserves.

=== Agriculture ===
== Infrastructure ==

=== Communications ===
Postal services are provided by state-owned Mongol Post and 54 other licensed operators.

=== Energy ===

Mongolia imports 98% of its fuel and is building its first ever oil refinery to reduce its foreign energy dependency.

=== Transportation ===

The Trans-Mongolian Railway is the main rail link between Mongolia and its neighbors. It begins at the Trans-Siberian Railway in Russia at the town of Ulan-Ude, crosses into Mongolia, runs through Ulaanbaatar, then passes into China at Erenhot where it joins the Chinese railway system. A separate railroad link connects the eastern city of Choibalsan with the Trans-Siberian Railway. However, that link is closed to passengers after the Mongolian town of Chuluunkhoroot. Mongolia also has a 233 km-long cargo rail link from the Tavan Tolgoi coal mine to Chinese border.

Mongolia has a number of domestic airports, with some of them having international status. However, the main international airport is Chinggis Khaan International Airport, located approximately south of the capital Ulaanbaatar. Direct flight connections exist between Mongolia and South Korea, China, Thailand, Hong Kong, Japan, Russia, Germany, and Turkey. MIAT Mongolian Airlines is Mongolia&#x27;s national air carrier, operating international flights, while air carriers such as Aero Mongolia and Hunnu Airlines serve domestic and short international routes.

Many overland roads in Mongolia are only gravel roads or simple cross-country tracks. There are paved roads from Ulaanbaatar to the Russian and Chinese borders, from Ulaanbaatar east- and westward (the so-called Millennium Road), and from Darkhan to Bulgan. A number of road construction projects are currently underway. Mongolia has of paved roads, with of that total completed in 2013 alone.

=== Education ===

During the state socialist period, education was one of the areas of significant achievement in Mongolia. Before the People&#x27;s Republic, literacy rates were below one percent. By 1952, illiteracy was virtually eliminated, in part through the use of seasonal boarding schools for children of nomadic families. Funding to these boarding schools was cut in the 1990s, contributing to slightly increased illiteracy.

Primary and secondary education formerly lasted ten years, but was expanded to eleven years. Since the 2008–2009 school year, new first-graders are using the 12-year system, with a full transition to the 12-year system in the 2019–2020 school year.

, English is taught in all secondary schools across Mongolia, beginning in fourth grade. English has taken over from Russian as the dominant foreign language in Mongolia, particularly in Ulaanbaatar.

Mongolian national universities are all spin-offs from the National University of Mongolia and the Mongolian University of Science and Technology. Almost three in five Mongolian youths now enroll in university. There was a six-fold increase in students between 1993 and 2010. 

=== Health ===
== Culture ==
The symbol in the left bar of the national flag is a Buddhist icon called Soyombo. It represents the sun, moon, stars, and heavens per standard cosmological symbology abstracted from that seen in traditional thangka paintings.

=== Visual arts ===
Before the 20th century, most works of the fine arts in Mongolia had a religious function, and therefore Mongolian fine arts were heavily influenced by religious texts. Thangkas were usually painted or made in appliqué technique. Bronze sculptures usually showed Buddhist deities. A number of great works are attributed to the first Jebtsundamba Khutuktu, Zanabazar.

In the late 19th century, painters like &quot;Marzan&quot; Sharav turned to more realistic painting styles. Under the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic, socialist realism was the dominant painting style, however traditional &quot;thangka&quot;-like paintings dealing with secular, nationalist themes were also popular, a genre known as &quot;Mongol &quot;zurag&quot;&quot;.

Among the first attempts to introduce modernism into the fine arts of Mongolia was the painting &quot;Ehiin setgel&quot; (&quot;Mother&#x27;s love&quot;) created by Tsevegjav in the 1960s. The artist was purged as his work was censored.

All forms of fine arts flourished only after perestroika in the late 1980s. Otgonbayar Ershuu is arguably one of the most well-known Mongolian modern artists in the Western world, he was portrayed in the film &quot;ZURAG&quot; by Tobias Wulff.

=== Architecture ===

The traditional Mongolian dwelling is known as a &quot;ger&quot;. In the past it was known by the Russian term &quot;yurt&quot;, but this has been changing as the Mongolian term becomes better known in English-speaking countries. According to Mongolian artist and art critic N. Chultem, the &quot;ger&quot; was the basis for development of traditional Mongolian architecture. In the 16th and 17th centuries, lamaseries were built throughout the country. Many of them started as &quot;ger&quot;-temples. When they needed to be enlarged to accommodate the growing number of worshippers, the Mongolian architects used structures with 6 and 12 angles with pyramidal roofs to approximate to the round shape of a &quot;ger&quot;. Further enlargement led to a quadratic shape of the temples. The roofs were made in the shape of marquées. The trellis walls, roof poles and layers of felt were replaced by stone, brick, beams and planks, and became permanent.

Chultem distinguished three styles in traditional Mongolian architecture: Mongolian, Tibetan and Chinese as well as combinations of the three. Among the first quadratic temples was Batu-Tsagaan (1654) designed by Zanabazar. An example of the &quot;ger&quot;-style architecture is the lamasery Dashi-Choiling in Ulaanbaatar. The temple Lavrin (18th century) in the Erdene Zuu lamasery was built in the Tibetan tradition. An example of a temple built in the Chinese tradition is the lamasery Choijing Lamiin Sume (1904), which is a museum today. The quadratic temple Tsogchin in lamasery Gandan in Ulaanbaatar is a combination of the Mongolian and Chinese tradition. The temple of Maitreya (disassembled in 1938) is an example of the Tibeto-Mongolian architecture. Dashi-Choiling monastery has commenced a project to restore the temple and the sculpture of Maitreya.

=== Music ===

The music of Mongolia is strongly influenced by nature, nomadism, shamanism, and also Tibetan Buddhism. The traditional music includes a variety of instruments, famously the morin khuur, and also the singing styles like the urtyn duu (&quot;long song&quot;), and throat-singing (khoomei). The &quot;tsam&quot; is danced to keep away evil spirits and it was seen as reminiscent of shamanism.

=== Media ===

Mongolian press began in 1920 with close ties to the Soviet Union under the Mongolian Communist Party, with the establishment of the &quot;Unen&quot; (&quot;Truth&quot;) newspaper similar to the Soviet &quot;Pravda&quot;. Until reforms in the 1990s, the government had strict control of the media and oversaw all publishing, in which no independent media were allowed. The dissolution of the Soviet Union had a significant impact on Mongolia, where the one-party state grew into a multi-party democracy, and with that, media freedoms came to the forefront.

A new law on press freedom, drafted with help from international NGOs on August 28, 1998, and enacted on January 1, 1999, paved the way for media reforms. The Mongolian media currently consists of around 300 print and broadcasting outlets.

Since 2006, the media environment has been improving with the government debating a new Freedom of Information Act, and the removal of any affiliation of media outlets with the government. Market reforms have led to an annually increasing number of people working in the media, along with students at journalism schools.

In its 2013 World Press Freedom Index report, Reporters Without Borders classified the media environment as 98th out of 179, with 1st being most free. In 2016, Mongolia was ranked 60th out of 180.

According to 2014 Asian Development Bank survey, 80% of Mongolians cited television as their main source of information.

===Mongolian cuisine===

=== Sports and festivals ===

The main national festival is Naadam, which has been organized for centuries and takes place over three days in the summer, consisting of three Mongolian traditional sports, archery, cross-country horse-racing, and wrestling, traditionally recognized as the Three Manly Games of Naadam. In modern-day Mongolia, Naadam is held from July 11 to 13 in the honor of the anniversaries of the National Democratic Revolution and foundation of the Great Mongol State.

Another very popular activity called Shagaa is the &quot;flicking&quot; of sheep ankle bones at a target several feet away, using a flicking motion of the finger to send the small bone flying at targets and trying to knock the target bones off the platform. At Naadam, this contest is popular among older Mongolians.
Horse riding is especially central to Mongolian culture. The long-distance races that are showcased during Naadam festivals are one aspect of this, as is the popularity of trick riding. One example of trick riding is the legend that the Mongolian military hero Damdin Sükhbaatar scattered coins on the ground and then picked them up while riding a horse at full gallop.

Mongolian wrestling is the most popular of all Mongol sports. It is the highlight of the Three Manly Games of Naadam. Historians claim that Mongol-style wrestling originated some seven thousand years ago. Hundreds of wrestlers from different cities and aimags around the country take part in the national wrestling competition.

Other sports such as basketball, weightlifting, powerlifting, association football, athletics, gymnastics, table tennis, jujutsu, karate, aikido, kickboxing, and mixed martial arts have become popular in Mongolia. More Mongolian table tennis players are competing internationally.

Freestyle wrestling has been practised since 1958 in Mongolia. Mongolian freestyle wrestlers have won the first and the most Olympic medals of Mongolia.

Naidangiin Tüvshinbayar won Mongolia&#x27;s first ever Olympic gold medal in the men&#x27;s 100-kilogram class of judo.

Amateur boxing has been practised in Mongolia since 1948. The Mongolian Olympic boxing national team was founded in 1960. The Communist government of Mongolia banned boxing from 1964 to 1967 but the government soon ended the ban. Professional boxing began in Mongolia in the 1990s.

Mongolia national basketball team enjoyed some success recently, especially at the East Asian Games.

Association football is also played in Mongolia. The Mongolia national football team began playing national games again during the 1990s; but has not yet qualified for a major international tournament. The Mongolia Premier League is the top domestic competition.

Several Mongolian women have excelled in pistol shooting: Otryadyn Gündegmaa is a silver medalist of the 2008 Olympic Games, Munkhbayar Dorjsuren is a double world champion and Olympic bronze medal winner (now representing Germany), while Tsogbadrakhyn Mönkhzul is, as of May 2007, ranked third in the world in the 25-metre pistol event.

Mongolian sumo wrestler Dolgorsürengiin Dagvadorj won 25 top division tournament championships, placing him fourth on the all-time list. In January 2015, Mönkhbatyn Davaajargal took his 33rd top division championship, giving him the most in the history of sumo.

Bandy is the only sport in which Mongolia has finished higher than third place at the Asian Winter Games, which happened in 2011 when the national team captured the silver medal. It led to being chosen as the best Mongolian sports team of 2011. Mongolia won the bronze medal of the B division at the 2017 Bandy World Championship after which the then President of Mongolia, Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, held a reception for the team.

Ulaanbataar holds an annual marathon in June. 2015 was the sixth marathon that has been organized by Ar Mongol. The race starts at Sukhbataar Square and is always open to residents and runners who come especially for this event.
Mongolia holds other traditional festivals throughout the year. The Golden Eagle Festival, held annually, draws about 400 eagle hunters on horseback, including the traveler (), to compete with their birds. The Ice Festival and the Thousand Camel Festival are amongst many other traditional Mongolian festivals.

== See also ==

* Index of Mongolia-related articles
* Outline of Mongolia

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Mongolia&quot; , Encyclopædia Britannica
* Mongolia . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency
* &quot;Background notes on Mongolia&quot; , US Department of State
* Mongolia: Growth, Democracy, and Two Wary Neighbors (Q&amp;A with Alan Wachman, May 2012)
== External links ==
; Government
* 

; General information
* Mongolia. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency
* Mongolia Travel Guide
* at &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Mongolia profile from the BBC News
* Mongolia at &quot;Britannica.com&quot;
* 
* Wrestling Roots
* Mongolia, Facts and Culture on CountryReports.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="0" end="8" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="14" end="32" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="36" end="45" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="59" end="65" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="83" end="88" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="187" end="226" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="most sparsely populated sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="307" end="317" title="Endorheic basin" label="closed sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="361" end="367" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="414" end="425" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="440" end="451" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q661638" start="469" end="481" title="List of cities in Mongolia" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495771" start="605" end="619" title="nomadic empire" label="nomadic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="636" end="643" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="649" end="656" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="662" end="668" title="Rouran" label="Rouran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146034" start="674" end="696" title="First Turkic Khaganate" label="First Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833446" start="702" end="725" title="Second Turkic Khaganate" label="Second Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="731" end="747" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="769" end="781" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="794" end="807" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="834" end="856" title="List of largest empires" label="contiguous land empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="882" end="893" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="904" end="916" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="937" end="949" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="987" end="994" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304" start="1099" end="1109" title="Dayan Khan" label="Dayan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9335" start="1114" end="1131" title="Tumen Zasagt Khan" label="Tumen Zasagt Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000928" start="1155" end="1171" title="Buddhism in Mongolia" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="1217" end="1223" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1232" end="1244" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q838303" start="1445" end="1466" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1911" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081446" start="1488" end="1527" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1921" label="independence from the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="1578" end="1593" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1601" end="1613" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="1628" end="1660" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="1678" end="1693" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="1720" end="1739" title="revolutions of 1989" label="revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="1777" end="1798" title="1990 Democratic Revolution in Mongolia" label="democratic revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="1828" end="1846" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q528455" start="1854" end="1874" title="Constitution of Mongolia" label="constitution of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="1896" end="1910" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="1952" end="1957" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21511129" start="1977" end="1990" title="Horse culture in Mongolia" label="horse culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2009" end="2017" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="2114" end="2119" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="2200" end="2207" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="2299" end="2306" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193067" start="2308" end="2314" title="Tuvans" label="Tuvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2429" end="2443" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q776874" start="2445" end="2470" title="Asia Cooperation Dialogue" label="Asia Cooperation Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="2472" end="2475" title="Group of 77" label="G77"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109843" start="2477" end="2513" title="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank" label="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="2515" end="2535" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2542" end="2561" title="Foreign relations of NATO#Mongolia" label="NATO global partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2583" end="2607" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031620" start="2929" end="2935" title="Yujiulü Mugulü" label="Mugulü"/>
<link wikidata="Q155361" start="2968" end="2984" title="Rouran Khaganate" label="Rouran Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="3028" end="3035" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q836453" start="3096" end="3102" title="Shiwei people" label="Shiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="3121" end="3133" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="3185" end="3189" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="3291" end="3303" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875016" start="3317" end="3330" title="Khamag Mongol" label="Khamag Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="3362" end="3379" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="3410" end="3417" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="3424" end="3435" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317268" start="3444" end="3463" title="Tatar confederation" label="Tatar confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q573157" start="3514" end="3521" title="Yesugei" label="Yesügei"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="3533" end="3540" title="Genghis Khan" label="Temüjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="3603" end="3616" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="3742" end="3759" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="3792" end="3804" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q528455" start="3837" end="3861" title="Constitution of Mongolia" label="Constitution of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123692" start="4022" end="4041" title="Khoit Tsenkher Cave Rock Art" label="Khoit Tsenkher Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="4051" end="4065" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="4147" end="4155" title="mammoths" label="mammoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q677014" start="4157" end="4161" title="lynx" label="lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="4163" end="4177" title="bactrian camel" label="bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="4184" end="4191" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q172125" start="4229" end="4236" title="Lascaux" label="Lascaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061993" start="4260" end="4290" title="Venus figurines of Mal&amp;#x27;ta" label="Venus figurines of Mal&amp;#x27;ta"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747877" start="4669" end="4681" title="Genetic history of East Asians" label="ethnogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10588098" start="4685" end="4701" title="Mongolic peoples" label="Mongolic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="4742" end="4765" title="Ancient Northeast Asian" label="Ancient Northeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815171" start="4836" end="4858" title="Western Steppe Herders" label="Western Steppe Herders"/>
<link wikidata="Q80974" start="5060" end="5077" title="Afanasevo culture" label="Afanasevo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28445743" start="5099" end="5112" title="Indo-European migrations" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q747843" start="5139" end="5156" title="Khangai Mountains" label="Khangai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632835" start="5346" end="5360" title="Okunev culture" label="Okunev culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q459376" start="5382" end="5399" title="Andronovo culture" label="Andronovo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q129282" start="5419" end="5434" title="Karasuk culture" label="Karasuk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="5480" end="5487" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q176824" start="5554" end="5564" title="deer stone" label="deer stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737" start="5576" end="5583" title="kurgans" label="kurgans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098731" start="5585" end="5602" title="Slab Grave Culture" label="square slab tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="5889" end="5899" title="Copper Age" label="Copper Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q467985" start="6010" end="6016" title="Yuezhi" label="Yuezhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="6022" end="6031" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="6224" end="6233" title="Altai Mountains" label="the Altai"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="6322" end="6337" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="6479" end="6485" title="Donghu people" label="Donghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="6509" end="6522" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="6542" end="6554" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495771" start="6589" end="6603" title="nomadic empire" label="nomadic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181888" start="6823" end="6827" title="Khan (title)" label="Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q136649" start="6833" end="6841" title="Kurultai" label="Kurultai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059082" start="6898" end="6904" title="Keshig" label="Keshig"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="6971" end="6978" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="7031" end="7042" title="Modu Shanyu" label="Modu Shanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="7126" end="7137" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="7175" end="7194" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151702" start="7259" end="7268" title="Meng Tian" label="Meng Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="7413" end="7427" title="Xianbei state" label="Xianbei empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="7550" end="7557" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="7686" end="7694" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürks"/>
<link wikidata="Q906661" start="7757" end="7769" title="Panticapaeum" label="Panticapaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157065" start="7783" end="7788" title="Kerch" label="Kerch"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="7825" end="7841" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="7898" end="7905" title="Khitan people" label="Khitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875016" start="8002" end="8015" title="Khamag Mongol" label="Khamag Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q381125" start="8090" end="8102" title="Bilge Khagan" label="Bilge Khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="8160" end="8166" title="Khagan" label="Khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="8333" end="8342" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="8351" end="8366" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8395" end="8407" title="Genghis Khan#Name and title" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="8543" end="8556" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8662" end="8668" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="8684" end="8689" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="8721" end="8728" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79948" start="8749" end="8761" title="Gulf of Oman" label="Gulf of Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="8766" end="8773" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473258" start="8971" end="8984" title="Pax Mongolica" label="Pax Mongolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q331644" start="9142" end="9149" title="Khanate" label="Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16871984" start="9204" end="9220" title="Toluid Civil War" label="Toluid Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521" start="9282" end="9293" title="Möngke Khan" label="Möngke Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="9472" end="9483" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8959" start="9714" end="9735" title="Northern Yuan" label="Northern Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q62677" start="9855" end="9864" title="Karakorum" label="Karakorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8916" start="9940" end="9950" title="Biligtü Khan Ayushiridara" label="Ayushridar"/>
<link wikidata="Q489922" start="9967" end="9977" title="Köke Temür" label="Köke Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="10024" end="10036" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="10401" end="10407" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087883" start="10459" end="10501" title="Yongle Emperor&amp;#x27;s campaigns against the Mongols" label="five expeditions led by the Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304" start="10531" end="10541" title="Dayan Khan" label="Dayan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272188" start="10550" end="10556" title="khatun" label="khatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q299737" start="10557" end="10566" title="Mandukhai" label="Mandukhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q434393" start="10641" end="10651" title="Altan Khan" label="Altan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q535534" start="10763" end="10769" title="Hohhot" label="Hohhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25256" start="10801" end="10811" title="3rd Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="10852" end="10868" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="10944" end="10951" title="Khalkha Mongols" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058965" start="10990" end="11000" title="Erdene Zuu Monastery" label="Erdene Zuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q735871" start="11033" end="11042" title="Zanabazar" label="Zanabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473851" start="11060" end="11082" title="Jebtsundamba Khutuktu" label="Jebtsundamba Khutughtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="11252" end="11256" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341" start="11528" end="11539" title="Ligden Khan" label="Ligden Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="11599" end="11606" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="11720" end="11734" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="11789" end="11801" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808293" start="11934" end="11951" title="Dzungar–Qing Wars" label="Dzungar–Qing Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="11957" end="11965" title="Dzungars" label="Dzungars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462644" start="12138" end="12157" title="Dzungar genocide" label="Dzungar were killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473851" start="12366" end="12387" title="Jebtsundamba Khutuktu" label="Jebtsundamba Khutuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="12583" end="12596" title="Pontic–Caspian steppe" label="Volga steppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="12623" end="12630" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q948601" start="12681" end="12689" title="Siberian Route" label="Tea Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q456615" start="12951" end="12956" title="Amban" label="Amban"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="13012" end="13018" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Khüree"/>
<link wikidata="Q943374" start="13020" end="13028" title="Uliastai" label="Uliastai"/>
<link wikidata="Q731256" start="13034" end="13039" title="Khovd (city)" label="Khovd"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="13401" end="13409" title="usury" label="usurious"/>
<link wikidata="Q353547" start="13939" end="13949" title="Bogd Khaan" label="Bogd Khaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="14008" end="14025" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="14079" end="14090" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="14096" end="14130" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="14170" end="14179" title="Successor state" label="successor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983974" start="14214" end="14237" title="Qing dynasty in Inner Asia" label="both Mongolia and China"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="14486" end="14500" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="14544" end="14562" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408784" start="14604" end="14615" title="Xu Shuzheng" label="Xu Shuzheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="14694" end="14711" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="14717" end="14722" title="White movement" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q70542" start="14750" end="14762" title="Roman Ungern von Sternberg" label="Baron Ungern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="14841" end="14855" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Niislel Khüree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="14960" end="14976" title="Russian SFSR" label="Bolshevik Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475882" start="15089" end="15103" title="Altanbulag, Selenge" label="Mongolian part"/>
<link wikidata="Q156337" start="15107" end="15114" title="Kyakhta" label="Kyakhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q353547" start="15430" end="15440" title="Bogd Khaan" label="Bogd Khaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="15449" end="15465" title="laryngeal cancer" label="laryngeal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="15543" end="15559" title="political system" label="political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="15577" end="15609" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q311488" start="15636" end="15658" title="Khorloogiin Choibalsan" label="Khorloogiin Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593895" start="15763" end="15776" title="Pan-Mongolism" label="Pan-Mongolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311488" start="15919" end="15941" title="Khorloogiin Choibalsan" label="Khorloogiin Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115455" start="16051" end="16067" title="Stalinist repressions in Mongolia" label="Stalinist purges"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="16408" end="16414" title="Buryats" label="Buryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="16432" end="16464" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q542291" start="16578" end="16588" title="Red Terror" label="Red Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q558640" start="16633" end="16649" title="Peljidiin Genden" label="Peljidiin Genden"/>
<link wikidata="Q45281" start="16654" end="16666" title="Anandyn Amar" label="Anandyn Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="16672" end="16700" title="Great Purge" label="Stalinist purges in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="16788" end="16820" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q311488" start="16884" end="16894" title="Khorloogiin Choibalsan" label="Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115455" start="16933" end="16961" title="Stalinist repressions in Mongolia" label="Stalinist purges in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="17010" end="17022" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="17032" end="17041" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q689302" start="17049" end="17063" title="Bohumír Šmeral" label="Bohumír Šmeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551794" start="17212" end="17254" title="Japanese invasion of Manchuria" label="Japanese invasion of neighboring Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="17314" end="17340" title="Battles of Khalkhin Gol" label="Soviet-Japanese Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="17470" end="17493" title="Battles of Khalkhin Gol" label="Battles of Khalkhin Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="17517" end="17536" title="Soviet–Japanese War" label="Soviet–Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q697837" start="17594" end="17603" title="Mengjiang" label="Mengjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="17643" end="17659" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="17718" end="17729" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899683" start="17874" end="17888" title="1945 Mongolian independence referendum" label="The referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="18037" end="18068" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="18152" end="18169" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975651" start="18179" end="18200" title="United Nations Security Council veto power" label="Security Council veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="18239" end="18271" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="18411" end="18428" title="Republic of China and the United Nations" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="18618" end="18628" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="18894" end="18922" title="China and the United Nations" label="China and the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q275025" start="18944" end="18964" title="Yumjaagiin Tsedenbal" label="Yumjaagiin Tsedenbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q558706" start="19241" end="19256" title="Jambyn Batmönkh" label="Jambyn Batmönkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="19287" end="19318" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230447" start="19370" end="19375" title="Youth in Mongolia" label="youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="19402" end="19432" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1990" label="peaceful Democratic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="19436" end="19448" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="January 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="19475" end="19493" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="19566" end="19582" title="Marxist-Leninist" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="19583" end="19626" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="19660" end="19689" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q528455" start="19742" end="19758" title="Constitution of Mongolia" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19877" end="19907" title="Economy of Mongolia#Transition to a market economy" label="transition to a market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q776874" start="20211" end="20236" title="Asia Cooperation Dialogue" label="Asia Cooperation Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="20244" end="20277" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="20324" end="20357" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="20423" end="20435" title="List of sovereign states and dependencies by area" label="18th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316072" start="20542" end="20545" title="41st parallel north" label="41°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224096" start="20550" end="20554" title="52nd parallel north" label="52°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703400" start="20602" end="20605" title="87th meridian east" label="87°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349620" start="20610" end="20615" title="120th meridian east" label="120°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q15664" start="21184" end="21195" title="quadripoint" label="quadripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="21244" end="21255" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q172497" start="21355" end="21385" title="Mongolian-Manchurian grassland" label="Mongolian-Manchurian grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091113" start="21562" end="21574" title="Khüiten Peak" label="Khüiten Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q143008" start="21582" end="21592" title="Tavan bogd" label="Tavan bogd"/>
<link wikidata="Q81150" start="21638" end="21646" title="Uvs Lake" label="Uvs Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q960" start="21660" end="21673" title="Tuva Republic" label="Tuva Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="21698" end="21717" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="22263" end="22284" title="temperature inversion" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q488578" start="22390" end="22410" title="Siberian Anticyclone" label="Siberian Anticyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q822815" start="22489" end="22497" title="Ulaangom" label="Ulaangom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607950" start="22518" end="22531" title="Rinchinlkhumbe, Khovsgol" label="Rinchinlhumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q634104" start="22551" end="22563" title="Tosontsengel, Zavkhan" label="Tosontsengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q822808" start="22798" end="22809" title="Dalanzadgad" label="Dalanzadgad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402208" start="22811" end="22819" title="Khanbogd, Ömnögovi" label="Khanbogd"/>
<link wikidata="Q529834" start="22980" end="22990" title="Tsetserleg (city)" label="Tsetserleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q717684" start="23027" end="23037" title="Arvaikheer" label="Arvaikheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q747843" start="23190" end="23207" title="Khangai Mountains" label="Khangai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262272" start="23490" end="23493" title="zud" label="zud"/>
<link wikidata="Q209774" start="24252" end="24267" title="Bulgan Province" label="Bulgan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="24725" end="24731" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="25057" end="25071" title="Bactrian camel" label="Bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="25140" end="25158" title="rain shadow effect" label="rain shadow effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344541" start="25538" end="25553" title="Tadpole shrimps" label="Tadpole shrimps"/>
<link wikidata="Q206694" start="25632" end="25636" title="Onon River" label="Onon"/>
<link wikidata="Q641020" start="25641" end="25648" title="Kherlen River" label="Kherlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q715788" start="25660" end="25669" title="Lake Buir" label="Lake Buir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="25687" end="25697" title="Amur river" label="Amur river"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="26104" end="26122" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="26190" end="26214" title="U.S. Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019506" start="26215" end="26255" title="Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs" label="Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="26344" end="26400" title="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs" label="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="27052" end="27072" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="27568" end="27575" title="Khalkha" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="27662" end="27669" title="Khalkha" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="27749" end="27756" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="27769" end="27782" title="Turkic people" label="Turkic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="27785" end="27792" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193067" start="27797" end="27803" title="Tuvans" label="Tuvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="27971" end="27988" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="27992" end="28001" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="28019" end="28036" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399808" start="28069" end="28083" title="Khalkha Mongolian" label="Khalkha Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q56959" start="28177" end="28182" title="Oirat language" label="Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q33120" start="28184" end="28190" title="Buryat language" label="Buryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196052" start="28196" end="28205" title="Khamnigan Mongol" label="Khamnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="28395" end="28406" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii"/>
<link wikidata="Q192942" start="28408" end="28411" title="Uvs Province" label="Uvs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="28417" end="28422" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28424" end="28430" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="28434" end="28449" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34119" start="28498" end="28503" title="Tuvan language" label="Tuvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244788" start="28541" end="28549" title="Khövsgöl Province" label="Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915499" start="28551" end="28574" title="Mongolian Sign Language" label="Mongolian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q949743" start="28670" end="28687" title="Mongolian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="28728" end="28743" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1990" label="1990 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055705" start="28791" end="28807" title="Mongolian script" label="Mongolian script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187403" start="28852" end="28874" title="Mongols in China" label="Mongols in neighboring"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="28875" end="28889" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="29327" end="29340" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="communist era"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="29464" end="29476" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="30223" end="30230" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="30241" end="30249" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="30255" end="30261" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301642" start="30330" end="30360" title="Mongolians in South Korea" label="Mongolians work in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056505" start="30374" end="30408" title="Mongolian diaspora" label="largest group of Mongolians abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000928" start="30513" end="30522" title="Buddhism in Mongolia" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="30539" end="30552" title="Irreligion" label="non-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899730" start="30556" end="30575" title="Mongolian shamanism" label="Mongolian shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="30745" end="30761" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084098" start="30970" end="30975" title="Islam in Mongolia" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="31019" end="31028" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181888" start="31271" end="31275" title="Khan (title)" label="Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311488" start="31336" end="31358" title="Khorloogiin Choibalsan" label="Khorloogiin Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115455" start="31431" end="31487" title="Stalinist repressions in Mongolia" label="killed at least 30,000 people, of whom 18,000 were lamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="31503" end="31516" title="Buddhist monk" label="Buddhist monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="31567" end="31584" title="fall of communism" label="fall of communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="31629" end="31645" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861328" start="32190" end="32203" title="Barnabas Fund" label="Barnabas Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="32290" end="32337" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="32576" end="32587" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="32620" end="32628" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="32645" end="32667" title="Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="32783" end="32800" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="32860" end="32869" title="President of Mongolia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="32936" end="32954" title="State Great Khural" label="State Great Khural"/>
<link wikidata="Q528455" start="33068" end="33092" title="constitution of Mongolia" label="constitution of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="33141" end="33162" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="33167" end="33175" title="Freedom of religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="33568" end="33597" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="33606" end="33622" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="33658" end="33671" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="34475" end="34491" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57888" start="34537" end="34556" title="Norovyn Altankhuyag" label="Norovyn Altankhuyag"/>
<link wikidata="Q903751" start="34572" end="34586" title="Prime Minister of Mongolia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15934317" start="34634" end="34656" title="Chimediin Saikhanbileg" label="Chimediin Saikhanbileg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="34662" end="34665" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="MPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022553" start="34697" end="34711" title="2016 Mongolian parliamentary election" label="2016 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q903751" start="34725" end="34739" title="Prime Minister of Mongolia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="34744" end="34747" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="MPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058418" start="34755" end="34776" title="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh" label="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh"/>
<link wikidata="Q80598355" start="34827" end="34835" title="2020 Mongolian legislative election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248226" start="35151" end="35176" title="Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene" label="Luvsannamsrai Oyun-Erdene"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="35286" end="35307" title="President of Mongolia" label="President of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54820" start="35794" end="35812" title="Nambaryn Enkhbayar" label="Nambaryn Enkhbayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="35814" end="35835" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="35888" end="35904" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899651" start="35995" end="36045" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party (2010)" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party (2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899651" start="36047" end="36051" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party (2010)" label="MPRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q372202" start="36063" end="36081" title="Batbold Sukhbaatar" label="Batbold Sukhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="36257" end="36273" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9122260" start="36284" end="36305" title="Khaltmaagiin Battulga" label="Khaltmaagiin Battulga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454711" start="36327" end="36335" title="2017 Mongolian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058418" start="36410" end="36427" title="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh" label="Ukhnaa Khurelsukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="36457" end="36486" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="36488" end="36491" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="MPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026051" start="36577" end="36598" title="2021 Mongolian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="36617" end="36627" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="36628" end="36639" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993392" start="37358" end="37376" title="Altai gas pipeline" label="Power of Siberia 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="37823" end="37848" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447776" start="38076" end="38108" title="The Forum of Small States (FOSS)" label="The Forum of Small States (FOSS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="38312" end="38331" title="diplomatic missions" label="diplomatic missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="38359" end="38368" title="embassies" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="38404" end="38410" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="38412" end="38418" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="38420" end="38427" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="38429" end="38436" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="38438" end="38444" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="38446" end="38454" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="38456" end="38464" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="38466" end="38474" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="38476" end="38481" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="38483" end="38491" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="38493" end="38498" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="38500" end="38506" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="38508" end="38515" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="38517" end="38529" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="38531" end="38542" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="38544" end="38550" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="38552" end="38558" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="38560" end="38569" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="38571" end="38577" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="38579" end="38584" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="38586" end="38592" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="38594" end="38603" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="38605" end="38609" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="38611" end="38616" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="38618" end="38627" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="38629" end="38634" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="38636" end="38645" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="38647" end="38652" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="38654" end="38660" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326" start="38662" end="38671" title="Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="38673" end="38679" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="38681" end="38697" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="38739" end="38760" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="38835" end="38839" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="38875" end="38886" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="38924" end="38936" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q568879" start="38978" end="38991" title="Special Court for Sierra Leone" label="special court"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="39064" end="39068" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q775968" start="39083" end="39091" title="MINURCAT" label="MINURCAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="39190" end="39196" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="39219" end="39233" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="39341" end="39393" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245638" start="39473" end="39494" title="judiciary of Mongolia" label="judiciary of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="39535" end="39549" title="Trial court" label="first instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518096" start="39565" end="39584" title="Districts of Mongolia" label="provincial district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="39594" end="39614" title="Düürgüüd of Mongolia" label="Ulaanbaatar district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="39616" end="39625" title="Appellate court" label="appellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644946" start="39754" end="39779" title="Supreme Court of Mongolia" label="Supreme Court of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006576" start="39862" end="39886" title="Judicial General Council of Mongolia" label="Judicial General Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="39946" end="39956" title="State Great Khural" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q438484" start="40018" end="40048" title="alternative dispute resolution" label="alternative dispute resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399" start="40155" end="40173" title="Provinces of Mongolia" label="provinces (aimags)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518096" start="40198" end="40214" title="Districts of Mongolia" label="districts (sums)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399" start="40260" end="40287" title="Provinces of Mongolia" label="capital city (municipality)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207809" start="40343" end="40352" title="Arkhangai Province" label="Arkhangai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="40355" end="40366" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii"/>
<link wikidata="Q276200" start="40369" end="40381" title="Bayankhongor Province" label="Bayankhongor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209774" start="40384" end="40390" title="Bulgan Province" label="Bulgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18827" start="40393" end="40404" title="Darkhan-Uul Province" label="Darkhan-Uul"/>
<link wikidata="Q207795" start="40407" end="40413" title="Dornod Province" label="Dornod"/>
<link wikidata="Q213272" start="40416" end="40425" title="Dornogovi Province" label="Dornogovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211835" start="40428" end="40436" title="Dundgovi Province" label="Dundgovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192945" start="40439" end="40449" title="Govi-Altai Province" label="Govi-Altai"/>
<link wikidata="Q236333" start="40452" end="40462" title="Govisümber Province" label="Govisümber"/>
<link wikidata="Q239040" start="40465" end="40472" title="Khentii Province" label="Khentii"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="40475" end="40480" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd"/>
<link wikidata="Q244788" start="40483" end="40491" title="Khövsgöl Province" label="Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q235579" start="40494" end="40502" title="Ömnögovi Province" label="Ömnögovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234710" start="40505" end="40511" title="Orkhon Province" label="Orkhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234713" start="40514" end="40525" title="Övörkhangai Province" label="Övörkhangai"/>
<link wikidata="Q234680" start="40528" end="40535" title="Selenge Province" label="Selenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q244804" start="40538" end="40548" title="Sükhbaatar Province" label="Sükhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q276195" start="40551" end="40554" title="Töv Province" label="Töv"/>
<link wikidata="Q192942" start="40557" end="40560" title="Uvs Province" label="Uvs"/>
<link wikidata="Q167764" start="40563" end="40570" title="Zavkhan Province" label="Zavkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235571" start="40673" end="40680" title="Darkhan (city)" label="Darkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230628" start="40682" end="40689" title="Erdenet" label="Erdenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399" start="40695" end="40700" title="Provinces of Mongolia" label="aimag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518096" start="40713" end="40716" title="Districts of Mongolia" label="sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="40983" end="40993" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="41000" end="41008" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="41348" end="41364" title="informal economy" label="informal economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="41482" end="41485" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="41545" end="41555" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="42418" end="42445" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="42556" end="42565" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636342" start="42618" end="42642" title="3G (countries)" label="global growth generating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752885" start="42740" end="42764" title="Mongolian Stock Exchange" label="Mongolian Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="42856" end="42877" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="42977" end="43010" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="43606" end="43615" title="Rio Tinto Group" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856196" start="43620" end="43633" title="Turquoise Hill Resources" label="Ivanhoe Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059067" start="43649" end="43659" title="Oyu Tolgoi" label="Oyu Tolgoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139934" start="44045" end="44057" title="Tavan Tolgoi" label="Tavan Tolgoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="44232" end="44255" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301626" start="44695" end="44706" title="Mongol Post" label="Mongol Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q559037" start="44904" end="44927" title="Trans-Mongolian Railway" label="Trans-Mongolian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="45003" end="45025" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816" start="45051" end="45059" title="Ulan-Ude" label="Ulan-Ude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001036" start="45136" end="45143" title="Erenhot" label="Erenhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q318245" start="45241" end="45251" title="Choibalsan (city)" label="Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771883" start="45356" end="45370" title="Chuluunkhoroot" label="Chuluunkhoroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q14697701" start="45606" end="45642" title="Chinggis Khaan International Airport" label="Chinggis Khaan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q564717" start="45830" end="45853" title="MIAT Mongolian Airlines" label="MIAT Mongolian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q945055" start="46286" end="46292" title="Bulgan (city)" label="Bulgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="46567" end="46589" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349150" start="47377" end="47408" title="National University of Mongolia" label="National University of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370318" start="47417" end="47463" title="Mongolian University of Science and Technology" label="Mongolian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q857896" start="47699" end="47706" title="Soyombo symbol" label="Soyombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q916651" start="47833" end="47840" title="thangka" label="thangka"/>
<link wikidata="Q916651" start="48042" end="48050" title="Thangkas" label="Thangkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q621642" start="48083" end="48091" title="appliqué" label="appliqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473851" start="48206" end="48227" title="Jebtsundamba Khutuktu" label="Jebtsundamba Khutuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q735871" start="48229" end="48238" title="Zanabazar" label="Zanabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q779092" start="48281" end="48306" title="Marzan Sharav" label="&amp;quot;Marzan&amp;quot; Sharav"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="48359" end="48391" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="48393" end="48410" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899568" start="48582" end="48606" title="Mongol zurag" label="Mongol &amp;quot;zurag&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="48653" end="48662" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="48898" end="48909" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="49237" end="49241" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49395" end="49405" title="N. Chultem" label="N. Chultem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003901" start="50157" end="50164" title="Tibetan architecture" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="50169" end="50176" title="Chinese architecture" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q735871" start="50285" end="50294" title="Zanabazar" label="Zanabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058965" start="50436" end="50446" title="Erdene Zuu" label="Erdene Zuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129422" start="51127" end="51138" title="morin khuur" label="morin khuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785243" start="51177" end="51186" title="Long song" label="urtyn duu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51232" end="51239" title="Tuvan throat singing#Khoomei" label="khoomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="51333" end="51342" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="51568" end="51574" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="51733" end="51764" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="51813" end="51828" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="51841" end="51852" title="Multi-party system" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="52247" end="52273" title="Freedom of information laws by country" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="52527" end="52552" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q721133" start="52886" end="52892" title="Naadam" label="Naadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q21511129" start="53633" end="53645" title="Horse culture in Mongolia" label="Horse riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q314105" start="53894" end="53911" title="Damdin Sükhbaatar" label="Damdin Sükhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207182" start="54004" end="54023" title="Mongolian wrestling" label="Mongolian wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q83462" start="54366" end="54379" title="Olympic weightlifting" label="weightlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q213796" start="54381" end="54393" title="powerlifting" label="powerlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="54454" end="54461" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="54463" end="54469" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43114" start="54471" end="54477" title="aikido" label="aikido"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="54479" end="54489" title="kickboxing" label="kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="54495" end="54513" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q327223" start="54615" end="54634" title="Freestyle wrestling" label="Freestyle wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q353539" start="54769" end="54792" title="Naidangiin Tüvshinbayar" label="Naidangiin Tüvshinbayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573533" start="54890" end="54904" title="Amateur boxing" label="Amateur boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="55120" end="55139" title="Professional boxing" label="Professional boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873744" start="55173" end="55206" title="Mongolia national basketball team" label="Mongolia national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867737" start="55256" end="55272" title="Basketball at the East Asian Games" label="East Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q241353" start="55328" end="55359" title="Mongolia national football team" label="Mongolia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090855" start="55481" end="55504" title="Mongolia Premier League" label="Mongolia Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="55580" end="55595" title="shooting sports" label="pistol shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q444801" start="55597" end="55615" title="Otryadyn Gündegmaa" label="Otryadyn Gündegmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q70562" start="55664" end="55684" title="Munkhbayar Dorjsuren" label="Munkhbayar Dorjsuren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849820" start="55778" end="55800" title="Tsogbadrakhyn Mönkhzul" label="Tsogbadrakhyn Mönkhzul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55854" end="55869" title="25-metre pistol" label="25-metre pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40561" start="55888" end="55892" title="sumo" label="sumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334601" start="55902" end="55927" title="Dolgorsürengiin Dagvadorj" label="Dolgorsürengiin Dagvadorj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56000" end="56013" title="List of sumo record holders#Most career championships" label="all-time list"/>
<link wikidata="Q448054" start="56032" end="56054" title="Mönkhbatyn Davaajargal" label="Mönkhbatyn Davaajargal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="56141" end="56146" title="Bandy" label="Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q818463" start="56227" end="56245" title="Asian Winter Games" label="Asian Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186045" start="56265" end="56269" title="Bandy at the 2011 Asian Winter Games" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326775" start="56275" end="56292" title="Mongolia national bandy team" label="the national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953645" start="56441" end="56470" title="2017 Bandy World Championship" label="2017 Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="56492" end="56513" title="President of Mongolia" label="President of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="56515" end="56536" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376325" start="56867" end="56888" title="Golden Eagle Festival" label="Golden Eagle Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q861890" start="57009" end="57021" title="Ice Festival" label="Ice Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57030" end="57053" title="Thousand Camel Festival" label="Thousand Camel Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018473" start="57129" end="57163" title="Index of Mongolia-related articles" label="Index of Mongolia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112366" start="57166" end="57185" title="Outline of Mongolia" label="Outline of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="57306" end="57324" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="57332" end="57359" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429162" start="57496" end="57508" title="Alan M. Wachman" label="Alan Wachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="57598" end="57616" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="57624" end="57651" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="57743" end="57751" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19273" wikidata="Q1775510" url="?curid=19273" title="Geography of Mongolia">
<text>Mongolia is a landlocked country in East Asia, located between China and Russia. The terrain is one of mountains and rolling plateaus, with a high degree of relief. The total land area of Mongolia is 1,564,116 square kilometres. Overall, the land slopes from the high Altai Mountains of the west and the north to plains and depressions in the east and the south. The Khüiten Peak in extreme western Mongolia on the Chinese border is the highest point (). The lowest point is at , is the Hoh Nuur or lake Huh. The country has an average elevation of .

The landscape includes one of Asia&#x27;s largest freshwater lakes (Lake Khövsgöl), many salt lakes, marshes, sand dunes, rolling grasslands, alpine forests, and permanent mountain glaciers. Northern and western Mongolia are seismically active zones, with frequent earthquakes and many hot springs and extinct volcanoes. The nation&#x27;s closest point to any ocean is approximately from the country&#x27;s easternmost tip, bordering North China to Jinzhou in Liaoning province, China along the coastline of the Bohai Sea.

== Mountain regions ==
Mongolia has four major mountain ranges. The highest is the Altai Mountains, which stretch across the western and the southwestern regions of the country on a northwest-to-southeast axis. The range contains the country&#x27;s highest peak, the high Khüiten Peak.

The Khangai Mountains, mountains also trending northwest to southeast, occupy much of central and north-central Mongolia. These are older, lower, and more eroded mountains, with many forests and alpine pastures.

The Khentii Mountains, trending from northeast to southwest for about , occupy central Mongolia&#x27;s north eastern part. The northern parts are covered in taiga while the southern parts are filled with dry steppe. The range forms the watershed between the Arctic Ocean (via Lake Baikal) and the Pacific Ocean basins. Rivers originating in the range include the Onon, Kherlen, Menza and Tuul. These mountains also house the capital of Ulaanbaatar.

The Khövsgöl Mountains occupy the north of the country. It trends from north to south and generally has a lot of steep peaks. Young mountain range with Alpine characteristics, high gradient, with narrow cliffs.

Much of eastern Mongolia is occupied by a plain and the lowest area is a southwest-to-northeast trending depression that reaches from the Gobi Desert region in the south to the eastern frontier.

== Rivers and lakes ==
Some of Mongolia&#x27;s waterways drain to the oceans, but many finish at Endorheic basins in the deserts and the depressions of Inner Asia. Rivers are most extensively developed in the north, and the country&#x27;s major river system is that of the Selenge, which drains via Lake Baikal to the Arctic Ocean. Some minor tributaries of Siberia&#x27;s Yenisei River, which also flows to the Arctic Ocean, rise in the mountains of northwestern Mongolia. In northeastern Mongolia the Onon River drains into the Pacific Ocean through the Shilka River in Russia and the Amur (Heilong Jiang) rivers, forming the tenth longest river system in the world.
Many rivers of western Mongolia end at lakes in the Central Asian Internal Drainage Basin, most often in the Great Lakes Depression, or at Hulun Lake, Ulaan Lake or Ulungur Lake. The few streams of southern Mongolia do not reach the sea but run into lakes or deserts.

Mongolia&#x27;s largest lake by area, Uvs Lake is in the Great Lakes Depression. Mongolia&#x27;s largest lake by volume of water, Lake Khövsgöl, drains via the Selenge river to the Arctic Ocean. One of the most easterly lakes of Mongolia, Hoh Nuur, at an elevation of 557 metres, is the lowest point in the country. In total, the lakes and rivers of Mongolia cover 10,560 square kilometres, or 0.67% of the country.

== Climate ==

=== Overview ===

Mongolia has a high elevation, with a cold and dry climate. It has an extreme continental climate with long, very cold winters and short summers, during which most precipitation falls. The country averages 257 cloudless days a year, and it is usually at the center of a region of high atmospheric pressure. Precipitation is highest in the north, which averages per year, and lowest in the south, which receives . The extreme south is the Gobi Desert, some regions of which receive no precipitation at all in most years. The name Gobi is a Mongol word meaning desert, depression, salt marsh, or steppe, but which usually refers to a category of arid rangeland with insufficient vegetation to support marmots but with enough to support camels. Mongols distinguish Gobi from desert proper, although the distinction is not always apparent to outsiders unfamiliar with the Mongolian landscape. Gobi rangelands are fragile and are easily destroyed by overgrazing, which results in expansion of the true desert, a stony waste where not even Bactrian camels can survive.

Average temperatures over most of the country are below freezing from November through March and are above freezing in April and October. Winter nights can drop to in most years. Summer extremes reach as high as in the southern Gobi region and in Ulaanbaatar. Most of Mongolia is covered by discontinuous permafrost (grading to continuous at high altitudes), which makes construction, road building, and mining difficult. All rivers and freshwater lakes freeze over in the winter, and smaller streams commonly freeze to the bottom. Ulaanbaatar lies at above sea level in the valley of the Tuul River. Located in the relatively well-watered north, it receives an annual average of of precipitation, almost all of which falls in July and in August. Ulaanbaatar has an average annual temperature of and a frost-free period extending on the average from mid-May to late August.

Mongolia&#x27;s weather is characterized by extreme variability and short-term unpredictability in the summer, and the multiyear averages conceal wide variations in precipitation, dates of frosts, and occurrences of blizzards and spring dust storms. Such weather poses severe challenges to human and livestock survival. Official statistics list less than 1% of the country as arable, 8 to 10% as forest, and the rest as pasture or desert. Grain, mostly wheat, is grown in the valleys of the Selenge river system in the north, but yields fluctuate widely and unpredictably as a result of the amount and the timing of rain and the dates of killing frosts.

=== Zud ===
Although winters are generally cold and clear, and livestock can survive, under various weather conditions livestock are unable to graze and die in large numbers. A winter in which this occurs is known as a &quot;zud;&quot; causes include blizzards, drought, extreme cold, and freezing rain. Such losses of livestock, which are an inevitable and, in a sense, normal consequence of the climate, have made it difficult for planned increases in livestock numbers to be achieved.

=== Seasonal blizzards ===
Severe blizzards can occur in the region. The winters of 1970–1971, 2000–2001, 2008–2009 and 2009–2010 were particularly harsh, featuring extremely severe zuds.

The blizzards of December 2011 blocked many roads, and killed 16,000 livestock and 10 people. The Mongolian State Emergency Commission said it was the coldest winter in thirty years and, like the preceding harsh summer drought, could have been the result of global warming. The United Nations provided major aid due to the high level of damage caused.

In the snowstorms between the 8 and 28 May 2008, 21 people were killed and 100 others went missing in seven provinces in eastern Mongolia. The toll finally reached at least 52 people and 200,000 livestock by the end of June. Most of the victims were herders who froze to death along with their livestock. It was the worst cold snap since the founding of the modern state in 1922.

Snowstorms in December 2009 – February 2010 also killed 8,000,000 livestock and 60 people.

=== Climate change ===
== Ecoregions ==

* Altai montane forest and forest steppe
* Khangai Mountains conifer forests
* Selenge-Orkhon forest steppe
* Sayan montane conifer forests
* Trans-Baikal conifer forests
* Daurian forest steppe
* Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
* Altai alpine meadow and tundra
* Khangai Mountains alpine meadow
* Sayan alpine meadows and tundra
* Alashan Plateau semi-desert
* Eastern Gobi desert steppe
* Gobi Desert
* Gobi Lakes Valley desert steppe
* Great Lakes Basin desert steppe
* Junggar Basin semi-desert

== Resources and land use ==

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;arable land:&quot;
9.10%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent crops:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot;
99.61% (2011)

Irrigated land:
843 km² (2011)

Total renewable water resources:
34.8 km 3 (2011)

== See also ==
* Greater Mongolia
* Mongolian Plateau
* List of reptiles of Mongolia

== References ==
== External links ==
* Administration of Land Affairs, Geodesy and Cartography
* Official government site – Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology
* Official government site – Mineral Resources Authority
* Official government site – Water Agency of Mongolia 
* Limnological Catalogue of Mongolian Lakes
* GEOLOGY OF THE KHARKHIRAA UUL, MONGOLIAN ALTAI</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1775510" start="0" end="8" title="Geography of Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="14" end="32" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="36" end="45" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="63" end="68" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="73" end="79" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="125" end="132" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="188" end="196" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="268" end="283" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091113" start="367" end="379" title="Khüiten Peak" label="Khüiten Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q20160756" start="487" end="495" title="Hoh Nuur" label="Hoh Nuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q192215" start="620" end="633" title="Lake Khövsgöl" label="Lake Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046848" start="986" end="997" title="North China" label="North China"/>
<link wikidata="Q28996" start="1001" end="1008" title="Jinzhou" label="Jinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="1012" end="1029" title="Liaoning province" label="Liaoning province"/>
<link wikidata="Q181969" start="1064" end="1073" title="Bohai Sea" label="Bohai Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="1159" end="1174" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091113" start="1348" end="1360" title="Khüiten Peak" label="Khüiten Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q747843" start="1367" end="1384" title="Khangai Mountains" label="Khangai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q748435" start="1580" end="1597" title="Khentii Mountains" label="Khentii Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="1733" end="1738" title="taiga" label="taiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="1784" end="1790" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="1834" end="1846" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="1852" end="1863" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1873" end="1886" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q206694" start="1939" end="1943" title="Onon (river)" label="Onon"/>
<link wikidata="Q641020" start="1945" end="1952" title="Kherlen" label="Kherlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580238" start="1954" end="1959" title="Menza (river)" label="Menza"/>
<link wikidata="Q643058" start="1964" end="1968" title="Tuul" label="Tuul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="2012" end="2023" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2030" end="2048" title="Khövsgöl Mountains" label="Khövsgöl Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="2376" end="2387" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="2531" end="2547" title="Endorheic basins" label="Endorheic basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q75745" start="2707" end="2714" title="Selenga" label="Selenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="2733" end="2744" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="2752" end="2764" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="2807" end="2820" title="Yenisei River" label="Yenisei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q206694" start="2937" end="2947" title="Onon River" label="Onon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2964" end="2977" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q115456" start="2990" end="3002" title="Shilka River" label="Shilka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="3021" end="3025" title="Amur River" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q486047" start="3062" end="3075" title="List of rivers by length" label="tenth longest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060367" start="3155" end="3192" title="Central Asian Internal Drainage Basin" label="Central Asian Internal Drainage Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q921453" start="3212" end="3234" title="Great Lakes Depression" label="Great Lakes Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q537374" start="3242" end="3252" title="Hulun Lake" label="Hulun Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462331" start="3254" end="3264" title="Ulaan Lake" label="Ulaan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578612" start="3268" end="3280" title="Ulungur Lake" label="Ulungur Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q81150" start="3410" end="3418" title="Uvs Lake" label="Uvs Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q192215" start="3502" end="3515" title="Lake Khövsgöl" label="Lake Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q20160756" start="3611" end="3619" title="Hoh Nuur" label="Hoh Nuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="4260" end="4271" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="4856" end="4870" title="Bactrian camel" label="Bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="5133" end="5144" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="5177" end="5201" title="discontinuous permafrost" label="discontinuous permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q643058" start="5475" end="5485" title="Tuul River" label="Tuul River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262272" start="6641" end="6644" title="zud" label="zud"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="7098" end="7107" title="blizzards" label="blizzards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7192" end="7228" title="Mongolian State Emergency Commission" label="Mongolian State Emergency Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="7313" end="7320" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="7352" end="7366" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="7372" end="7386" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079023" start="7454" end="7464" title="snowstorms" label="snowstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q642683" start="7769" end="7778" title="cold wave" label="cold snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742985" start="7963" end="8001" title="Altai montane forest and forest steppe" label="Altai montane forest and forest steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q91024483" start="8004" end="8037" title="Khangai Mountains conifer forests" label="Khangai Mountains conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q58310758" start="8040" end="8068" title="Selenge-Orkhon forest steppe" label="Selenge-Orkhon forest steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41227494" start="8071" end="8100" title="Sayan montane conifer forests" label="Sayan montane conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q22070218" start="8103" end="8131" title="Trans-Baikal conifer forests" label="Trans-Baikal conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234541" start="8134" end="8155" title="Daurian forest steppe" label="Daurian forest steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172497" start="8158" end="8188" title="Mongolian-Manchurian grassland" label="Mongolian-Manchurian grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761699" start="8191" end="8221" title="Altai alpine meadow and tundra" label="Altai alpine meadow and tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q89974549" start="8224" end="8255" title="Khangai Mountains alpine meadow" label="Khangai Mountains alpine meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q38900340" start="8258" end="8289" title="Sayan alpine meadows and tundra" label="Sayan alpine meadows and tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q70159905" start="8292" end="8319" title="Alashan Plateau semi-desert" label="Alashan Plateau semi-desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q70255611" start="8322" end="8348" title="Eastern Gobi desert steppe" label="Eastern Gobi desert steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="8351" end="8362" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q90648800" start="8365" end="8396" title="Gobi Lakes Valley desert steppe" label="Gobi Lakes Valley desert steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498711" start="8399" end="8430" title="Great Lakes Basin desert steppe" label="Great Lakes Basin desert steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q284027" start="8433" end="8458" title="Junggar Basin semi-desert" label="Junggar Basin semi-desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593895" start="8727" end="8743" title="Pan-Mongolism" label="Greater Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="8746" end="8763" title="Mongolian Plateau" label="Mongolian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874659" start="8766" end="8794" title="List of reptiles of Mongolia" label="List of reptiles of Mongolia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19274" wikidata="Q2410187" url="?curid=19274" title="Demographics of Mongolia">
<text>This article on the [[demography|demographics]] of [[Mongolia]] include population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. All data are from the National Statistics Office of Mongolia, unless otherwise mentioned.

== Population size and structure ==

=== Structure of the population ===




=== Youth ===
=== Urbanization ===
Life in sparsely populated Mongolia has become more urbanized. Nearly half of the people live in the capital, Ulaanbaatar, and in other provincial centers. Semi nomadic life still predominates in the countryside, but settled agricultural communities are becoming more common. Mongolia&#x27;s population growth rate is estimated at 1.6% (2020 census). About two-thirds of the total population is under age 30, 36% of whom are under 14.

Key: For population growth 1979–2008

* Salmon cells indicate that the population has declined or experienced minimal (&lt;1%) growth.
* Light green cells indicate a growth between 1–2%.
* Dark green cells indicate a growth of greater than or equal to 2%.

* - city proper, Nalaikh, Baganuur, Bagakhangai not included in this figure, they are separated in the table.

From &quot;List of cities in Mongolia&quot;

==Vital statistics==
===UN estimates===
===Registered births and deaths===

====Current vital statistics====


=== Life expectancy ===

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

== Ethnicity and languages ==
The demonym for the people of Mongolia is &quot;Mongolian&quot;. The name &quot;Mongol&quot; usually accounts for people of the Mongol ethnic group, thus excluding Turkic groups such as Kazakhs and Tuvans.

Ethnic Mongols account for about 96% of the population and consist of Khalkh and other subgroups, all distinguished primarily by dialects of the Mongolian language. The Khalkhs make up 86% of the ethnic Mongol population. The remaining 14% include Oirats, Buryats and others. Ethnic distinctions among the Mongol subgroups are relatively minor. Language or tribal differences are not a political or social issue.

Turkic speaking Kazakhs form the largest ethnic minority and constitute c. 3.9% of Mongolia&#x27;s population. Khotons and Chantuu are Mongolized people with Turkic origin and speak Mongolian.

In around 1860, part of the Middle jüz Kazakhs who sought refuge from Qing Empire massacre in Xinjiang came to Mongolia and were allowed to settle down in Bayan-Ölgii Province. There are smaller numbers of Russian, Chinese, Korean and American people working in Mongolia since 1990. 3,000 Westerners live in Mongolia, accounting for 0.1% of its total population.

English is the most widely used foreign language followed by Russian. Lately, Mandarin Chinese, Japanese, Korean and German are gaining popularity.

===Ethnicity===

== Religions ==
Various forms of Shamanism have been widely practiced throughout the history of what is now Mongolia, as such beliefs were common among nomadic people in Asian history. Such beliefs gradually gave way to Tibetan Buddhism, but shamanism has left a mark on Mongolian religious culture, and continues to be practiced.

Traditionally, Tibetan Buddhism was the predominant religion. However, it was suppressed under the communist regime until 1990, with only one showcase monastery allowed to remain. Since 1990, as liberalization began, Buddhism has encountered a resurgence.

== Base demographic indicators for Mongolia ==


==See also==
*Mongolian nationality law
*Ethnic groups in East Asia
*Buddhism in East Asia
*&quot;Mongolia Human Development Report 1997&quot;, UNDP Mongolia Communications Office, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia 1997

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2410187" start="20" end="63" title="Demographics of Mongolia" label="[[demography|demographics]] of [[Mongolia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="72" end="90" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="92" end="101" title="ethnicity" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="394" end="402" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="477" end="488" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282418" start="1077" end="1084" title="Nalaikh" label="Nalaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570810" start="1086" end="1094" title="Baganuur" label="Baganuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639749" start="1096" end="1107" title="Bagakhangai" label="Bagakhangai"/>
<link wikidata="Q661638" start="1182" end="1208" title="List of cities in Mongolia" label="List of cities in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="1561" end="1580" title="Mongols" label="Mongol ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="1619" end="1626" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193067" start="1631" end="1637" title="Tuvans" label="Tuvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="1647" end="1654" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="1710" end="1716" title="Khalka Mongols" label="Khalkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="1785" end="1803" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="1888" end="1894" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q207050" start="1896" end="1903" title="Buryats" label="Buryats"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="2054" end="2060" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="2070" end="2077" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875052" start="2165" end="2172" title="Khotons" label="Khotons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858959" start="2177" end="2184" title="Chantuu" label="Chantuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q931937" start="2276" end="2286" title="Middle jüz" label="Middle jüz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2318" end="2329" title="Qing Empire" label="Qing Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="2342" end="2350" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="2403" end="2423" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="2454" end="2461" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="2463" end="2470" title="Han Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="2472" end="2478" title="Koreans" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="2483" end="2491" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2537" end="2547" title="Westerners" label="Westerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="2556" end="2564" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2612" end="2619" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2673" end="2680" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="2690" end="2706" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2708" end="2716" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="2718" end="2724" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2729" end="2735" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="2811" end="2820" title="Shamanism" label="Shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="3125" end="3141" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899708" start="3430" end="3455" title="Mongolian nationality law" label="Mongolian nationality law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404210" start="3457" end="3483" title="Ethnic groups in East Asia" label="Ethnic groups in East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905453" start="3485" end="3506" title="Buddhism in East Asia" label="Buddhism in East Asia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19275" wikidata="Q1154113" url="?curid=19275" title="Politics of Mongolia">
<text>The politics of Mongolia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary system with a multi-party representative democracy. While some sources have incorrectly described Mongolia as a semi-presidential system, its 1992 Constitution clearly defines it as a parliamentary republic.

The government is headed by the Prime Minister, who is appointed by and accountable to the State Great Khural (Parliament). Executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. The President serves as the head of state with limited authority, primarily in the areas of foreign policy and national security, as well as being the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. The President also has veto power over laws passed by Parliament, though this can be overridden by a two-thirds parliamentary majority.

Legislative power is vested in the State Great Khural, a unicameral parliament. Judicial power is independent of the executive and legislature, as guaranteed by the Constitution.

Mongolia held its first democratic elections in 1990, following a peaceful 1990 revolution. From 1921 to 1990, Mongolia was a communist single-party state under the Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party. Historically, Mongolian politics has been influenced by its two large neighbors, Russia and China.

==Socialist period and single party government==

Shortly after the Mongolian Revolution of 1921, Mongolia adopted a one-party socialist republican constitution modelled after the Soviet Union; only the communist party — the Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (MPRP) — was officially permitted to function. Mongolian politics was closely monitored and directed by Kremlin. Any political opposition was brutally repressed, and government officials who opposed the Soviet influence were murdered, executed or sent to labour camps. During the communist regime, collectivisation of livestock, introduction of modern agriculture, limited industrialisation and the urbanisation were carried out without perceptible popular opposition.

==Democratic movement==
The perestroika in the Soviet Union and the democracy movements across Eastern Europe had a profound impact in Mongolian politics. On the morning of 10 December 1989, the first open pro-democracy demonstration was held in front of the Youth Cultural Centre in Ulaanbaatar. There, Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj announced the establishment of the Mongolian Democratic Union.

Over the next months activists, led by 13 leaders, continued to organise demonstrations, rallies, protests and hunger strikes, as well as teachers&#x27; and workers&#x27; strikes. Activists had growing support from Mongolians, both in the capital and the countryside. Efforts made by trade unions across the country for democracy had a significant impact on the success of the movement. After demonstrations of tens thousands of people in freezing weather in the capital city as well as provincial centres, Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party Politburo gave way to the pressure and entered negotiations with the leaders of the democratic movement. Jambyn Batmönkh, chairman of the Politburo decided to dissolve the Politburo and to resign on 9 March 1990, paving the way for the first multi-party elections in Mongolia. As a result, Mongolia became the first country in Asia to successfully transition into democracy from communist rule.

==Multi-party system==
As a result of the democratic movement that led to 1990 Democratic Revolution in Mongolia, the constitution was amended, removing reference to the MPRP&#x27;s role as the leading political force in the country, legalising opposition parties and creating a standing legislative body and the office of president in May 1990.

Mongolia&#x27;s first multi-party elections for the People&#x27;s Great Khural (Upper Chamber of the Parliament) were held on 29 July 1990. The MPRP won 85% of the seats. The People&#x27;s Great Khural first commenced on 3 September and elected a president (MPRP), a vice-president (SDP, Social Democratic Party), a prime minister (MPRP), and 50 members to the Baga Khural (Lower Chamber of the Parliament). The vice president was also the speaker of the Baga Khural. In November 1991, the People&#x27;s Great Khural began discussion on a new constitution and adopted it on 13 January 1992. The Constitution entered into force on 12 February 1992. In addition to establishing Mongolia as an independent, sovereign republic and guaranteeing a number of rights and freedoms, the new constitution restructured the legislative branch of government, creating a unicameral legislature, the State Great Khural, with 76 members.

The 1992 constitution provided that the president would be directly elected by popular vote rather than by the legislature as before. In June 1993, incumbent Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat won the first direct presidential election, running as the candidate of the democratic opposition.

As the supreme legislative organ, the State Great Khural is empowered to enact and amend laws, regarding domestic and foreign policy, to ratify international agreements, and declare a state of emergency by the constitution. The State Great Khural meets semi-annually. The parliamentary election holds place every four years, but the electoral system varied in each election. The current electoral system is based on plurality-on-large with 29 electoral districts. The Speaker of the State Great Khural is elected by the members of the parliament, and one deputy speaker is appointed by each political party or coalition with at least 10 seats in the parliament.

==Political developments==
Until June 1996 the predominant party in Mongolia was the Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party (MPRP). The country&#x27;s president was Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat (Democratic Party) during 1990-1997. Ochirbat was a member of MPRP until 1990 but changed his party membership to the Democratic Party following the democratic revolution.

Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, as the chairman of the Democratic Party, co-led the Democratic Union Coalition to its first time historic victory in the 1996 parliamentary elections winning 50 out of 76 parliamentary seats. Democratic Union Coalition of Democratic Party and Social Democratic Party (chairman Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj) was in power in 1996-2000. Mendsaikhany Enkhsaikhan, election manager of Democratic Union Coalition worked as the prime minister from 7 July 1996 to 23 April 1998. In 1998, a clause in the constitution was removed that prohibited members of parliament to take cabinet responsibility. Thus on 23 April 1998, the parliament elected (61–6) Elbegdorj, chairman of the Democratic Union Coalition and the Majority Group in parliament as the prime minister. Due to opposition MPRP&#x27;s demand Elbegdorj lost confidence vote at the Parliament and was replaced by Janlavyn Narantsatsralt (Democratic Party) on 9 December 1998. Janlavyn Narantsatsralt worked as the prime minister for eight months until his resignation in July 1999. Rinchinnyamyn Amarjargal became Democratic Party&#x27;s new chairman and served as the prime minister from 30 July 1999 to 26 July 2000.

In 1997 Natsagiin Bagabandi (MPRP) was elected as the country&#x27;s president in 1997 Mongolian presidential election. He was re-elected as president in 2001 Mongolian presidential election and served as the country&#x27;s president until 2005.

As a result of 2000 parliamentary elections MPRP was back in power in the parliament and the government as well as the presidency.

The vote in the 2004 parliamentary elections was evenly split between the two major political forces – Motherland-Democratic Coalition of Democratic Party and Motherland Party and the MPRP. Thus it required the establishing of the first ever coalition government in Mongolia between the democratic coalition and the MPRP. On 20 August 2004, Elbegdorj became the prime minister of Mongolia for the second time leading a grand coalition government.

In 2005 Mongolian presidential election Nambaryn Enkhbayar (MPRP) was elected as the country&#x27;s president.

The MPRP won a majority (46 of 76 seats) in 2008 parliamentary elections. The Democratic Party won 27 seats with the three remaining seats going to minor parties and an independent. MPRP formed a coalition government with the Democratic Party although MPRP had enough seats to form a government alone in parliament.

On 24 May 2009, in 2009 Mongolian presidential election, Democratic Party candidate Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj made a victory over incumbent President Nambaryn Enkhbayar. Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj was sworn into office and became the country&#x27;s president on 18 June 2009. Elbegdorj is Mongolia&#x27;s first president to never have been a member of the former communist Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party and the first to obtain a Western education.

In 2010 former communist party Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party reverted its name to its original name, the Mongolian People&#x27;s Party. After his defeat in 2009 presidential election, Nambaryn Enkhbayar established a new political party and named it Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party after receiving the old name of Mongolian People&#x27;s Party from the Supreme Court of Mongolia in 2010. Enkhbayar became the chairman of the new party.

In June 2012 the Democratic Party won the 2012 parliamentary elections and became the majority in the parliament. The Democratic Party established a coalition government with Civil Will-Green Party, and Justice Coalition of new MPRP and Mongolian National Democratic Party due to Democratic Party having not enough seats at the parliament to establish a government on its own by law. Members of the parliament were: 35 from Democratic Party, 26 from Mongolian People&#x27;s Party, 11 from Justice Coalition, 2 from Civil Will-Green Party, and 3 independents.

Incumbent President Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, candidate of Democratic Party won the 2013 Mongolian presidential election on 26 June 2013 and was sworn into office for his second term as President of Mongolia on 10 July 2013. Thus, since 2012 the Democratic Party has been in power holding both presidency and government.

Subsequently, in 2016, the party suffered a landslide defeat in that year&#x27;s parliamentary election, being reduced to only 9 seats, although they would narrowly retain the presidency in the presidential election held in 2017, in which Khaltmaagiin Battulga was elected to succeed Elbegdorj, the outgoing president. Therefore, Mongolia then had divided government, with the Mongolian People&#x27;s Party having an overwhelming majority in the Khural, while the Democratic Party held the presidency.

On June 24, 2020, Mongolian People&#x27;s Party was re-elected to the parliament with a landslide victory. Prime Minister Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh continued to head the cabinet providing government stability and policy certainty.

After Prime Minister Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh had resigned after protests over the treatment of a coronavirus patient, Luvsannamsrai Oyun-Erdene of MPP became the new prime minister on 27 January 2021. He represented a younger generation of leaders that had studied abroad.

In June 2021, former Prime Minister Ukhnaa Khurelsukh, the candidate of the ruling Mongolian People&#x27;s Party (MPP), became the country&#x27;s sixth democratically elected president after winning the presidential election.

In August 2022, Prime Minister Oyun-Erdene made a cabinet reshuffle to get legislative support in pushing his liberalization and privatization agenda forward.

==Executive branch==

|President
|Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh
|Mongolian People&#x27;s Party
|25 June 2021
|Prime Minister
||Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene
|Mongolian People&#x27;s Party
|27 January 2021

==President==

The presidential candidates are usually nominated by parties having seats in the State Great Khural. The president is elected by popular vote for a non-renewable six-year term. The president is the head of state, commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, and head of the National Security Council. The constitution empowers the president to propose a prime minister (upon the recommendation by the dominant political party), call for the government&#x27;s dismissal (the two-thirds majority of vote needed in the State Great Khural), initiate legislation, veto all or parts of a legislation (the State Great Khural can override the veto with a two-thirds majority), and issue decrees (effective with the prime minister&#x27;s countersignature). In the absence, incapacity, or resignation of the president, the Speaker of the State Great Khural exercises presidential power until inauguration of a newly elected president. Although the president has limited executive powers, they represent the nation internationally, sign international treaties and conventions and advise the cabinet on important socioeconomic issues. After being elected, the president-elect must give up their party affiliations to act as the &quot;symbol of unity&quot;.

In June 2021, former Prime Minister Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh won the presidential election. He was inaugurated on 25 June 2021.

==Cabinet==
The Cabinet, headed by the prime minister, has a four-year term. The president appoints the prime minister after each parliamentary election and appoints the members of the Government on the recommendation of the prime minister. If the president is not able to reach a consensus with the prime minister on the appointment of the Cabinet within a week, the issue is submitted the State Great Khural. Dismissal of the government occurs upon the prime minister&#x27;s resignation, simultaneous resignation of half the cabinet, or after the State Great Khural voted for a motion of censure.

The prime minister holds most of the executive powers in Mongolian politics. Unlike the president, the prime minister is chosen by the party (or coalition) with the majority of seats in the State Great Khural. Typically, the prime minister leads a major political party and generally commands the majority in the State Great Khural.

===Structure===
The Cabinet consists of the prime minister, the deputy prime minister, the cabinet secretary and 14 ministers. The government consists of six general function ministries, eight specialised ministries, four agencies for policy arrangement, 23 agencies for policy implementation, four agencies under direct control of the prime minister and five agencies under direct control of the deputy prime minister.

The current prime minister of Mongolia is Mr Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene (Mongolian People&#x27;s Party). &lt;br&gt;

*Ministry of Environment and Tourism
*Ministry of Defence
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs
*Ministry of Treasury
*Ministry of Justice and Interior Affairs
*Ministry of Labour and Social Protection

*Ministry of Construction and Urban Development
*Ministry of Education and Science
*Ministry of Road and Transport Development
*Ministry of Culture
*Ministry of Mining and Heavy Industry
*Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry
*Ministry of Energy
*Ministry of Health
*Ministry of Economy and Development
*Ministry of Digital Development and Communications

*General Authority for Archives
*Mineral Resources and Petroleum Agency
*Mongolian Customs
*Mongolian Immigration Agency
*Agency for Land Management, Geodesy and Cartography
*Authority for Family, Child and Youth Development
*Fund for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
*Civil Aviation Authority of Mongolia
*Agency for Veterinary Medicine
*General Authority for Social Insurance
*General Authority for Social Welfare and Services
*Authority for Intellectual Property
*Department for Arts and Culture
*General Authority for Taxation
*Department for Water
*National Geology Agency
*General Authority for Border Protection
*National Agency for Weather and Environmental Monitoring
*National Institute of Forensic Science
*General Agency for Court Decision Execution
*Department for Medicine and Medical Equipments
*General Authority for Health Insurance

*Department for Physical Education and Sports
*General Intelligence Agency
*Agency for Coordination of Government Properties
*State Special Security Department

*General Authority for Professional Inspection
*National Emergency Management Agency
*Mongolian Agency for Standard and Metrology
*Agency for Government Purchases
*Agency for Fair Competition and Consumer Protection

==Parliament==
The State Great Khural (&quot;Ulsyn Ikh Khural&quot; in Mongolian, meaning State Great Assembly) is a unicameral legislative body with 76 seats. The State Great Khural wields some of the most important powers in Mongolian politics. Parliamentary elections are held every four years, and 76 representatives are chosen. The current electoral system is based on plurality-at-large with 29 electoral districts across the country. According to the Constitution, every Mongolian citizen over the age of 18 can participate in elections, or run for government offices including the State Great Khural. Although there are several controversies (such as the right to vote of prisoners and Mongolian nationals abroad), the US government-funded agency Freedom House considers Mongolia to be a free representative democracy.

The State Great Khural is charged with the passage of legislation, approval of treaties, confirmation of the Government ministers and hearings of various government officials. Members of the State Great Khural have immunity against court trials, and the right to inspect government documents as an accountability on the Government&#x27;s activities.
==Political parties and elections==

Mongolian politics is currently dominated by two major political parties: Mongolian People&#x27;s Party (160,000 members) and Democratic Party (150,000 members). After the 1990 Democratic Revolution, then-Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party transitioned into a centre-left social democratic party. In 2010, Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party changed its name to Mongolian People&#x27;s Party along with modifications in the party manifesto and leadership; however, the former president Nambaryn Enkhbayar&#x27;s faction and other conservative members departed from the party and created a new political party taking the original name, Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party. Since the fall of the Soviet regime, Mongolian People&#x27;s Party has been able to maintain a high level of support. On the other hand, the Democratic Party was established in 2000, integrating minor political parties established by the leaders of the Democratic Revolution. The Democratic Party is a centre-right political party. In 2011, National Labour Party, a centre-left party, was established as an alternative to the Mongolian People&#x27;s Party and the Democratic Party and gained a notable support from the populace. In 2020 elections, it was able to obtain a number of seats in both the State Great Khural and municipal councils with hopes to increase its political power in the upcoming elections.

There are 36 political parties recognised by the Supreme Court. However, critics say there are no major ideological differences between the political parties on issues like economic policies and governance.

===2017 presidential election===

===2020 legislative election===

In 2020 legislative election, Mongolian People&#x27;s Party maintained its majority in the parliament.

==Legal system==
The new constitution empowered a Judicial General Council (JGC) to select all judges and protect their rights. The Supreme Court is the highest judicial body. Justices are nominated by the JGC, confirmed by the State Great Khural and appointed by the president. The Supreme Court is constitutionally empowered to examine all lower court decisions—excluding specialized court rulings—upon appeal and provide official interpretations on all laws except the constitution.

Specialized civil, criminal, and administrative courts exist at all levels and are not subject to Supreme Court supervision. Local authorities—district and city governors—ensure that these courts abide by presidential decrees and SGKh decisions. At the apex of the judicial system is the Constitutional Court of Mongolia, which consists of nine members, including a chairman, appointed for six-year term, whose jurisdiction extends solely over the interpretation of the constitution.

The constitution states that the Judicial branch of the government should be independent of any outside influences and government officials. However, in 2019, the State Great Khural passed a law that allows the National Security Council (composed of speaker of parliament, president and prime minister) to dismiss judges who are &quot;dishonest&quot;, effectively removing their immunity that meant to prevent outside interventions to court decisions. Various civil movements, international organisations and prominent individuals (including the former president Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj) have denounced the decision, but no action was made so far.

==Administrative divisions==
Mongolia is divided in 21 &quot;Aimags&quot; (provinces) and one municipality/city (&quot;khot&quot;): Arkhangai, Bayan-Ölgii, Bayankhongor, Bulgan, Darkhan-Uul, Dornod, Dornogovi, Dundgovi, Govi-Altai, Govisümber, Khentii, Khovd, Khövsgöl, Ömnögovi, Orkhon, Övörkhangai, Selenge, Sükhbaatar, Töv, Uvs, Zavkhan, and the city of Ulaanbaatar.

Local elections are held every four year in all 21 provinces and the capital, electing representatives to municipal councils. After each election, the newly elected municipal councils recommend a governor and their office, and meet semi-annually to discuss issues in their province, recommend and supervise the local government. However, the prime minister has the power to choose provincial governors. Unlike federal republics like Germany and the United States, local governments in Mongolia hold limited authority, and are generally tasked with implementing the central government policies.

On the next lower administrative level, representatives are elected in provincial subdivisions and urban sub-districts in Ulaanbaatar.

The latest municipal elections took place on 15 October 2020. A total of 17149 candidates ran for 8167 seats in provincial and county councils. Mongolian People&#x27;s Party won a majority in 13 out of 21 provincial councils in Mongolia while the Democratic Party took the remaining eight provinces. 
==See also==
*Foreign relations of Mongolia
*Flag of Mongolia

== Further reading ==
* S. Narangerel, &quot;Legal System of Mongolia&quot;, Interpress, 2004

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;official website of the Office of the President of Mongolia&quot;
*&quot;official website of the Office of the Parliament of Mongolia&quot;
*&quot;official website of the Government of Mongolia&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154113" start="4" end="24" title="Politics of Mongolia" label="politics of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="57" end="77" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="85" end="96" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="97" end="121" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="183" end="207" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639003" start="284" end="294" title="Government of Mongolia" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q903751" start="312" end="326" title="Prime Minister of Mongolia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="371" end="389" title="State Great Khural" label="State Great Khural"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="404" end="419" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="476" end="485" title="President of Mongolia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="800" end="817" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="880" end="894" title="Judiciary" label="Judicial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053571" start="1028" end="1032" title="1990 Mongolian parliamentary election" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="1055" end="1070" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1990" label="1990 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="1145" end="1188" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081446" start="1358" end="1386" title="Outer Mongolian Revolution of 1921" label="Mongolian Revolution of 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="1438" end="1450" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q462214" start="1470" end="1482" title="Politics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="1493" end="1508" title="communist party" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="1515" end="1558" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1663" end="1670" title="Soviet Union" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115455" start="1701" end="1719" title="Stalinist repressions in Mongolia" label="brutally repressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="1814" end="1826" title="Gulag" label="labour camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="1857" end="1886" title="collective farming" label="collectivisation of livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="1932" end="1949" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="1958" end="1970" title="Urbanization" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="2057" end="2068" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2076" end="2088" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="2097" end="2116" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="democracy movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="2124" end="2138" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="2333" end="2354" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q558706" start="3075" end="3090" title="Jambyn Batmönkh" label="Jambyn Batmönkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="3440" end="3478" title="1990 Democratic Revolution in Mongolia" label="1990 Democratic Revolution in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="3765" end="3791" title="State Great Khural" label="People&amp;#x27;s Great Khural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="3857" end="3861" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="MPRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="4597" end="4615" title="State Great Khural" label="State Great Khural"/>
<link wikidata="Q887753" start="4793" end="4815" title="Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat" label="Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="5249" end="5265" title="electoral system" label="electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="5332" end="5350" title="Multiple non-transferable vote" label="plurality-on-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="5664" end="5707" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q887753" start="5749" end="5771" title="Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat" label="Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="5945" end="5966" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="5991" end="6007" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022128" start="6020" end="6046" title="Democratic Union Coalition" label="Democratic Union Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899704" start="6089" end="6116" title="1996 Mongolian legislative election" label="1996 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393621" start="6295" end="6319" title="Mendsaikhany Enkhsaikhan" label="Mendsaikhany Enkhsaikhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262021" start="6825" end="6848" title="Janlavyn Narantsatsralt" label="Janlavyn Narantsatsralt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262021" start="6888" end="6911" title="Janlavyn Narantsatsralt" label="Janlavyn Narantsatsralt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393569" start="6994" end="7018" title="Rinchinnyamyn Amarjargal" label="Rinchinnyamyn Amarjargal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334679" start="7140" end="7159" title="Natsagiin Bagabandi" label="Natsagiin Bagabandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899719" start="7214" end="7250" title="1997 Mongolian presidential election" label="1997 Mongolian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q14110618" start="7286" end="7322" title="2001 Mongolian presidential election" label="2001 Mongolian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q934936" start="7394" end="7422" title="2000 Mongolian legislative election" label="2000 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9378980" start="7527" end="7555" title="2004 Mongolian legislative election" label="2004 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899721" start="7962" end="7998" title="2005 Mongolian presidential election" label="2005 Mongolian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q54820" start="7999" end="8017" title="Nambaryn Enkhbayar" label="Nambaryn Enkhbayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="8075" end="8079" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="MPRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q846007" start="8115" end="8143" title="2008 Mongolian legislative election" label="2008 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151833" start="8407" end="8443" title="2009 Mongolian presidential election" label="2009 Mongolian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="8445" end="8461" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="8472" end="8493" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q54820" start="8534" end="8552" title="Nambaryn Enkhbayar" label="Nambaryn Enkhbayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="8554" end="8575" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="8752" end="8795" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="8873" end="8916" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="8961" end="8990" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q54820" start="9040" end="9058" title="Nambaryn Enkhbayar" label="Nambaryn Enkhbayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899651" start="9106" end="9149" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party (2010-)" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="9182" end="9211" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="9322" end="9338" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083245" start="9347" end="9375" title="2012 Mongolian legislative election" label="2012 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q945843" start="9480" end="9502" title="Civil Will-Green Party" label="Civil Will-Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874686" start="9508" end="9525" title="Justice Coalition (Mongolia)" label="Justice Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561128" start="9542" end="9577" title="Mongolian National Democratic Party (2005)" label="Mongolian National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="9885" end="9906" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415375" start="9946" end="9982" title="2013 Mongolian presidential election" label="2013 Mongolian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022553" start="10265" end="10287" title="2016 Mongolian legislative election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="10360" end="10370" title="president of Mongolia" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454711" start="10378" end="10399" title="2017 Mongolian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9122260" start="10423" end="10444" title="Khaltmaagiin Battulga" label="Khaltmaagiin Battulga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="10561" end="10590" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="10630" end="10636" title="State Great Khural" label="Khural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186234" start="10648" end="10664" title="Democratic Party (Mongolia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="10705" end="10734" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="10757" end="10767" title="State Great Khural" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058418" start="10809" end="10830" title="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh" label="Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248226" start="11031" end="11056" title="Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene" label="Luvsannamsrai Oyun-Erdene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058418" start="11223" end="11240" title="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh" label="Ukhnaa Khurelsukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026051" start="11390" end="11411" title="2021 Mongolian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="11597" end="11606" title="President of Mongolia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058418" start="11608" end="11629" title="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh" label="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="11631" end="11660" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q903751" start="11676" end="11690" title="Prime Minister of Mongolia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248226" start="11693" end="11719" title="Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene" label="Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="11721" end="11750" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="11982" end="11995" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="11997" end="12015" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178910" start="12023" end="12035" title="Mongolian Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122824" start="12053" end="12078" title="National Security Council of Mongolia" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437264" start="12757" end="12761" title="They (singular)" label="they"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="12880" end="12893" title="Socioeconomics" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="13001" end="13016" title="National identity" label="symbol of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058418" start="13061" end="13082" title="Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh" label="Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026051" start="13104" end="13112" title="2021 Mongolian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639003" start="13167" end="13174" title="Government of Mongolia" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q903751" start="13190" end="13204" title="Prime Minister of Mongolia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="13731" end="13748" title="motion of censure" label="motion of censure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="13886" end="13891" title="Political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053699" start="14661" end="14680" title="Ministry of Defense (Mongolia)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16071066" start="14682" end="14709" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Mongolia)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753915" start="14711" end="14731" title="Ministry of Finance (Mongolia)" label="Ministry of Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290026" start="14733" end="14773" title="Ministry of Justice and Internal Affairs (Mongolia)" label="Ministry of Justice and Interior Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866819" start="14866" end="14899" title="Ministry of Education and Science (Mongolia)" label="Ministry of Education and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544714" start="16434" end="16452" title="State Great Khural" label="State Great Khural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="17835" end="17878" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q54820" start="18133" end="18151" title="Nambaryn Enkhbayar" label="Nambaryn Enkhbayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899651" start="18282" end="18325" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party (2010)" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006576" start="19469" end="19493" title="Judicial General Council of Mongolia" label="Judicial General Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644946" start="19551" end="19564" title="Supreme Court of Mongolia" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164292" start="20194" end="20226" title="Constitutional Court of Mongolia" label="Constitutional Court of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57421" start="20954" end="20975" title="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj" label="Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399" start="21099" end="21105" title="Aimags of Mongolia" label="Aimags"/>
<link wikidata="Q207809" start="21170" end="21179" title="Arkhangai Province" label="Arkhangai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="21181" end="21192" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii"/>
<link wikidata="Q276200" start="21194" end="21206" title="Bayankhongor Province" label="Bayankhongor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209774" start="21208" end="21214" title="Bulgan Province" label="Bulgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18827" start="21216" end="21227" title="Darkhan-Uul Province" label="Darkhan-Uul"/>
<link wikidata="Q207795" start="21229" end="21235" title="Dornod Province" label="Dornod"/>
<link wikidata="Q213272" start="21237" end="21246" title="Dornogovi Province" label="Dornogovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211835" start="21248" end="21256" title="Dundgovi Province" label="Dundgovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192945" start="21258" end="21268" title="Govi-Altai Province" label="Govi-Altai"/>
<link wikidata="Q236333" start="21270" end="21280" title="Govisümber Province" label="Govisümber"/>
<link wikidata="Q239040" start="21282" end="21289" title="Khentii Province" label="Khentii"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="21291" end="21296" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd"/>
<link wikidata="Q244788" start="21298" end="21306" title="Khövsgöl Province" label="Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q235579" start="21308" end="21316" title="Ömnögovi Province" label="Ömnögovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234710" start="21318" end="21324" title="Orkhon Province" label="Orkhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234713" start="21326" end="21337" title="Övörkhangai Province" label="Övörkhangai"/>
<link wikidata="Q234680" start="21339" end="21346" title="Selenge Province" label="Selenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q244804" start="21348" end="21358" title="Sükhbaatar Province" label="Sükhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q276195" start="21360" end="21363" title="Töv Province" label="Töv"/>
<link wikidata="Q192942" start="21365" end="21368" title="Uvs Province" label="Uvs"/>
<link wikidata="Q167764" start="21370" end="21377" title="Zavkhan Province" label="Zavkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="21395" end="21406" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437264" start="21618" end="21623" title="They (singular)" label="their"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052213" start="22455" end="22484" title="Foreign relations of Mongolia" label="Foreign relations of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165552" start="22486" end="22502" title="Flag of Mongolia" label="Flag of Mongolia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19276" wikidata="Q384095" url="?curid=19276" title="Economy of Mongolia">
<text>The economy of Mongolia has traditionally been based on agriculture and livestock. Mongolia also has extensive mineral deposits: copper, coal, molybdenum, tin, tungsten, and gold account for a large part of industrial production. Soviet assistance, at its height one-third of Gross domestic product (GDP), disappeared almost overnight in 1990–91, in the time of the collapse of the Soviet Union. Mongolia was driven into deep recession.

Economic growth picked up in 1997–99 after stalling in 1996 due to a series of natural disasters and increases in world prices of copper and cashmere. Public revenues and exports collapsed in 1998 and 1999 due to the repercussions of the Asian financial crisis. In August and September 1999, the economy suffered from a temporary Russian ban on exports of oil and oil products. Mongolia joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1997. The international donor community pledged over $300 million per year in the last Consultative Group Meeting, held in Ulaanbaatar in June 1999. Recently, the Mongolian economy has grown at a fast pace due to an increase in mining and Mongolia attained a GDP growth rate of 11.7% in 2013. However, because much of this growth is export-based, Mongolia is suffering from the global slowdown in mining caused by decreased growth in China.

==Economic history==
===Socialist era===

The rapid political changes of 1990–91 marked the beginning of Mongolia&#x27;s efforts to develop a market economy, but these efforts have been complicated and disrupted by the dissolution and continuing deterioration of the economy of the former Soviet Union. Prior to 1991, 80% of Mongolia&#x27;s trade was with the former Soviet Union, and 15% was with other Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) countries. Mongolia was heavily dependent upon the former Soviet Union for fuel, medicine, and spare parts for its factories and power plants.

The former Soviet Union served as the primary market for Mongolian industry. In the 1980s, Mongolia&#x27;s industrial sector became increasingly important. By 1989, it accounted for an estimated 34% of material products, compared to 18% from agriculture. However, minerals, animals, and animal-derived products still constitute a large proportion of the country&#x27;s exports. Principal imports included machinery, petroleum, cloth, and building materials.

In the late 1980s, the government began to improve links with non-communist Asia and the West, and tourism in Mongolia developed. As of 1 January 1991, Mongolia and the former Soviet Union agreed to conduct bilateral trade in hard currency at world prices.

Despite its external trade difficulties, Mongolia has continued to press ahead with reform. Privatization of small shops and enterprises has largely been completed in the 1990s, and most prices have been freed. Privatization of large state enterprises has begun. Tax reforms also have begun, and the barter and official exchange rates were unified in late 1991.

===Transition to a market economy===
Between 1990 and 1993, Mongolia suffered triple-digit inflation, rising unemployment, shortages of basic goods, and food rationing. During that period, economic output contracted by one-third. As market reforms and private enterprise took hold, economic growth began again in 1994–95. Unfortunately, since this growth was fueled in part by over-allocation of bank credit, especially to the remaining state-owned enterprises, economic growth was accompanied by a severe weakening of the banking sector. GDP grew by about 6% in 1995, thanks to largely to a boom in copper prices. Average real economic growth leveled off to about 3.5% in 1996–99 due to the Asian financial crisis, the 1998 Russian financial crisis, and worsening commodity prices, especially copper and gold.

Mongolia&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP) growth fell from 3.2% in 1999 to 1.3% in 2000. The decline can be attributed to the loss of 2.4 million livestock in bad weather and natural disasters in 2000. Prospects for development outside the traditional reliance on nomadic, livestock-based agriculture are constrained by Mongolia&#x27;s landlocked location and lack of basic infrastructure. Since 1990, more than 1,500 foreign companies from 61 countries have invested a total of $338.3 million in Mongolia. By 2003 private companies made up 70% of Mongolian GDP and 80% of exports.

Until recently, there have been a very few restrictions on foreign investments during most of Mongolia&#x27;s post-socialist period. Consequently, mining industry&#x27;s contribution to FDI increased to almost 25% in 1999 from zero in 1990.

===Economic development present day===
Mongolia&#x27;s reliance on trade with China meant that the worldwide financial crisis hit hard, severely stunting the growth of its economy. With the sharp decrease in metal prices, especially copper (down 65% from July 2008-February 2009), exports of its raw materials withered and by 2009 the stock market MSE Top-20 registered an all-time low since its dramatic spike in mid-2007. Just as the economy started to recover, Mongolia was hit by a Zud over the winter period of 2009–2010, causing many livestock to perish and thus severely affecting cashmere production which accounts for a further 7% of the country&#x27;s export revenues.

According to the World Bank and International Monetary Fund estimates, real GDP growth reduced from 8% to 2.7% in 2009, and exports shrunk 26% from $2.5Bn to $1.9Bn before a promisingly steady increase up until 2008. Because of this, it was projected that between 20,000 and 40,000 fewer Mongolians (0.7% and 1.4% of the population respectively) will be lifted out of poverty, than would have been the case without the global financial crisis.

In late 2009 and the beginning of 2010, however, the market has begun to recover once again. Having identified and learnt from its previous economic instabilities, legislative reform and a tightened fiscal policy promises to guide the country onwards and upwards. In February 2010, foreign assets were recorded at USD1,569,449 million. New trade agreements are being formed and foreign investors are keeping a close eye on the &quot;Asian Wolf&quot;.

Mining is the principal industrial activity in Mongolia, making up 30% of all Mongolian industry. Another important industry is the production of cashmere. Mongolia is the world&#x27;s second largest producer of cashmere, with the main company, Gobi Cashmere, accounting for 21% of world cashmere production as of 2006.

Total export in 2019 was US$7.6 billion.

The 2022 economic growth is expected to be one percent and international institutions anticipate the economy to speed up by at least six percent in 2023 from expanded commodity exports. A significant commodity export boom is expected starting from 2023 with new coal rail networks to China coming online and increased copper production from Rio Tinto’s underground mine Oyu Tolgoi in southern Mongolia.

In early 2020s, Mongolia&#x27;s economy, though experiencing growth spurred by natural resource exports, faces challenges. Over-reliance on mining, rising debt, inflation, and potential fuel supply disruptions from Russia pose risks to the country&#x27;s economic stability despite government efforts in infrastructure and social programs.

==The Wolf Economy==
The term was coined and subsequently popularized by Renaissance Capital in their report &quot;Mongolia: &quot;Blue-sky opportunity&quot;. They state that Mongolia is set to become the new Asian tiger, or &quot;Mongolian wolf&quot; as they prefer to call it, and predict &quot;unstoppable&quot; economic growth. With the recent developments in the mining industry and foreign interest increasing at an astonishing rate, it is claimed that the &#x27;Wolf Economy&#x27; looks ready to pounce. The term&#x27;s aggressive title mirrors the country&#x27;s attitude in the capital markets, and with newfound mineral prospects it has the chance to retain its title as one of the world&#x27;s fastest growing economies.

==Banks==

The banking sector is highly concentrated, with five banks controlling about 80% of financial assets as of 2015: Shares of Mongolia&#x27;s five largest domestic banks are to be offered to the public for the first time on the soon-to-be partially privatized Mongolian Stock Exchange.

===Commercial banks===
*KhasBank - KhasBank is a community development bank and microfinance institution headquartered in Ulaanbaatar, with a nationwide network of 100 offices and 1309 staff as of June 2012.
*Khan Bank - Khan Bank has its central office in Ulaanbaatar, where 5 branches are located. It has 24 regional branch offices throughout the country, each of which supervises an additional 15 to 25 smaller branches in its area, totaling 512.
*Golomt Bank - Golomt Bank started in 1995 and now manages around 23% of the assets in the domestic banking system. Recently begun its stock sales.
*Trade and Development Bank - TDB was formed in 1990 and is thus the oldest bank in Mongolia. It has a network of 28 branches and settlement centers, 60 ATMs, 1300 POS terminals, and Internet/SMS banking throughout the country. Foreign banks like ING are breaking into the market.
*Other lesser banks are: M-Bank, State bank, Capitron Bank, Arig Bank, Bogd Bank, and Chinggis Bank.

In terms of access to credit, Mongolia ranked 61st out of 189 economies in accordance with 2015 Ease of Doing Business survey. However, Mongolia had one of the highest banking branch penetration rates in the world at 1 bank branch per 15,257 residents as of May 2015.

===Investment banks===
With a strengthening capital market environment, many foreign and local investment institutions have begun to establish themselves in Mongolia. The most prominent local agencies include: TDB Capital , Eurasia Capital, Monet Investment Bank, BDSec, MICC , and Frontier Securities.

==Environment==

As a result of rapid urbanization and industrial growth policies under the communist regime, Mongolia&#x27;s deteriorating environment has become a major concern. The burning of soft coal coupled with thousands of factories in Ulaanbaatar and a sharp increase in individual motorization has resulted in severe air pollution. Deforestation, overgrazed pastures, and, less recently, efforts to increase grain and hay production by plowing up more virgin land have increased soil erosion from wind and rain.

==Other statistics==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 2007–2022.
Household income or consumption by percentage share:
* &quot;lowest 10%:&quot; 3.5%
* &quot;highest 10%:&quot; 35% (2005)

Distribution of family income - Gini index:
40 (2000)

Agriculture - products:
wheat, barley, vegetables, forage crops, sheep, goats, cattle, camels, horses

Industries:
construction and construction materials; mining (coal, copper, molybdenum, fluorspar, and gold); food and beverages; processing of animal products, cashmere wool and natural fiber manufacturing

Industrial production growth rate:
6% (2010 est.)

Electricity:
* &quot;production:&quot; 3.43 TWh (2006 est.)
* &quot;consumption:&quot; 2.94 TWh (2006 est.)
* &quot;exports:&quot; 15.95 GWh (2006 est.)
* &quot;imports:&quot; 125 GWh (2006 est.)

Electricity - production by source:
* &quot;fossil fuel:&quot; 80%
* &quot;hydro:&quot; 0%
* &quot;other:&quot; 20% (2011)
* &quot;nuclear:&quot; 0%

Oil:
* &quot;production:&quot; (2006 est.)
* &quot;consumption:&quot; (2006 est.)
* &quot;exports:&quot; (2006 est.)
* &quot;imports:&quot; (2006 est.)

Exports - commodities:
copper, apparel, livestock, animal products, cashmere wool, hides, fluorspar, other nonferrous metals

Imports - commodities:
machinery and equipment, fuel, cars, food products, industrial consumer goods, chemicals, building materials, sugar, tea

Exchange rates:
tögrögs/tugriks per US dollar: 1890 (2014), 1396 (2012), 1,420 (2009), 1,179.6 (2006), 1,205 (2005), 1,187.17 (2004), 1,171 (2003), 1,110.31 (2002), 1,097.7 (2001), 1,076.67 (2000)

==See also==
* Mongolia and the International Monetary Fund
* Agriculture in Mongolia
* Mining in Mongolia

==References==


== External links ==
* Official site of the Ministry of Finance
* Official government site of the Bank of Mongolia - the central bank 
* Mongolia CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q384095" start="4" end="23" title="Economy of Mongolia" label="economy of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="83" end="91" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="111" end="118" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="129" end="135" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="137" end="141" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="143" end="153" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="155" end="158" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="160" end="168" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="174" end="178" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="230" end="236" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="276" end="298" title="Gross domestic product" label="Gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="366" end="394" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="426" end="435" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="438" end="453" title="Economic growth" label="Economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="517" end="533" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="568" end="574" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="676" end="698" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="836" end="860" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="993" end="1004" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="1454" end="1468" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1601" end="1613" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="1672" end="1691" title="former Soviet Union" label="former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="1716" end="1754" title="Council for Mutual Economic Assistance" label="Council for Mutual Economic Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694062" start="2148" end="2159" title="Agriculture in Mongolia" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2322" end="2331" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2431" end="2440" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="2441" end="2445" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2450" end="2458" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298327" start="2464" end="2483" title="tourism in Mongolia" label="tourism in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="2591" end="2604" title="hard currency" label="hard currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2715" end="2728" title="Privatization" label="Privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346630" start="2886" end="2896" title="Tax reform" label="Tax reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="3077" end="3086" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="3095" end="3107" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="3678" end="3700" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142572" start="3706" end="3735" title="1998 Russian financial crisis" label="1998 Russian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="3814" end="3836" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="4175" end="4189" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="4961" end="4973" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262272" start="5112" end="5115" title="Zud" label="Zud"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="5674" end="5681" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="6065" end="6068" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q384095" start="6184" end="6194" title="Wolf Economy" label="Asian Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="6907" end="6916" title="Rio Tinto (corporation)" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059067" start="6936" end="6946" title="Oyu Tolgoi mine" label="Oyu Tolgoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312405" start="7384" end="7403" title="Renaissance Capital (Russian company)" label="Renaissance Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="7520" end="7531" title="Asian tiger" label="Asian tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752885" start="8312" end="8336" title="Mongolian Stock Exchange" label="Mongolian Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8363" end="8371" title="KhasBank" label="KhasBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q25632240" start="8548" end="8557" title="Khan Bank" label="Khan Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580917" start="8790" end="8801" title="Golomt Bank" label="Golomt Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832017" start="8938" end="8964" title="Trade and Development Bank of Mongolia" label="Trade and Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="9120" end="9128" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="9129" end="9132" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q645708" start="9184" end="9187" title="ING" label="ING"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052375" start="9830" end="9851" title="Monet Investment Bank" label="Monet Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835385" start="9853" end="9858" title="BDSec" label="BDSec"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="9931" end="9943" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10173" end="10196" title="individual motorization" label="individual motorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="10220" end="10233" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="10235" end="10248" title="Deforestation" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="10261" end="10268" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="10382" end="10394" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="10661" end="10671" title="Gini index" label="Gini index"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="10708" end="10713" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="10715" end="10721" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="10749" end="10754" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="10756" end="10760" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="10763" end="10769" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="10771" end="10776" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="10848" end="10852" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="10854" end="10860" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="10862" end="10872" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="10874" end="10883" title="fluorspar" label="fluorspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="10889" end="10893" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679431" start="11652" end="11669" title="nonferrous metals" label="nonferrous metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="11804" end="11809" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="11811" end="11814" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183435" start="11840" end="11846" title="tugrik" label="tugrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674679" start="12029" end="12073" title="Mongolia and the International Monetary Fund" label="Mongolia and the International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694062" start="12076" end="12099" title="Agriculture in Mongolia" label="Agriculture in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099132" start="12102" end="12120" title="Mining in Mongolia" label="Mining in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="12285" end="12303" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19277" wikidata="Q2989684" url="?curid=19277" title="Telecommunications in Mongolia">
<text>Telecommunications in [[Mongolia]] face unique challenges. As the least densely populated country in the world, with a significant portion of the population living a nomadic lifestyle, it has been difficult for many traditional information and communication technology (ICT) companies to make headway into Mongolian society. With almost half the population clustered in the capital of Ulaanbaatar, most landline technologies are deployed there. Wireless technologies have had greater success in rural areas.

Mobile phones are common, with provincial capitals all having 4G access. Wireless local loop is another technology that has helped Mongolia increase accessibility to telecommunications and bypass fixed-line infrastructure. For Internet, Mongolia relies on fiber optic communications with its Chinese and Russian neighbors. In 2005, Mongolia&#x27;s state-run radio and TV provider converted to a public service provider. Private radio and TV broadcasters, multi-channel satellite, and cable TV providers are also available.

==Telecommunications infrastructure==
Telecommunications network is improving with international direct dialing available in many areas. A fiber-optic network has been installed that is improving broadband and communication services between major urban centers with multiple companies providing inter-city fiber-optic cable services.
* 7 satellite earth station: Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region), Intelsat, Asiasat-1.
* International overland: Europe-Russia-Mongolia-China (ERMC) cable system.

==Telephones==
* 385,000 fixed lines in use, 102nd in the world (2019 estimate).
* 4.3 million mobile-cellular lines in use, 127th in the world (2019 estimate).
* International dialing code: +976.

There are two landline telephone companies in Mongolia: Mongolia Telecom Company (MTC) and the Mongolian Railway Authority. MTC is a joint venture with Korea Telecom and partially publicly owned. MTC leases fiber-optic lines from the Mongolian Railway Authority and connects to all aimags and soums. The number of fixed-line phones in Mongolia is slowly decreasing. The majority of MTC subscribers are in Ulaanbaatar.

Mobile phones are very popular in the city as well as the countryside with 1.5 million active mobile social users in January 2017. Especially in the countryside, the government is preferring the installation of cell phone base stations over laying land lines, as cell phone base stations are easier to install. Mongolia&#x27;s Communication Authority has announced a plan to connect all sum center and a number of other settlements to cell phone services. Since 2012 the country is covered by 3G services. The biggest problem of phone usage in rural parts of the country was the poor reception since in some areas getting the mobile signal required climbing on the highest mountain top in the neighbourhood or on the top of the horse on some hill. But with the plan of Communications Regulatory Commission of Mongolia that will allow the nationwide introduction of 4G mobile Internet technologies by approving licenses to use radio spectrum for 4G LTE service to Mobicom Corporation, Unitel, Skytel according to the first commission meeting in 2016 this problem should be resolved. It will also help parents for whom mobile phones are the only way to stay in touch with their children attending boarding schools in the cities.

;Mobile operators
*Unitel (GSM)- The No.1 ICT group in Mongolia who have the first and nationwide 3G/4G/5G network.
*G-Mobile (CDMA) – Established in 2007, it is focusing on development in rural areas
*Mobicom Corporation (GSM) – The first mobile operator.
*Skytel (CDMA)
*ONDO 5th Competitor in telecommunications 
 service resembling that of landlines, but uses technology similar to mobile phones. There are currently five licensed WLL providers, though there only appear to be three companies actually offering service.

;WLL providers
*Mongolia Telecom Company: WLL project a joint venture with LG Electronics Company of South Korea, 8,768 users, covers Darkhan, Erdenet, Nalaikh, Choibalsan, and Ulanbaatar. It also provides 450 MHz coverage in the following aimags: Orkhon, Darkhan Uul, Dornod, Arkhangai, Bayan-Ulgii, Bulgan, Hovd, Huvsgul, Zavkhan, and Uvs.
*Mobicom: Covers Ulaanbaatar and areas near the city, 13,400 users.
*Skytel: Covers Ulaanbaatar and rural Mongolia (area not specified), and has 22,000 users.

==Radio==
, more than 100 radio stations, including some 20 via repeaters for the public broadcaster as well as transmissions by multiple international broadcasters were available. , there were 360,000 radios.

Ulaanbaatar has 20 FM stations, including foreign radio stations BBC World Service, VOA, and Inner Mongolian Radio. In the whole country there are 5 longwave broadcasting stations, the most powerful at Ulaanbaatar with 1000 KW.

==Television==
Mongolian TV Broadcasting started on 27 September 1967 with the start of Mongolian National Television.
* Television sets: 118,000 (1997)

===Television providers===
;Stations/Channels
* Mongolian National Broadcaster, the official, state-funded television channel in Mongolia.
* Premier Sports Network (PSN, dominant subscription television sports brand in Mongolia.)
* C1
* Channel 25
* Eagle TV
* Edutainment TV (Боловсрол суваг)
* ETV 
* Mongol TV, first HD TV, New Mongol TV
* NTV
* SBN
* TV5
* TV8
* TV9
* Ulaanbaatar Broadcasting System (UBS)

;Satellite television
* DDishTV LLC, broadcasts major Mongolian channels and some international channels throughout the whole of Mongolia and to other Asian countries via Ku-Band Satellite. For that service it is necessary to have a dish and special box.
* Mongolsat

;Cable television
* DDishTV LLC
* MNBC CaTV
* Sansar CaTV – &quot;Space&quot;

;Internet Protocol television (IPTV)
* Univision IPTV
* LookTV IPTV
* Homemedia IPTV
* Skymedia IPTV
* VOO IPTV

==Internet==
The Internet, established in 1995 in Mongolia, has begun making a significant impact, with 68.1% of the population having access to it as of 2020. Mongolia is the most sparsely populated independent country in the world, which is a serious constraint to country-wide Internet deployment. While much of the country remains pastoral with countryside residents dependent on herding and agriculture, Internet access is widely available to urban populations. There has been steady online growth in online newspapers, magazines and advertising. The poor access to the Internet in the countryside has been a reason behind designating Mongolian countryside as a digital detox location for the tech-tired tourists.
* Internet users: 2,233,000 users; 68.1% of the population (2020).
* Fixed broadband: 115,561 subscriptions, 98th in the world; 3.6% of the population, 114th in the world (2012).
* Mobile broadband: 848,391 subscriptions, 75th in the world; 26.7% of the population, 61st in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts: 20,084 hosts, 118th in the world (2012).
* The top level domain of Mongolia is &quot;.mn&quot;.

===Internet service providers (ISPs)===
;Wholesale providers
*Information Communications Network LLC /NETCOM/
*Gemnet LLC
*Mobicom Networks LLC
*MT Networks
*Unitel
*Skytel

;Retail providers
*Mongolia Telecom Company
*Univision[MCSCom]
*Boldsoft
*Digicom (FTTB)
*Mobinet
*Magicnet
*Micom
*Bodicom
*Skymedia[SkyC&amp;C]
*Yokozunanet
*Citinet
*HOMENET
*G-mobilenet

;Satellite providers
*DDishTV LLC, provides VSAT Internet connections, especially in rural area of Mongolia.
*Incomnet LLC, provides data communications network services throughout Mongolia, as well as satellite telephone call and satellite Internet services in remote areas since its establishment in 2001.
*Isatcom LLC, national satellite provider in Mongolia, provides VSAT Internet connections, VPN network for organizations in rural areas of Mongolia, since its establishment in 2004. Also involved in the sale of solar energy equipment.

===Internet initiatives===
Citizens Information Service Centers (CISC) have been established in Ulaanbataar and six Aimags that are equipped to allow nomadic rural populations to receive internet access.

Many libraries and schools provide internet access, including some mobile providers that travel between rural populations.

The Asian Development Bank has an initiative to develop ICT technologies to &quot;boost access to high-quality education for disadvantaged and remote populations in Mongolia, through a grant assistance approved for US$1 million.&quot; The goal is to take advantage of newer technologies to improve access to information for about 10,000 students at 36 schools.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===
There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet. The criminal code and constitution prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, however, there are reports of government surveillance, wiretapping, and e-mail account monitoring. Individuals and groups engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. Defamation laws carrying civil and criminal penalties severely impede criticism of government officials. Moreover, in 2014 the Mongolian Telecommunications Regulatory Commission has published a list of up to 774 words and phrases, use of which is prohibited on local websites.

Censorship of public information is banned under the 1998 Media Freedom Law, but a 1995 state secrets law severely limits access to government information. After an eight-year campaign by activists, the parliament passed the Law on Information Transparency and Right to Information in June 2011, with the legislation taking effect in December 2011. Internet users remain concerned about a February 2011 regulation, the &quot;General Conditions and Requirements on Digital Content&quot;, by the Communications Regulatory Commission (CRC) that restricts obscene and inappropriate content without explicitly defining it and requires popular websites to make their users&#x27; IP addresses publicly visible. The production, sale, or display of all pornography is illegal and carries a penalty of up to three months in prison.

While there is no official censorship by the government, journalists frequently complain of harassment and intimidation.

==Post==
Mongol Post is the state-owned postal service of Mongolia.

==See also==
* Telephone numbers in Mongolia

==References==

;Bibliography

==Further reading==
* 
* 
*Odkhuu Tsolmondelger (2020). Research Report on ICT infrastructure Co-deployment with Transport and Energy Infrastructures in Mongolia. ESCAP Information and Communications Technology and Disaster Risk Reduction Division. 

==External links==
* Telecom Mongolia, the national telecommunications company.
*Information Communications Network LLC, national fiber optic backbone network provider.
* Incomnet LLC, the national satellite communications company.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2989684" start="0" end="34" title="Telecommunications in Mongolia" label="Telecommunications in [[Mongolia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="228" end="268" title="information and communication technology" label="information and communication technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="306" end="314" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="385" end="396" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399" start="540" end="558" title="Provinces of Mongolia" label="provincial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="571" end="573" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435401" start="582" end="601" title="Wireless local loop" label="Wireless local loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="765" end="776" title="optical fibers" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="993" end="1001" title="Cable television" label="cable TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548793" start="1396" end="1408" title="Intersputnik" label="Intersputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1432" end="1440" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q726812" start="1442" end="1449" title="Asiasat" label="Asiasat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324051" start="1479" end="1514" title="ERMC (cable system)" label="Europe-Russia-Mongolia-China (ERMC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899579" start="1784" end="1808" title="Mongolia Telecom Company" label="Mongolia Telecom Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q485908" start="1880" end="1893" title="Korea Telecom" label="Korea Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="1935" end="1946" title="optical fiber" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187075" start="2010" end="2016" title="aimags" label="aimags"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518096" start="2534" end="2544" title="sums of Mongolia" label="sum center"/>
<link wikidata="Q692281" start="3110" end="3129" title="Mobicom Corporation" label="Mobicom Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893681" start="3131" end="3137" title="Unitel (Mongolia)" label="Unitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538054" start="3139" end="3145" title="Skytel (Mongolia)" label="Skytel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893681" start="3394" end="3400" title="Unitel (Mongolia)" label="Unitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511908" start="3492" end="3500" title="G-Mobile" label="G-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q692281" start="3577" end="3596" title="Mobicom Corporation" label="Mobicom Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538054" start="3633" end="3639" title="Skytel (Mongolia)" label="Skytel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3648" end="3652" title="ONDO" label="ONDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899579" start="3916" end="3940" title="Mongolia Telecom Company" label="Mongolia Telecom Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q692281" start="4243" end="4250" title="Mobicom" label="Mobicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538054" start="4311" end="4317" title="Skytel (Mongolia)" label="Skytel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="4613" end="4624" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="4678" end="4695" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="4697" end="4700" title="VOA" label="VOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770677" start="5044" end="5074" title="Mongolian National Broadcaster" label="Mongolian National Broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163444" start="5137" end="5159" title="Premier Sports Network (Mongolia)" label="Premier Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007711" start="5228" end="5230" title="C1 Television" label="C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072280" start="5233" end="5243" title="Channel 25 (Mongolia)" label="Channel 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q108542376" start="5246" end="5254" title="Eagle TV" label="Eagle TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341343" start="5257" end="5271" title="Edutainment TV" label="Edutainment TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163497" start="5292" end="5295" title="ETV (Mongolia)" label="ETV"/>
<link wikidata="Q108541730" start="5299" end="5308" title="Mongol HD TV" label="Mongol TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955528" start="5339" end="5342" title="NTV (Mongolia)" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q108541736" start="5345" end="5348" title="Supervision Broadcasting Network" label="SBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949495" start="5351" end="5354" title="TV5 Mongolia" label="TV5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672127" start="5357" end="5360" title="TV8 (Mongolia)" label="TV8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874717" start="5363" end="5366" title="TV9 (Mongolia)" label="TV9"/>
<link wikidata="Q108541802" start="5369" end="5400" title="Ulaanbaatar Broadcasting System" label="Ulaanbaatar Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152863" start="5432" end="5443" title="DDishTV LLC" label="DDishTV LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q306639" start="5579" end="5586" title="Ku-Band" label="Ku-Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152863" start="5696" end="5707" title="DDishTV LLC" label="DDishTV LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="6058" end="6067" title="Population" label="populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153191" start="6374" end="6391" title="online newspapers" label="online newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="6944" end="6960" title="top level domain" label="top level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42873" start="6982" end="6985" title=".mn" label=".mn"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060181" start="7056" end="7103" title="Information Communications Network LLC" label="Information Communications Network LLC /NETCOM/"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152863" start="7381" end="7392" title="DDishTV LLC" label="DDishTV LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="7403" end="7407" title="VSAT" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q248903" start="7561" end="7580" title="satellite telephone" label="satellite telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q877159" start="7590" end="7608" title="satellite Internet" label="satellite Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="7731" end="7735" title="VSAT" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="8113" end="8122" title="libraries" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="8127" end="8134" title="Education" label="schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="8236" end="8258" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="8856" end="8868" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="8870" end="8881" title="wiretapping" label="wiretapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q651476" start="8887" end="8912" title="Computer surveillance" label="e-mail account monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="9019" end="9029" title="Defamation" label="Defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301626" start="10251" end="10262" title="Mongol Post" label="Mongol Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696618" start="10326" end="10355" title="Telephone numbers in Mongolia" label="Telephone numbers in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060181" start="10720" end="10758" title="Information Communications Network LLC" label="Information Communications Network LLC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19278" wikidata="Q898688" url="?curid=19278" title="Transport in Mongolia">
<text>The transportation system in Mongolia consists of a network of railways, roads, waterways, and airports.

==Railways==
The Trans-Mongolian Railway connects the Trans-Siberian Railway from Ulan Ude in Russia to Erenhot and Beijing in China through the capital Ulaanbaatar. The Mongolian section of this line runs for 1110 km. A spur line connects Darkhan to the copper mines of Erdenet; another spur line connects Ulaanbaatar with the coal mines of Baganuur. A separate railway line is in the east of the country between Choibalsan and the Trans-Siberian at Borzya; however, that line is closed to passengers beyond the Mongolian town of Chuluunkhoroot. 

For domestic transport, daily trains run from Ulaanbaatar to Darkhan, Sukhbaatar, and Erdenet, as well as Zamiin-Üüd, Choir and Sainshand. Mongolia uses the (Russian gauge) track system. The total length of the system 1,810 km. In 2007, rail transport carried 93% of Mongolian freight and 43% of passenger turnover (in tons*km and passenger*km, respectively).

==Roadways==

In 2007, only about 2600 km of Mongolia&#x27;s road network were paved. Another 3900 km are graveled or otherwise improved. This network of paved roads was expanded to 4,800 km in 2013, with 1,800 km completed in 2014 alone. This included the roads from Ulaanbaatar to the Russian and Chinese borders, paved road from Ulaanbaatar to Kharkhorin and Bayankhongor, another going south to Mandalgovi, and a partly parallel road from Lün to Dashinchilen, as well as the road from Darkhan to Bulgan via Erdenet. The vast majority of Mongolia&#x27;s official road network, some 40,000 km, are simple cross-country tracks.

Construction is underway on an east-west road (the so-called Millennium Road) that incorporates the road from Ulaanbaatar to Arvaikheer and on the extension of the Darkhan-Bulgan road beyond Bulgan. Private bus and minibus companies offer service from Ulaanbaatar to most aimag centers.

In September and December 2014 roads connecting Dalanzadgad town of Ömnögovi Province and Mörön town of Khuvsgul province with capital city of Ulaanbaatar were completed.

In 2019, the first expressway in Mongolia opened, the Ulaanbaatar Airport Expressway.

===Buses===

The history of public transport in Mongolia starts with the creation of «Mongoltrans» council in 1929. The first public bus route was between Ulaanbaatar city and then-city Amgalan with 5 rides a day.
Currently, buses are the main mode of public transportation in Ulaanbaatar. Buses pass stops at approximately 15-minute intervals. Buses runs between 7:00am and 10:00pm. The 1,200 daily buses of 21 companies serve the people on 79 routes in the capital city.

There is a daily international bus service between Ulan-Ude, Russia and Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.

There is relatively developed bus transport between cities of Mongolia from minivans to large coach buses (usually up to 45 seats). The national and municipal governments regulate a wide system of private transit providers which operate numerous bus lines around the city. There is also an Ulaanbaatar trolleybus system. Tenuun Ogoo LLC, Erdem Trans LLC and Sutain buyant LLC are major bus operators.

===Taxis===
There are about 10 licensed taxi companies such as Ulaanbaatar taxi (1991), Noyon taxi (1950), Telecom taxi (1109), 1616 taxi (1616) with about 600 cars operating in Ulaanbaatar. There are a few local taxi companies in smaller cities such as Darkhan, Erdenet, Baganuur and Zuunmod. And there are many drivers with private unlicensed cars who act as taxis.

A typical fare is MNT 1,500 per kilometer; taxi drivers tend to ask for more especially if the client is a foreign national. Official taxis with proper markings are allowed to drive without plate number restrictions on the first lane of Ulaanbaatar&#x27;s central road usually reserved for large public transports such as buses and trolleybuses since October 2013.

==Waterways==

Mongolia has 580 km of waterways, but only Lake Khövsgöl has ever been heavily used. The Selenge (270 km) and Orkhon (175 km) rivers are navigable but carry little traffic, although a customs boat patrols the Selenge to the Russian border. Lake Khovsgol has charter boats for tourists. The lakes and rivers freeze over in the winter and are usually open between May and September.

==Air transport==
MIAT Mongolian Airlines is the country&#x27;s flag carrier and first airline, operating since 1956. It conducted scheduled domestic flights in the communist era with its hub at Buyant-Ukhaa International Airport (built 1961), and started international routes in 1987. With the onset of the democratic revolution, the airline gradually adopted modern jet airliners and expanded its international operations. Since the 2000s, private operators such as Aero Mongolia, Hunnu Air, and Eznis Airways commenced flights, dominating domestic air routes in the country. In 2023, MIAT Mongolian Airlines resumed domestic flights after 15 years under the brand name MIAT Regional.

Mongolia opened the new Chinggis Khaan International Airport (UBN) in July 2021, located about 50 km from the center of Ulaanbaatar. Replacing Buyant-Ukhaa, it is the country&#x27;s only international airport. Most airports of the 21 aimag centers of Mongolia have paved runways, but those closest to Ulaanbaatar lack scheduled air service.

Ulaanbaatar can be accessed with direct flights to various locations in Europe and Asia, with future direct routes planned to North America and Australia.

==References==
== External links ==
*Ministry of Road, Transportation, Construction and Urban Development
*CIA World Factbook
*Eznis Airways:Schedule &amp; Charter airline of Mongolia
*MIAT Mongolian Airlines - National Air Carrier</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898688" start="4" end="25" title="Transport in Mongolia" label="transportation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="29" end="37" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q559037" start="123" end="146" title="Trans-Mongolian Railway" label="Trans-Mongolian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="160" end="182" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816" start="188" end="196" title="Ulan Ude" label="Ulan Ude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="200" end="206" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001036" start="210" end="217" title="Erenhot" label="Erenhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="222" end="229" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="233" end="238" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="259" end="270" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q230628" start="377" end="384" title="Erdenet" label="Erdenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570810" start="448" end="456" title="Baganuur" label="Baganuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q318245" start="520" end="530" title="Choibalsan (city)" label="Choibalsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105372" start="557" end="563" title="Borzya" label="Borzya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771883" start="637" end="651" title="Chuluunkhoroot" label="Chuluunkhoroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197451" start="813" end="826" title="Russian gauge" label="Russian gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1122" end="1128" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="1284" end="1295" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q932069" start="1363" end="1373" title="Kharkhorin" label="Kharkhorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q804117" start="1378" end="1390" title="Bayankhongor" label="Bayankhongor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000373" start="1415" end="1425" title="Mandalgovi" label="Mandalgovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089625" start="1459" end="1462" title="Lün" label="Lün"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606094" start="1466" end="1478" title="Dashinchilen" label="Dashinchilen"/>
<link wikidata="Q235571" start="1505" end="1512" title="Darkhan (city)" label="Darkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q945055" start="1516" end="1522" title="Bulgan (city)" label="Bulgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230628" start="1527" end="1534" title="Erdenet" label="Erdenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187075" start="1918" end="1923" title="aimag" label="aimag"/>
<link wikidata="Q822808" start="1982" end="1993" title="Dalanzadgad" label="Dalanzadgad"/>
<link wikidata="Q235579" start="2002" end="2019" title="Ömnögovi Province" label="Ömnögovi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q572951" start="2024" end="2029" title="Mörön" label="Mörön"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2160" end="2190" title="Ulaanbaatar Airport Expressway" label="Ulaanbaatar Airport Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816" start="2718" end="2726" title="Ulan-Ude" label="Ulan-Ude"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="2739" end="2750" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q235571" start="3419" end="3426" title="Darkhan (city)" label="Darkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230628" start="3428" end="3435" title="Erdenet" label="Erdenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570810" start="3437" end="3445" title="Baganuur" label="Baganuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q917690" start="3450" end="3457" title="Zuunmod" label="Zuunmod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="3938" end="3947" title="waterways" label="waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q192215" start="3958" end="3971" title="Lake Khövsgöl" label="Lake Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q75745" start="4004" end="4011" title="Selenga" label="Selenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q237099" start="4025" end="4031" title="Orkhon River" label="Orkhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="4052" end="4061" title="navigable" label="navigable"/>
<link wikidata="Q564717" start="4315" end="4338" title="MIAT Mongolian Airlines" label="MIAT Mongolian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q837745" start="4492" end="4526" title="Buyant-Ukhaa International Airport" label="Buyant-Ukhaa International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="4601" end="4626" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1990" label="the democratic revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q381324" start="4765" end="4778" title="Aero Mongolia" label="Aero Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q904069" start="4780" end="4789" title="Hunnu Air" label="Hunnu Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386058" start="4795" end="4808" title="Eznis Airways" label="Eznis Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q564717" start="4884" end="4907" title="MIAT Mongolian Airlines" label="MIAT Mongolian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q14697701" start="5009" end="5045" title="Chinggis Khaan International Airport" label="Chinggis Khaan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q50399" start="5219" end="5232" title="Provinces of Mongolia" label="aimag centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="5256" end="5263" title="runways" label="runways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19279" wikidata="Q1178910" url="?curid=19279" title="Mongolian Armed Forces">
<text>The Mongolian Armed Forces () is the collective name for the Mongolian military and the joint forces that comprise it. It is tasked with protecting the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of Mongolia. Defined as the peacetime configuration, its current structure consists of five branches: the Mongolian Ground Force, Mongolian Air Force, Construction and Engineering Forces, cyber security, and special forces. In case of a war situation, the Border Troops, Internal Troops, Judicial enforcement agency and National Emergency Management Agency can be reorganized into the armed forces structure. The General Staff of the Mongolian Armed Forces is the highest professional military management organization of the state military organization and operates independently from the Ministry of Defense, its government controlled parent body. Mongolian military day is celebrated on 18 March, similar to Defender of the Fatherland Day in Russia and PLA Day in China.

==History==
=== Mongol Empire and post-imperial ===

As a unified state, Mongolia traces its origins to the Mongol Empire created by Genghis Khan in the 13th century. Genghis Khan unified the all of Mongol speaking khanates and tribes on the Mongolian plateau, and his descendants eventually conquered almost the entirety of Asia, the Middle East, and parts of Eastern and Central Europe.

The Mongol Army was organized into decimal units of tens, hundreds, thousands, and ten thousands. A notable feature of the army is that it was composed entirely of cavalry units, giving it the advantage of maneuverability. Siege weaponry was adapted from other cultures, with foreign experts integrated into the command structure.

The Mongols rarely used naval power, with a few exceptions. In the 1260s and 1270s they used seapower while conquering the Song dynasty of China, though they were unable to mount successful seaborne campaigns against Japan due to storms and rough battles. Around the Eastern Mediterranean, their campaigns were almost exclusively land-based, with the seas being controlled by the Crusader and Mamluk forces.

With the disintegration of the Mongol Empire in the late 13th century, the Mongol Army as a unified unit also crumbled. The Mongols retreated to their homeland after the fall of the Mongol Yuan dynasty, and once again delved into civil war. Although the Mongols became united once again during the reign of Esen Taishi and Batmongkhe Dayan Khan, and conducted successful military campaigns against the Ming dynasty and Central Asia. In the 17th-18th century they were annexed into the Qing dynasty. The Dzungar Khanate strengthened its influence in Central Asia from western Mongolia, developing artillery, ground forces, and cavalry, leading the Mongol army to a more advanced stage.

===Period under Qing Rule===
Once Mongolia was under the Qing, the Mongol Armies were used to defeat the Ming dynasty, helping to consolidate Manchu Rule. Mongols proved a useful ally in the war, lending their expertise as cavalry archers. During most of the Qing dynasty time, the Mongols gave military assistance to the Manchus.

With the creation of the Eight Banners, Banner Armies were broadly divided along ethnic lines, namely Manchu and Mongol.

=== Bogd Khanate (1911–1919) ===
In 1911, Outer Mongolia declared independence as the Bogd Khaanate under the Bogd Khan. This initial independence did not last, with Mongolia being occupied successively by the Chinese Beiyang Government, and Baron Ungern&#x27;s White Russian forces. The modern precursor to the Mongolian Armed Forces was placed, with men&#x27;s conscription and a permanent military structure starting in 1912.

===Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic===

With Independence lost again to foreign forces, the newly created Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Party created a native communist army in 1920 under the leadership of Damdin Sükhbaatar in order to fight against Russian troops from the White movement and Chinese forces. The MPRP was aided by the Red Army, which helped to secure the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic and remained in its territory until at least 1925. However, during the 1932 armed uprising in Mongolia and the initial Japanese border probes beginning in the mid-1930s, Soviet Red Army troops in Mongolia amounted to little more than instructors for the native army and as guards for diplomatic and trading installations.

====Battles of Khalkhin Gol====
The Battles of Khalkhin Gol began on 11 May 1939. A Mongolian cavalry unit of some 70–90 men had entered the disputed area in search of grazing for their horses. On that day, Manchukuoan cavalry attacked the Mongolians and drove them back across the Khalkhin Gol. On 13 May, the Mongolian force returned in greater numbers and the Manchukoans were unable to dislodge them.

On 14 May, Lt. Col. Yaozo Azuma led the reconnaissance regiment of 23rd Infantry Division, supported by the 64th Infantry Regiment of the same division, under Colonel Takemitsu Yamagata, into the territory and the Mongolians withdrew. Soviet and Mongolian troops returned to the disputed region, however, and Azuma&#x27;s force again moved to evict them. This time things turned out differently, as the Soviet–Mongolian forces surrounded Azuma&#x27;s force on 28 May and destroyed it. The Azuma force suffered eight officers and 97 men killed and one officer and 33 men wounded, for 63% total casualties. The commander of the Soviet forces and the Far East Front was Comandarm Grigory Shtern from May 1938.

Both sides began building up their forces in the area: soon Japan had 30,000 men in the theater. The Soviets dispatched a new Corps commander, Comcor Georgy Zhukov, who arrived on 5 June and brought more motorized and armored forces (I Army Group) to the combat zone. Accompanying Zhukov was Comcor Yakov Smushkevich with his aviation unit. Zhamyangiyn Lhagvasuren, Corps Commissar of the Mongolian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army, was appointed Zhukov&#x27;s deputy.

The Battles of Khalkhin Gol ended on 16 September 1939.

====World War II and immediate aftermath====
In the beginning stage of World War II, the Mongolian People&#x27;s Army was involved in the Battle of Khalkhin Gol, when Japanese forces, together with the puppet state of Manchukuo, attempted to invade Mongolia from the Khalkha River. Soviet forces under the command of Georgy Zhukov, together with Mongolian forces, defeated the Japanese Sixth army and effectively ended the Soviet–Japanese border conflicts.

In 1945, Mongolian forces participated in the Soviet invasion of Manchuria under the command of the Red Army, among the last engagements of World War II. A Soviet–Mongolian Cavalry mechanized group under Issa Pliyev took part as part of the Soviet Transbaikal Front. Mongolian troops numbered four cavalry divisions and three other regiments. During 1946–1948, the Mongolian People&#x27;s Army successfully repelled attacks from the Kuomintang&#x27;s Hui regiment and their Kazakh allies in the border between Mongolia and Xinjiang. The attacks were propagated by the Ili Rebellion, a Soviet-backed revolt by the Second East Turkestan Republic against the Kuomintang Government of the Republic of China. This little-known border dispute between Mongolia and the Republic of China became known as the Pei-ta-shan Incident.

These engagements would be the last active battles the Mongolian Army would see, until after the democratic revolution.

===After the Democratic Revolution===
Mongolia underwent a democratic revolution in 1990, ending the communist one-party state that had existed since the early 1920s. In 2002, a law was passed that enabled Mongolian Army and police forces to conduct UN-backed and other international peacekeeping missions abroad. In August 2003, Mongolia contributed troops to the Iraq War as part of the Multi-National Force – Iraq. Mongolian troops, numbering 180 at its peak, were under Multinational Division Central-South and were tasked with guarding the main Polish base, Camp Echo. Prior to that posting, they had been protecting a logistics base dubbed Camp Charlie in Hillah.

Then-Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard Myers, visited Ulaanbaatar on 13 January 2004 and expressed his appreciation for the deployment of a 173-strong contingent to Iraq. He then inspected the 150th Peacekeeping Battalion, which was planned to send a fresh force to replace the first contingent later in January 2004. All troops were withdrawn on 25 September 2008.

In June 2005, Batzorigiyn Erdenebat, the Vice Minister of National Defense, told Jane&#x27;s Defence Weekly that the deployment of forces in Mongolia was changing away from its Cold War, southern-orientated against China posture. &quot;Under Mongolia&#x27;s regional development concept the country has been divided into four regions, each incorporating several provinces. The largest capital city in each region will become the regional center and we will establish regional military headquarters in each of those cities,&quot; he said. However, at the time, implementation had been delayed.

In 2009, Mongolia sent 114 troops as part of the International Security Assistance Force to Afghanistan. The troops were sent, backing the U.S. surge in troop numbers. Mongolian forces in Afghanistan mostly assist NATO/International Security Assistance Force personnel in training on the former Warsaw Pact weapons that comprise the bulk of the military equipment available to the Afghan National Army.

In 2021, on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the armed forces, it was awarded the Order of Genghis Khan by President Khaltmaagiin Battulga.

== Peacekeeping operations ==

Mongolia passed legislation enabling it to contribute to peacekeeping missions in 2002, deploying two military observers to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and another two officers to the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. From 2005–2006, Mongolian troops served under NATO command as part of the Belgian KFOR contingent in Kosovo. In 2006 it deployed a 250 person contingent to the United Nations Mission in Liberia, the country&#x27;s first sizeable contribution to UN peacekeeping.

In 2011, the government decided to deploy its first fully self-sustained forces to UNMISS in South Sudan, conducting peacekeeping duties in Unity State, with officers deployed at the Force Headquarters and Sector Headquarters. The first general officer deployed in this mission as Brigade Commander was in 2014.

Mongolian armed forces have performed peacekeeping missions in South Sudan, Chad, Georgia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Congo, Western Sahara, Sudan (Darfur), Iraq, Afghanistan, and in Sierra Leone under the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. As of 2024, Mongolia has the 28th most peacekeepers contributed to UN missions. Mongolia has contributed a total of about 19,000 UN peacekeeping personnel as of 2022, 900 of which have been women, ranking 20th among contributing countries.

Peacekeeping battalions in the Mongolian forces may include the 084th Special Task Battalion, and the 330th and 350th Special Task Battalion.
==Military policy==

Mongolia has a unique military policy due to its geopolitical position and economic situation. Being between two of the world&#x27;s largest nations, Mongolian armed forces have a limited capability to protect its independence against foreign invasions; the country&#x27;s national security therefore depends strongly on diplomacy, a notable part of which is the third neighbor policy. The country&#x27;s military ideal is to create and maintain a small but efficient and professional armed forces.

==Organization==

=== Higher leadership ===
The military order of precedence is as follows:

*President of Mongolia (Commander-in-Chief)
*Minister of Defense
*Deputy Ministers of Defense
*Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces
*Deputy Chiefs of the General Staff of the Armed Forces
*Service branch commanders

===Branches===
====Ground Force====
The Ground Forces possess over 470 tanks, 650 Infantry Fighting Vehicles and armored personnel carriers, 500 mobile anti-aircraft weapons, more than 700 artillery and mortar and other military equipment. Most of them are old Soviet Union models designed between the late 1950s to early 1980s. There are a smaller number of newer models designed in post-Soviet Russia.

====Air Force====
On 25 May 1925 a Junkers F.13 entered service as the first aircraft in Mongolian civil and military aviation. By 1935 Soviet aircraft were based in the country. In May 1937 the air force was renamed the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic Air Corps. During 1939–1945 the Soviets delivered Polikarpov I-15s, Polikarpov I-16s, Yak-9s and Ilyushin Il-2s. By 1966 the first SA-2 SAM units entered service, and the air force was renamed the Air Force of the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic. The MiG-15, UTI and MiG-17 the first combat jet aircraft in the Mongolian inventory, entered service in 1970 and by the mid-1970s was joined by MiG-21s, Mi-8s and Ka-26s.

After the end of the Cold War and the advent of the Democratic Revolution, the air force was effectively grounded due to a lack of fuel and spare parts. However, the government has been trying to revive the air force since 2001. The country has the goal of developing a full air force in the future.

In 2011, the Ministry of Defense announced that they would buy MiG-29s from Russia by the end of the year, but this did not materialize. In October 2012 the Ministry of Defense returned a loaned Airbus A310-300 to MIAT Mongolian Airlines. From 2007 to 2011 the active fleet of MiG-21s was reduced. In 2013 the Air Force examined the possibility of buying three C-130J transport airplanes, manufactured by Lockheed Martin. Left without Russian aid, the Mongolian air force inventory gradually reduced to a few Antonov An-24/26 tactical airlifters and a dozen airworthy Mi-24 and Mi-8 helicopters.

On 26 November 2019 Russia donated two MiG-29 fighter aircraft to Mongolia, which then became the only combat-capable fighter jets in its air force.

==== Construction and Engineering Forces ====

Since 1963, large-scale construction work has been a military affair, with the Council of Ministers on 8 January 1964 establishing the General Construction Military Agency under the Ministry of Defense. In addition, a large number of construction military units have been established. The work create a new construction and engineering army began in 2010. The Ministry of Defense and the General Staff of the Armed Forces have established six civil engineering units over the last 10 years.

==== Cyber Security Forces ====
The Armed Forces Cyber Security Center has been established under the General Staff of the Armed Forces. A project to upgrade the Armed Forces&#x27; information and communication network, conduct integrated monitoring, detect cyber attacks, and install response equipment is expected to be completed in August 2021. A decision has been made to build a Data Center for the Armed Forces&#x27; Cyber Security Center. This will be the basis for the creation of a Cyber Security Force.

==== Special Forces ====
The only Special Forces unit () in Mongolia is the 084th Special Task Battalion.

==== Navy ====
Mongolia has no navy due to its landlocked status. In the 13th century, the Mongolian Navy became one of the largest in the world under Kublai Khan, though most of this fleet sank during the Mongol invasions of Japan. Since then, there was no navy in Mongolia, and currently only a small number of motorboats are used by border guards on Buir Lake, for patrolling the border between Mongolia and China in the lake. 

There is a misconception that the tugboat &quot;Sukhbaatar&quot; (a Project 758B built 1983 by Kama Shipbuilding in Perm, Russia) and its crew, which was used for cargo transportation in Lake Khövsgöl, are the Mongolian navy.

== Personnel ==

=== Military education ===
In October 1943, the Sükhbaatar Officers&#x27; School was opened to train personnel of the Mongolian Army in accordance with the experience of the Red Army during the Second World War. The National Defense University serves as the main educational institution of the armed forces. The NDU is composed of the following education institutions: Defense Management Academy, Defense Research Institute, Academic Education Institute, Military Institute, Military Music College, NCO College. In 1994, the MNDU maintained a border protection faculty, which would later be expanded to establish the Border Troops Institute and what would later become the Law Enforcement University of Mongolia.

=== Conscription ===
The legal basis of conscription is the Universal Military Service Act. Men are conscripted between the ages of 18 and 25 for a one-year tour of duty. Mongolian men receive their conscription notices through their local administrative unit. Reserve service is still required up until the age of 45.

=== Women in the Armed Forces ===
More than 20 percent of the total personnel of the Armed Forces are women, who work mainly in communications, logistics and medical sectors. In addition, female members of the Armed Forces have been active in UN peacekeeping operations. Major N. Nyamjargal was the first female member of the Armed Forces to serve as a UN-mandated military observer in Western Sahara in 2007. A total of 12 women have served in the Western Sahara and Sierra Leone.

Policies in recent years have been aimed at making female military service more equitable. Most women are assigned duties in the kitchen facilities and the barracks, as they are subject to many gender inequalities.

In 2022, Bolor Ganbold became the first woman to attain the rank of brigadier general in the Armed Forces. She had previously been one of the first women to enlist in 1994.

=== Military courts ===
On 16 March 1921, a joint meeting of the Provisional People&#x27;s Government and the members of the Central Committee of the MPRP decided to establish a &quot;Military Judicial Office under the Ministry of Defense&quot;. In 1928, the government approved the “Charter of the Red Army Judiciary” and the Military Judiciary established under the Ministry of Justice. This was disbanded a year later and the Military College of the Supreme Court was established. It was composed of the Khovd Regional Military Court, the Eastern Military Court, and the Military Courts of the 1st Cavalry Division (Ulaanbaatar). The military court were referred to as &quot;special courts&quot; at the time and dealt with criminal and civil cases involving military personnel. In 1929, the Provisional Court and the General Military Court were dissolved, and the Military College of the Supreme Court was subordinated to the three former military units. The Military College was dissolved in 1954, and was re-established in 1971.

In connection with the change in the staffing, the parliament ordered in 1993 the abolition of the All-Military Special Court and the Special Military Court of First Instance, transferring the assets used by the Military Courts to the General Council of the Judiciary. All activities of the Military Court system is supervised by the Military Collegium.

== Equipment ==
== References ==
*&quot;World aircraft information files Bright Star Publishing London File 332 Sheet 3

== External links ==
*General Staff of the Mongolian Armed Forces 
*Ministry of Defense 
*General Intelligence Agency
*Photo report on the Military Parade for the honor of National Flag of Mongolia, 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1178910" start="4" end="26" title="Mongolian Armed Forces" label="Mongolian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="208" end="216" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056506" start="311" end="333" title="Mongolian Ground Force" label="Mongolian Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056504" start="335" end="354" title="Mongolian Air Force" label="Mongolian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q107223276" start="356" end="391" title="Construction and Engineering Forces" label="Construction and Engineering Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762923" start="461" end="474" title="General Authority for Border Protection" label="Border Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769613" start="476" end="491" title="Internal Troops of Mongolia" label="Internal Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035968" start="493" end="520" title="General Executive Agency of Court Decision" label="Judicial enforcement agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q89905792" start="525" end="561" title="National Emergency Management Agency (Mongolia)" label="National Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q107242087" start="618" end="661" title="General Staff of the Mongolian Armed Forces" label="General Staff of the Mongolian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053699" start="794" end="813" title="Ministry of Defense (Mongolia)" label="Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090029" start="854" end="876" title="Mongolian military day" label="Mongolian military day"/>
<link wikidata="Q163708" start="915" end="945" title="Defender of the Fatherland Day" label="Defender of the Fatherland Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="949" end="955" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158408" start="960" end="967" title="PLA Day" label="PLA Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="971" end="976" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="1087" end="1100" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="1112" end="1124" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q560198" start="1221" end="1238" title="Mongolian plateau" label="Mongolian plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1824" end="1836" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="2292" end="2311" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Mongol Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9263" start="2417" end="2428" title="Esen Taishi" label="Esen Taishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304" start="2433" end="2454" title="Dayan Khan" label="Batmongkhe Dayan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2595" end="2607" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923401" start="2613" end="2628" title="Dzungar Khanate" label="Dzungar Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2659" end="2671" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="3153" end="3166" title="Eight Banners" label="Eight Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="3230" end="3236" title="Manchu" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="3241" end="3247" title="Mongols" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475921" start="3336" end="3349" title="Outer Mongolia (1911–1919)" label="Bogd Khaanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q353547" start="3360" end="3369" title="Bogd Khan" label="Bogd Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222403" start="3416" end="3452" title="Occupation of Mongolia" label="Mongolia being occupied successively"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="3468" end="3486" title="Beiyang Government" label="Beiyang Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q70542" start="3492" end="3504" title="Baron Ungern" label="Baron Ungern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127178" start="3786" end="3829" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q314105" start="3894" end="3911" title="Damdin Sükhbaatar" label="Damdin Sükhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="4023" end="4031" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502042" start="4164" end="4195" title="1932 armed uprising in Mongolia" label="1932 armed uprising in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696389" start="4204" end="4234" title="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts" label="initial Japanese border probes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4842" end="4853" title="Yaozo Azuma" label="Yaozo Azuma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4989" end="5007" title="Takemitsu Yamagata" label="Takemitsu Yamagata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656142" start="5470" end="5484" title="Far East Front" label="Far East Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229141" start="5489" end="5498" title="Comandarm" label="Comandarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391510" start="5499" end="5513" title="Grigory Shtern" label="Grigory Shtern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="5656" end="5661" title="Corps" label="Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619976" start="5673" end="5679" title="Comcor" label="Comcor"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="5680" end="5693" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914828" start="5829" end="5846" title="Yakov Smushkevich" label="Yakov Smushkevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16291651" start="5871" end="5894" title="Zhamyangiyn Lhagvasuren" label="Zhamyangiyn Lhagvasuren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944482" start="6146" end="6174" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="6205" end="6217" title="Battles of Khalkhin Gol" label="Khalkhin Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="6374" end="6387" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q696389" start="6480" end="6512" title="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts" label="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="6561" end="6589" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Soviet invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6655" end="6667" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054826" start="6688" end="6712" title="Cavalry mechanized group" label="Cavalry mechanized group"/>
<link wikidata="Q670030" start="6719" end="6730" title="Issa Pliyev" label="Issa Pliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q911083" start="6763" end="6780" title="Transbaikal Front" label="Transbaikal Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="6948" end="6958" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256789" start="7083" end="7096" title="Ili Rebellion" label="Ili Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10988528" start="7128" end="7158" title="Second East Turkestan Republic" label="Second East Turkestan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="7200" end="7217" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231829" start="7315" end="7335" title="Pei-ta-shan Incident" label="Pei-ta-shan Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302974" start="7506" end="7547" title="1990 Democratic Revolution in Mongolia" label="underwent a democratic revolution in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="7709" end="7718" title="UN peacekeeping" label="UN-backed"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="7824" end="7832" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="7848" end="7875" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="Multi-National Force – Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934811" start="7933" end="7969" title="Multinational Division Central-South" label="Multinational Division Central-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210089" start="8022" end="8031" title="Camp Echo (Iraq)" label="Camp Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q243846" start="8121" end="8127" title="Hillah" label="Hillah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="8135" end="8172" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="8174" end="8181" title="General" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937025" start="8182" end="8195" title="Richard Myers" label="Richard Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q107335121" start="8344" end="8372" title="150th Peacekeeping Battalion" label="150th Peacekeeping Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="9161" end="9200" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="9204" end="9215" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="9331" end="9370" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="9407" end="9418" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689084" start="9493" end="9513" title="Afghan National Army" label="Afghan National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335994" start="9606" end="9627" title="Order of Genghis Khan" label="Order of Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9122260" start="9641" end="9662" title="Khaltmaagiin Battulga" label="Khaltmaagiin Battulga"/>
<link wikidata="Q695186" start="9824" end="9883" title="United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara" label="United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="9917" end="9979" title="United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="10027" end="10031" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="10063" end="10067" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="10082" end="10088" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="10141" end="10174" title="United Nations Mission in Liberia" label="United Nations Mission in Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q670434" start="10327" end="10333" title="UNMISS" label="UNMISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="10337" end="10348" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319965" start="10384" end="10395" title="Unity (state)" label="Unity State"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="10620" end="10631" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="10633" end="10637" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="10639" end="10646" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="10648" end="10656" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="10658" end="10665" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="10667" end="10672" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="10674" end="10688" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="10690" end="10695" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="10697" end="10703" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="10706" end="10710" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="10712" end="10723" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="10732" end="10744" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="10770" end="10803" title="United Nations Mission in Liberia" label="United Nations Mission in Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613941" start="10834" end="10856" title="List of countries by number of UN peacekeepers contributed" label="28th most peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360389" start="11110" end="11138" title="084th Special Task Battalion" label="084th Special Task Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="11530" end="11539" title="diplomacy" label="diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785072" start="11572" end="11593" title="third neighbor policy" label="third neighbor policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="11803" end="11824" title="President of Mongolia" label="President of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="11826" end="11844" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="11847" end="11866" title="Minister of Defense" label="Minister of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="11875" end="11895" title="Minister of Defense" label="Ministers of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048983" start="11897" end="11943" title="Chief of General Staff (Mongolia)" label="Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="12099" end="12103" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="12110" end="12136" title="Infantry Fighting Vehicles" label="Infantry Fighting Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="12141" end="12167" title="armored personnel carriers" label="armored personnel carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="12180" end="12200" title="anti-aircraft weapon" label="anti-aircraft weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="12217" end="12226" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="12231" end="12237" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12289" end="12301" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="12424" end="12430" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26172" start="12468" end="12480" title="Junkers F.13" label="Junkers F.13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944482" start="12654" end="12696" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q696089" start="12737" end="12752" title="Polikarpov I-15" label="Polikarpov I-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q641977" start="12755" end="12770" title="Polikarpov I-16" label="Polikarpov I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q562475" start="12773" end="12778" title="Yak-9" label="Yak-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q211443" start="12784" end="12797" title="Ilyushin Il-2" label="Ilyushin Il-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q163186" start="12818" end="12822" title="SA-2" label="SA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="12939" end="12945" title="MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q152976" start="12955" end="12961" title="MiG-17" label="MiG-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="13079" end="13085" title="MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="13088" end="13092" title="Mil Mi-8" label="Mi-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043860" start="13098" end="13103" title="Ka-26" label="Ka-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="13471" end="13477" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="13603" end="13618" title="Airbus A310-300" label="Airbus A310-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q564717" start="13622" end="13645" title="MIAT Mongolian Airlines" label="MIAT Mongolian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="13685" end="13691" title="MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187536" start="13769" end="13775" title="C-130J" label="C-130J"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="14044" end="14050" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360389" start="15284" end="15312" title="084th Special Task Battalion" label="084th Special Task Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="15466" end="15477" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208156" start="15521" end="15546" title="Mongol invasions of Japan" label="Mongol invasions of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762923" start="15651" end="15664" title="General Authority for Border Protection" label="border guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q715788" start="15668" end="15677" title="Buir Lake" label="Buir Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q915" start="15863" end="15867" title="Perm, Russia" label="Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q192215" start="15934" end="15947" title="Khövsgöl Nuur" label="Lake Khövsgöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q314105" start="16039" end="16049" title="Damdin Sükhbaatar" label="Sükhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641210" start="16207" end="16234" title="National Defense University (Mongolia)" label="National Defense University"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641075" start="16466" end="16488" title="Military Music College of Mongolia" label="Military Music College"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="16534" end="16551" title="Border security" label="border protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q25632487" start="16664" end="16702" title="University of Internal Affairs of Mongolia" label="Law Enforcement University of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117459363" start="17733" end="17746" title="Bolor Ganbold" label="Bolor Ganbold"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="19224" end="19238" title="Military Court" label="Military Court"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19281" wikidata="Q13353" url="?curid=19281" title="Montserrat">
<text>Montserrat ( , ) is a British Overseas Territory in the Caribbean. It is part of the Leeward Islands, the northern portion of the Lesser Antilles chain of the West Indies. Montserrat is about long and wide, with roughly of coastline. It is nicknamed &quot;The Emerald Isle of the Caribbean&quot; both for its resemblance to coastal Ireland and for the Irish ancestry of many of its inhabitants. Montserrat is the only non-fully sovereign full member of the Caribbean Community and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, though it is far from being the only dependency in the Caribbean overall.

On 18 July 1995, the previously dormant Soufrière Hills volcano in the southern end of the island became active and its eruptions destroyed Plymouth, Montserrat&#x27;s Georgian era capital city situated on the west coast. Between 1995 and 2000, two-thirds of the island&#x27;s population was forced to flee, mostly to the United Kingdom, leaving fewer than 1,200 people on the island in 1997. (The population had increased to nearly 5,000 by 2016). The volcanic activity continues, mostly affecting the vicinity of Plymouth, including its docks, and the eastern side of the island around the former W. H. Bramble Airport, the remnants of which were buried by flows from further volcanic activity on 11 February 2010.

An exclusion zone was imposed, encompassing the southern part of the island as far north as parts of the Belham Valley, because of the size of the existing volcanic dome and the resulting possibility of pyroclastic activity. Visitors are generally not permitted to enter the exclusion zone, but a view of destroyed Plymouth can be seen from the top of Garibaldi Hill in Isles Bay. The volcano has been relatively quiet since early 2010 and continues to be closely monitored by the Montserrat Volcano Observatory.

In 2015, it was announced that planning would begin on a new town and port at Little Bay on the northwest coast of the island, and the centre of government and businesses was moved temporarily to Brades. After a number of delays, including Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017 and the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in early 2020, the Little Bay Port Development Project, a £28 million project funded by the UK and the Caribbean Development Bank, began in June 2022.

== Etymology ==
In 1493, Christopher Columbus named the island &quot;Santa María de Montserrate&quot;, after the Virgin of Montserrat of the Monastery of Montserrat near Barcelona in Catalonia, Spain. Montserrat means &quot;serrated mountain&quot; in Catalan.

== History ==


===Pre-colonial era===
Archaeological field work in 2012 in Montserrat&#x27;s Centre Hills indicated that there had been an Archaic (pre-Arawak) occupation between 2000 and 500 BCE. Later coastal sites showed the presence of the Saladoid culture (until 550 CE). The native Caribs are believed to have called the island &quot;Alliouagana&quot;, meaning &#x27;Land of the Prickly Bush&#x27;.

In 2016, nine petroglyphs were discovered by local residents hiking in a wooded area near Soldier Ghaut. Another was discovered in 2018 in the same area of the island. The carvings are believed to be 1,000–1,500 years old.

===Early European period===

In November 1493, Christopher Columbus passed Montserrat on his second voyage, after being told that the island was unoccupied because of raids by the Caribs.

A number of Irishmen settled in Montserrat in 1632. Most came from nearby Saint Kitts at the instigation of the island&#x27;s governor Thomas Warner, with more settlers arriving later from Virginia. The first settlers &quot;appear to have been cultivators, each working his own little farm&quot;.

The preponderance of Anglo-Irish in the first wave of European settlers led a leading legal scholar to remark that a &quot;nice question&quot; is whether the original settlers took with them the law of the Kingdom of Ireland insofar as it differed from the law of the Kingdom of England.

The Irish being historical allies of the French, especially in their qualified disdain of the English, invited the French to claim the island in 1666, although no troops were sent by France to maintain control. The French attacked and briefly occupied the island in the late 1660s; it was captured shortly afterwards by the English, and English control of the island was confirmed under the Treaty of Breda the following year. Despite the seizing by force of the island by the French, the island&#x27;s legal status is that of a &quot;colony acquired by settlement&quot;, as the French gave up their claim to the island at Breda.

A neo-feudal colony developed amongst the so-called &quot;redlegs&quot;. The Anglo-Irish colonists began to transport both Sub-Saharan African slaves and Irish indentured servants for labour, as was common to most Caribbean islands. By the late 18th century, numerous plantations had been developed on the island.

=== 18th century ===
There was a brief French attack on Montserrat in 1712. On 17 March 1768, a slave rebellion failed but their efforts were remembered. Slavery was abolished in 1834. In 1985, the people of Montserrat made St Patrick&#x27;s Day a ten-day public holiday to commemorate the uprising. Festivities celebrate the culture and history of Montserrat in song, dance, food and traditional costumes.

In 1782, during the American Revolutionary War, as America&#x27;s first ally, France captured Montserrat in their war of support of the Americans. The French, not intending to colonise the island, agreed to return the island to Great Britain under the 1783 Treaty of Paris.

=== New crops and politics ===
In 1834, Britain abolished slavery in Montserrat and its other territories.

During the nineteenth century, falling sugar prices had an adverse effect on the island&#x27;s economy, as Brazil and other nations competed in the trade.

The first lime tree orchards on the island were planted in 1852 by a local planter, Mr Burke. In 1857, the British philanthropist Joseph Sturge bought a sugar estate to prove that it was economically viable to employ paid labour rather than use slaves. Numerous members of the Sturge family bought additional land. In 1869, the family established the Montserrat Company Limited and planted Key lime trees; started the commercial production of lime juice, with more than 100,000 gallons produced annually by 1895; set up a school; and sold parcels of land to the inhabitants of the island. The pure lime juice was transported in casks to England, where it was clarified and bottled by Evans, Sons &amp; Co, of Liverpool, with a trade mark on each bottle intended to guarantee quality to the public. 

Much of Montserrat came to be owned by smallholders.

From 1871 to 1958, the island was administered as part of the federal crown colony of the British Leeward Islands, becoming a province of the short-lived West Indies Federation from 1958 to 1962. The first Chief Minister of Montserrat was William Henry Bramble of the Montserrat Labour Party from 1960 to 1970; he worked to promote labour rights and boost tourism to the island, and Montserrat&#x27;s original airport was named in his honour. Bramble&#x27;s son, Percival Austin Bramble, was critical of the way tourist facilities were being constructed, and he set up his own party, the Progressive Democratic Party, which won the 1970 Montserratian general election. Percival Bramble served as Chief Minister from 1970 to 1978. The period 1978 to 1991 was dominated politically by Chief Minister John Osborne and his People&#x27;s Liberation Movement A brief flirtation with possibly declaring independence never materialised.

On 10 May 1991, the Caribbean Territories (Abolition of Death Penalty for Murder) Order 1991 came into force, formally abolishing the death penalty for murder on Montserrat.

Corruption allegations within the PLM party resulted in the collapse of the Osborne government in 1991, with Reuben Meade becoming the new chief minister, and early elections were called.

In 1995–1999, Montserrat was devastated by catastrophic volcanic eruptions in the Soufrière Hills, which destroyed the capital city of Plymouth, and necessitated the evacuation of a large part of the island. Many Montserratians emigrated abroad, mainly to the United Kingdom, although some have returned. The eruptions rendered the entire southern half of the island uninhabitable, and it is currently designated an Exclusion Zone with restricted access.

Criticism of the Montserratian government&#x27;s response to the disaster led to the resignation of Chief Minister Bertrand Osborne in 1997 after only a year in office. He was replaced by David Brandt, who remained in office until 2001. Since leaving office, Brandt has been the subject of multiple criminal investigation into alleged sex offences with minors. He was found guilty of six counts of sexual exploitation and sentenced to fifteen years in July 2021.

John Osborne returned as Chief Minister following victory in the 2001 election. He was ousted by Lowell Lewis of the Montserrat Democratic Party in 2006. Reuben Meade returned to office in 2009 to 2014. During his term, the post of Chief Minister was replaced with that of Premier.

In the autumn of 2017, Montserrat was not affected by Hurricane Irma, and sustained only minor damage from Hurricane Maria.

Since November 2019, Easton Taylor-Farrell of the Movement for Change and Prosperity party has been the island&#x27;s Premier.

==Politics and government==

Montserrat is an internally self-governing overseas territory of the United Kingdom. The United Nations Committee on Decolonization includes Montserrat on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. The island&#x27;s head of state is King Charles III, represented by an appointed Governor. Executive power is exercised by the government, whereas the Premier is the head of government. The Premier is appointed by the Governor from among the members of the Legislative Assembly which consists of nine elected members. The leader of the party with a majority of seats is usually the one who is appointed. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly. The Assembly also includes two &quot;ex officio&quot; members, the attorney general and financial secretary.

The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

=== Administrative divisions ===
For the purposes of local government, Montserrat is divided into three parishes. Going north to south, they are:
* Parish of Saint Peter
* Parish of Saint Georges
* Parish of Saint Anthony

The locations of settlements on the island have been vastly changed since the volcanic activity began. Only the Parish of Saint Peter in the northwest of the island is now inhabited, with a population of between 4,000 and 6,000, the other two parishes being still too dangerous to inhabit.

A significantly more up-to-date administrative division type would be the 3 census regions, primarily used for the population census. Going north to south, these are:

* Northern Region (2,369 pop.)
* Central Region (1,666 pop.)
* South of Nantes river (887 pop.)

For census purposes, these are further divided into 23 enumeration districts.

===Police===
Policing is primarily the responsibility of the Royal Montserrat Police Service.

===Military and defence===
The defence of Montserrat is the responsibility of the United Kingdom. The Royal Navy maintains a ship on permanent station in the Caribbean () and from time-to-time may send another Royal Navy or Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship as a part of the Atlantic Patrol (NORTH) tasking. These ships&#x27; main mission in the region is to maintain British sovereignty for the overseas territories, provide humanitarian aid and disaster relief during disasters such as hurricanes, which are common in the area, and conduct counter-narcotics operations. In October 2023, the destroyer HMS &quot;Dauntless&quot; (which had temporarily replaced &quot;Medway&quot; on her Caribbean tasking), visited the territory in order to assist local authorities in preparing for the climax of the hurricane season.

====Royal Montserrat Defence Force====

The Royal Montserrat Defence Force is the home defence unit of the British Overseas Territory of Montserrat. Raised in 1899, the unit is today a reduced force of about forty volunteer soldiers, primarily concerned with civil defence and ceremonial duties. The unit has a historical association with the Irish Guards.

== Communications ==
The island is served by landline telephones, fully digitalised, with 3000 subscribers and by mobile cellular, with an estimated number of 5000 handsets in use. An estimated 2860 users have internet access. These are July 2016 estimates. Public radio service is provided by Radio Montserrat. There is a single television broadcaster, PTV. Cable and satellite television service is available.

The UK postcode for directing mail to Montserrat is MSR followed by four digits according to the destination town; for example, the postcode for Little Bay is MSR1120.

== Geography ==

The island of Montserrat is located approximately southwest of Antigua, southeast of Redonda (a small island owned by Antigua and Barbuda), and northwest of the French overseas region of Guadeloupe. Beyond Redonda lies the island of Nevis (which is part of the federation of St Kitts and Nevis), about to the north-west.

Montserrat comprises and is gradually increasing owing to the buildup of volcanic deposits on the southeast coast. The island is long and wide and consists of a mountainous interior surrounded by a flatter littoral region, with rock cliffs rising above the sea and a number of smooth bottomed sandy beaches scattered among coves on the western (Caribbean Sea) side of the island.

The major mountains are (from north to south) Silver Hill, Katy Hill in the Centre Hills range, the Soufrière Hills and the South Soufrière Hills. The Soufrière Hills volcano is the island&#x27;s highest point; its pre-1995 height was . However, it has grown after the eruption due to the creation of a lava dome, with its current height being estimated at .

The 2011 estimate by the CIA indicates that 30% of the island&#x27;s land is classified as agricultural, 20% as arable, 25% as forest and the balance as &quot;other&quot;.

Montserrat has a few tiny off-shore islands, such as Little Redonda off its north coast and Pinnacle Rock and Statue Rock off its east.

=== Volcano and exclusion zone ===

In July 1995, Montserrat&#x27;s Soufrière Hills volcano, dormant for centuries, erupted and soon buried the island&#x27;s capital, Plymouth, in more than of mud, destroyed its airport and docking facilities, and rendered the southern part of the island, now termed the exclusion zone, uninhabitable and not safe for travel. The southern part of the island was evacuated and visits are severely restricted. The exclusion zone also includes two sea areas adjacent to the land areas of most volcanic activity.

After the destruction of Plymouth and disruption of the economy, more than half of the population left the island, which also lacked housing. During the late 1990s, additional eruptions occurred. On 25 June 1997, a pyroclastic flow travelled down Mosquito Ghaut. This pyroclastic surge could not be restrained by the ghaut (a steep revine leading to the sea) and spilled out of it, killing 19 people who were in the (officially evacuated) Streatham village area. Several others in the area suffered severe burns.

British nationality law has changed over time with respect to the status granted to Montserrat residents. In recognition of the disaster, in 1998, the people of Montserrat were granted full residency rights in the United Kingdom, allowing them to migrate if they chose. British citizenship was granted in 2002 to British Overseas Territories citizens in Montserrat and all but one other British Overseas Territory.

For a number of years in the early 2000s, the volcano&#x27;s activity consisted mostly of infrequent ventings of ash into the uninhabited areas in the south. The ash falls occasionally extended into the northern and western parts of the island. In the most recent period of increased activity at the Soufrière Hills volcano, from November 2009 through February 2010, ash vented and there was a vulcanian explosion that sent pyroclastic flows down several sides of the mountain. Travel into parts of the exclusion zone was occasionally allowed, though only by a licence from the Royal Montserrat Police Force. Since 2014 the area has been split into multiple subzones with varying entry and use restrictions, based on volcanic activity: some areas even being (in 2020) open 24 hours and inhabited. The most dangerous zone, which includes the former capital, remains forbidden to casual visitors due to volcanic and other hazards, especially due to the lack of maintenance in destroyed areas. It is legal to visit this area when accompanied by a government-authorised guide.

The northern part of Montserrat has largely been unaffected by volcanic activity, and remains lush and green. In February 2005, Princess Anne officially opened what is now called the John A. Osborne Airport in the north. Since 2011, it handles several flights daily operated by Fly Montserrat Airways. Docking facilities are in place at Little Bay, where the new capital town is being constructed; the new government centre is at Brades, a short distance away.

=== Wildlife ===
Montserrat, like many isolated islands, is home to rare, endemic plant and animal species. Work undertaken by the Montserrat National Trust in collaboration with the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew has centred on the conservation of pribby (&quot;Rondeletia buxifolia&quot;) in the Centre Hills region. Until 2006, this species was known only from one book about the vegetation of Montserrat. In 2006, conservationists also rescued several plants of the endangered Montserrat orchid (&quot;Epidendrum montserratense&quot;) from dead trees on the island and installed them in the security of the island&#x27;s botanic garden.

Montserrat is also home to the critically endangered giant ditch frog (&quot;Leptodactylus fallax&quot;), known locally as the mountain chicken, found only in Montserrat and Dominica. The species has undergone catastrophic declines due to the amphibian disease Chytridiomycosis and the volcanic eruption in 1997. Experts from Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust have been working with the Montserrat Department of Environment to conserve the frog in-situ in a project called &quot;Saving the Mountain Chicken&quot;, and an ex-situ captive breeding population has been set up in partnership with Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust, Zoological Society of London, Chester Zoo, Parken Zoo, and the Governments of Montserrat and Dominica. Releases from this programme have already taken place in a hope to increase the numbers of the frog and reduce extinction risk from Chytridiomycosis.

The national bird is the endemic Montserrat oriole (&quot;Icterus oberi&quot;). The IUCN Red List classifies it as vulnerable, having previously listed it as critically endangered. Captive populations are held in several zoos in the UK including: Chester Zoo, London Zoo, Jersey Zoo and Edinburgh Zoo.

The Montserrat galliwasp (&quot;Diploglossus montisserrati&quot;), a type of lizard, is endemic to Montserrat and is listed on the IUCN Red List as critically endangered. A species action plan has been developed for this species.

In 2005, a biodiversity assessment for the Centre Hills was conducted. To support the work of local conservationists, a team of international partners, including Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and Montana State University, carried out extensive surveys and collected biological data. Researchers from Montana State University found that the invertebrate fauna was particularly rich on the island. The report found that the number of invertebrate species known to occur in Montserrat is 1241. The number of known beetle species is 718 species from 63 families. It is estimated that 120 invertebrates are endemic to Montserrat.

Montserrat is known for its coral reefs and its caves along the shore. These caves house many species of bats, and efforts are underway to monitor and protect the ten species of bats from extinction.

The Montserrat tarantula (&quot;Cyrtopholis femoralis&quot;) is the only species of tarantula native to the island. It was first bred in captivity at the Chester Zoo in August 2016.
=== Climate ===
Montserrat has a tropical rainforest climate (&quot;Af&quot; according to the Köppen climate classification) with the temperature being warm and consistent year-round, and lots of precipitation. Summer and autumn are wetter because of Atlantic hurricanes.

== Economy ==

Montserrat&#x27;s economy was devastated by the 1995 eruption and its aftermath; currently the island&#x27;s operating budget is largely supplied by the British government and administered through the Department for International Development (DFID) amounting to approximately £25 million per year. Additional amounts are secured through income and property taxes, licence and other fees as well as customs duties levied on imported goods.

The limited economy of Montserrat, with a population under 5000, consumes 2.5 MW of electric power, produced by five diesel generators. Two exploratory geothermal wells have found good resources and the pad for a third geothermal well was prepared in 2016. Together the geothermal wells are expected to produce more power than the island requires. A 250 kW solar PV station was commissioned in 2019, with plans for another 750 kW.

A report published by the CIA indicates that the value of exports totalled the equivalent of US$5.7 million (2017 est.), consisting primarily of electronic components, plastic bags, apparel, hot peppers, limes, live plants and cattle. The value of imports totalled US$31.02 million (2016 est.), consisting primarily of machinery and transportation equipment, foodstuffs, manufactured goods, fuels and lubricants.

In 1979, The Beatles producer George Martin opened AIR Studios Montserrat, making the island popular with musicians who often went there to record while taking advantage of the island&#x27;s climate and beautiful surroundings. In the early hours of 17 September 1989, Hurricane Hugo passed the island as a Category 4 hurricane, damaging more than 90% of the structures on the island. AIR Studios Montserrat closed, and the tourist economy was virtually wiped out. The slowly recovering tourist industry was again wiped out with the eruption of the Soufrière Hills Volcano in 1995, although it began partially to recover within fifteen years.

==Transport==
===Air===
John A. Osborne Airport is the only airport on the island (constructed after the W. H. Bramble Airport was destroyed in 1997 by the volcanic eruption). Scheduled service to Antigua is provided by FlyMontserrat and ABM Air. Charter flights are also available to the surrounding islands.

===Sea===
Ferry service to the island was provided by the Jaden Sun Ferry. It ran from Heritage Quay in St. John&#x27;s, Antigua and Barbuda to Little Bay on Montserrat. The ride was about an hour and a half and operated five days a week.

This service stopped in 2020 due to being financially unsustainable and the only access to Montserrat now is by air.

== Demographics ==
Montserrat had a population of 7,119 in 1842.

The island had a population of 5,879 (according to a 2008 estimate). An estimated 8,000 refugees left the island (primarily to the UK) following the resumption of volcanic activity in July 1995; the population was 13,000 in 1994. The 2011 Montserrat census indicated a population of 4,922. In early 2016, the estimated population had reached nearly 5,000 primarily due to immigration from other islands.

Age structure (2003 estimates):

* up to 14 years: 23.4% (male 1,062; female 1,041)
* 15 to 64 years: 65.3% (male 2,805; female 3,066)
* 65 years and over: 11.3% (male 537; female 484)

The median age of the population was 28.1 as of 2002 and the sex ratio was 0.96 males/female as of 2000.

The population growth rate is 6.9% (2008 est.), with a birth rate of 17.57 births/1,000 population, death rate of 7.34 deaths/1,000 population (2003 est.), and net migration rate of 195.35/1,000 population (2000 est.) There is an infant mortality rate of 7.77 deaths/1000 live births (2003 est.). The life expectancy at birth is 75.9 years: 76.8 for males and 75.0 for females (2023 est.). Globally, only Montserrat has a higher life expectancy for males than females, a difference of 1.8 years. The total fertility rate is 1.8 children born/woman (2003 est.).

According to the Montserrat government&#x27;s 2024 population census, the island has a total population of 4,386, a 10.9% drop compared to 2011.

===Language===
English is the sole official language and the main spoken language. A few thousand people speak Montserrat Creole, a dialect of Leeward Caribbean Creole English. Historically, Irish Gaelic was spoken, but has disappeared from use.

==== Irish language in Montserrat ====
The Irish constituted the largest proportion of the white population from the founding of the colony in 1628. Most were indentured servants; others were merchants or plantation owners. The geographer Thomas Jeffrey claimed in &quot;The West India Atlas&quot; (1780) that the majority of those on Montserrat were either Irish or of Irish descent, &quot;so that the use of the Irish language is preserved on the island, even among the Negroes.&quot;

African slaves and Irish indentured servants of all classes were in constant contact, with sexual relationships being common and a population of mixed descent appearing as a consequence. The Irish were also prominent in Caribbean commerce, with their merchants importing Irish goods such as beef, pork, butter and herring, and also importing slaves.

There is indirect evidence that the use of the Irish language continued in Montserrat until at least the middle of the nineteenth century. The County Kilkenny diarist and Irish scholar Amhlaoibh Ó Súilleabháin noted in 1831 that he had heard that Irish was still spoken in Montserrat by both black and white inhabitants.

In 1852, Henry H. Breen wrote in Notes and Queries that &quot;The statement that &#x27;the Irish language is spoken in the West India Islands, and that in some of them it may be said to be almost vernacular,&#x27; is true of the little Island of Montserrat, but has no foundation with respect to the other colonies.&quot;

In 1902, &quot;The Irish Times&quot; quoted the &quot;Montreal Family Herald&quot; in a description of Montserrat, noting that &quot;the negroes to this day speak the old Irish Gaelic tongue, or English with an Irish brogue. A story is told of a Connaught man who, on arriving at the island, was, to his astonishment, hailed in a vernacular Irish by the black people.&quot;

A letter by W. F. Butler in &quot;The Atheneum&quot; (15 July 1905) quotes an account by a Cork civil servant, C. Cremen, of what he had heard from a retired sailor called John O&#x27;Donovan, a fluent Irish speaker:

The British phonetician John C. Wells conducted research into speech in Montserrat in 1977–78 (which included also Montserratians resident in London). He found media claims that Irish speech, whether Anglo-Irish or Irish Gaelic, influenced contemporary Montserratian speech were largely exaggerated. He found little in phonology, morphology or syntax that could be attributed to Irish influence, and in Wells&#x27; report, only a small number of Irish words in use, one example being &quot;minseach&quot; which he suggests is the noun &quot;goat&quot;.

=== Religion ===
In 2001, the CIA estimated the primary religion as Protestant (67.1%, including Anglican 21.8%, Methodist 17%, Pentecostal 14.1%, Seventh-day Adventist 10.5%, and Church of God 3.7%), with Catholics constituting 11.6%, Rastafarian 1.4%, other 6.5%, none 2.6%, unspecified 10.8%. By 2018, the statistics were Protestant 71.4% (includes Anglican 17.7%, Pentecostal/Full Gospel 16.1%, Seventh Day Adventist 15%, Methodist 13.9%, Church of God 6.7%, other Protestant 2%), Roman Catholic 11.4%, Rastafarian 1.4%, Hindu 1.2%, Jehovah&#x27;s Witness 1%, Muslim 0.4%, unspecified 5.1%, none 7.9% (2018 est.)

=== Ethnic groups ===
Residents of Montserrat are known as Montserratians. The population is predominantly, but not exclusively, of mixed African-Irish descent. It is not known with certainty how many African slaves and indentured Irish labourers were brought to the West Indies, though according to one estimate some 60,000 Irish were &quot;Barbadosed&quot; by Oliver Cromwell, some of whom would have arrived in Montserrat.

Data published by the Central Intelligence Agency indicates the ethnic group mix as follows (2011 est.):

:88.4%: African/black 
:3.7%: mixed 
:3.0%: Hispanic/Spanish (of any race, including white)
:2.7%: non-Hispanic Caucasian/white 
:1.5%: East Indian/Indian
:0.7%: other
As of 2018 the statistics were estimated at:

* African/Black 86.2%, 
* mixed 4.8%
* Hispanic/Spanish 3%
* Caucasian/White 2.7%
* East Indian/Indian 1.6%
* other 1.8%

== Education ==
Education in Montserrat is compulsory for children between the ages of 5 and 14, and free up to the age of 17. The only secondary school (pre-16 years of age) on the island is the Montserrat Secondary School (MSS) in Salem. Montserrat Community College (MCC) is a community college (post-16 and tertiary educational institution) in Salem. The University of the West Indies maintains its Montserrat Open Campus. University of Science, Arts and Technology is a private medical school in Olveston.

==Culture==
===Cuisine===

Montserrat&#x27;s national dish is goat water, a thick goat meat stew served with crusty bread rolls. Montserrat cuisine resembles the general British and Caribbean cuisines, as it is situated in the Caribbean zone and it is a British territory. The cuisine includes a wide range of light meats, like fish, seafood and chicken, which are mostly grilled or roasted. Being a fusion of numerous cultures, such as Spanish, French, African, Indian and Amerindian, the Caribbean cuisine is unique and complex. More sophisticated meals include the Montserrat jerk shrimp, with rum, cinnamon bananas and cranberry. In other more rural areas, people prefer to eat homemade food, like the traditional mahi mahi and local breads.

===Media===

Montserrat has one national radio station, Radio Montserrat. The station offers a wide selection of music and news within the island and also on the internet for Montserratians living overseas. Notable shows include the &quot;Morning Show&quot; with Basil Chambers and Rose Willock&#x27;s &quot;Cultural Show&quot;.

In the 1980s, the music videos for the Police&#x27;s songs &quot;Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic&quot; and &quot;Spirits in the Material World&quot; were filmed on the Montserrat. In 2017, Montserrat was used to film much of the 2020 film &quot;Wendy&quot;.

Ben Fogle produced &quot;Ben Fogle and the Lost City&quot;, a docuseries exploring Montserrat&#x27;s abandoned capital of Plymouth, now an ash-covered ghost town. The docuseries premiered in 2023 on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom. It also premiered at the Montserrat Cultural Centre, where it drew a large local audience.

=== AIR Montserrat studio ===

In 1975, AIR built a residential studio in Montserrat. It was constructed near the residence of producer George Martin in the town of Salem. AIR Montserrat (16°44′28″N 62°12′53″W) opened in July 1979, complete with several surrounding villas where clients could stay while working at the studio. The studio consisted of a 46-channel Neve mixing console, a pair of MCI 24-track recorders, three Ampex ATR-102 2-track tape recorders and an MCI synchronizer (for any 46-track work), with JBL and Tannoy monitors.

The first band to record there was the Climax Blues Band who were recording their album &quot;Real to Reel&quot;. Other musicians and bands who recorded there included Dire Straits, Elton John, Earth, Wind, and Fire, Jimmy Buffet, Michael Jackson, the Police, the Rolling Stones, and Rush. AIR Montserrat studio operated for more than a decade. In 1989, the studio was damaged by Hurricane Hugo and subsequently closed.

Many albums were recorded at AIR Studios, including 

* Dire Straits&#x27; &quot;Brothers in Arms&quot;
* Duran Duran&#x27;s &quot;Seven and the Ragged Tiger&quot;
* Jimmy Buffett&#x27;s &quot;Volcano&quot; (named for Soufrière Hills)
* the Police&#x27;s &quot;Synchronicity&quot; and &quot;Ghost in the Machine&quot; 
* Rush&#x27;s &quot;Power Windows&quot;

Ian Anderson&#x27;s (of Jethro Tull) &quot;Montserrat&quot;, on the album &quot;The Secret Language of Birds&quot;, was recorded in tribute to the volcanic difficulties and feeling among residents of being abandoned by the UK government.

After the island&#x27;s volcanic eruptions of 1995 through 1997, George Martin raised funds to help the victims and families on the island. The first event, Music for Montserrat, was held at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall in September 1997, and featured many artists who had previously recorded on the island including Paul McCartney, Mark Knopfler, Elton John, Sting, Phil Collins, Eric Clapton, and Midge Ure. The event raised £1.5 million. All the proceeds from the show went towards short-term relief for the islanders.

Martin&#x27;s second major initiative was to release five hundred limited edition lithographs of his score for the Beatles song &quot;Yesterday&quot;. The lithographs were numbered and signed by Paul McCartney and Martin. The lithograph sale raised more than US$1.4 million, which helped fund the building of a new cultural and community centre for Montserrat and provided a much needed focal point to help the re-generation of the island.

=== Sites ===
Montserrat has multiple cultural sites and landmarks open to the public:

* National Museum of Montserrat, a national museum focusing on the history of Montserrat
* Montserrat Volcano Observatory, the island&#x27;s volcanic observatory
* Plymouth (ghost town), the only volcanic-buried town in the Americas
* Jack Boy Hill, a viewing facility with views of the island&#x27;s volcano, towns, and beaches

== Sport ==

===Yachting===
Montserrat is home to the Montserrat Yachting Association.

=== Athletics ===
Montserrat has competed in every Commonwealth Games since 1994.

Miguel Francis who now represents the United Kingdom and previously represented Antigua and Barbuda was born in Montserrat. He holds the Antiguan National record over 200m in 19.88.

=== Basketball ===
Basketball is growing in popularity in Montserrat with the country now setting up their own basketball league. The league contains six teams, which are the Look-Out Shooters, Davy Hill Ras Valley, Cudjoe Head Renegades, St. Peters Hilltop, Salem Jammers and MSS School Warriors. They have also built a new 800 seater complex which cost $1.5 million.

=== Cricket ===
In common with many Caribbean islands, cricket is a very popular sport in Montserrat. Players from Montserrat are eligible to play for the West Indies cricket team. Jim Allen was the first to play for the West Indies and he represented the World Series Cricket West Indians, although, with a very small population, no other player from Montserrat had gone on to represent the West Indies until Lionel Baker made his One Day International debut against Pakistan in November 2008.

The Montserrat cricket team forms a part of the Leeward Islands cricket team in regional domestic cricket; however, it plays as a separate entity in minor regional matches, as well having previously played Twenty20 cricket in the Stanford 20/20. Two grounds on the island have held first-class matches for the Leeward Islands, the first and most historic was Sturge Park in Plymouth, which had been in use since the 1920s. This was destroyed in 1997 by the volcanic eruption. A new ground, the Salem Oval, was constructed and opened in 2000. This has also held first-class cricket. A second ground has been constructed at Little Bay.

=== Football ===

Montserrat has its own FIFA affiliated football team, and has competed in the World Cup qualifiers five times but failed to advance to the finals from 2002 to 2018. A field for the team was built near the airport by FIFA. In 2002, the team competed in a friendly match with the second-lowest-ranked team in FIFA at that time, Bhutan, in &quot;The Other Final&quot;, the same day as the final of the 2002 World Cup. Bhutan won 4–0. Montserrat has failed to qualify for any FIFA World Cup. They have also failed to ever qualify for the Gold Cup and Caribbean Cup. The current national team relies mostly on the diaspora resident in England and in the last World Cup qualification game against Curaçao nearly all the squad members played and lived in England.

Montserrat has a club league, the Montserrat Championship, which has played sporadically since 1974. The league was most recently on hiatus from 2005 until 2015 but restarted play in 2016.

=== Surfing ===

Carrll Robilotta, whose parents moved from the United States to Montserrat in 1980, was responsible for pioneering the sport of surfing on the island. He and his brother Gary explored, discovered, and named the surf spots on the island during the 80s and early 90s.

== Settlements ==

Settlements within the exclusion zone are no longer habitable. See also List of settlements abandoned after the 1997 Soufrière Hills eruption.
=== Settlements in the safe zone ===

* Baker Hill
* Banks
* Barzeys
* Blakes
* Brades
* Carr&#x27;s Bay
* Cavalla Hill
* Cheap End
* Cudjoe Head
* Davy Hill
* Dick Hill
* Drummonds
* Flemmings
* Fogarty
* Frith
* Garibaldi Hill
* Gerald&#x27;s
* Hope
* Jack Boy Hill
* Judy Piece
* Katy Hill
* Lawyers Mountain
* Little Bay
* Lookout
* Manjack
* Mongo Hill
* New Windward Estate
* Nixons
* Old Towne
* Olveston
* Peaceful Cottage
* Salem
* Shinlands
* St. John&#x27;s
* St. Peter&#x27;s
* Sweeney&#x27;s
* Woodlands
* Yellow Hill
=== Abandoned settlements in the exclusion zone ===
Settlements in italics have been destroyed by pyroclastic flows since the 1997 eruption. Others have been evacuated or destroyed since 1995.
* Amersham
* Beech Hill
* &quot;Bethel&quot;
* &quot;Bramble&quot;
* Bransby
* Bugby Hole
* Cork Hill
* Dagenham
* Delvins
* &quot;Dyers&quot;
* Elberton
* &quot;Farm&quot;
* &quot;Fairfield&quot;
* Fairy Walk
* &quot;Farrells&quot;
* &quot;Farells Yard&quot;
* Ffryes
* Fox&#x27;s Bay
* Gages
* &quot;Gallways Estate&quot;
* Gringoes
* Gun Hill
* Happy Hill
* &quot;Harris&quot;
* Harris Lookout
* &quot;Hermitage&quot;
* Hodge&#x27;s Hill
* Jubilee
* Kinsale
* Lees
* Locust Valley
* &quot;Long Ground&quot;
* Molyneux
* &quot;Morris&quot;
* Parsons
* &quot;Plymouth&quot;
* Richmond
* Richmond Hill
* Roche&#x27;s Yard
* &quot;Robuscus Mt&quot;
* Shooter&#x27;s Hill
* &quot;Soufrière&quot;
* Spanish Point
* St. George&#x27;s Hill
* &quot;St. Patrick&#x27;s&quot;
* &quot;Streatham&quot;
* Trants
* Trials
* Tuitts
* Victoria
* Webbs
* Weekes
* White&#x27;s
* Windy Hill
== Notable Montserratians ==
 
* Jim Allen, former cricketer who represented the World Series Cricket West Indians
* Jennette Arnold, the first Montserratian elected as a Member of the London Assembly.
* Lionel Baker, the first Montserratian to represent the West Indies in international cricket
* Alphonsus &quot;Arrow&quot; Cassell, musician known for his soca song &quot;Hot Hot Hot&quot;
* Chadd Cumberbatch, visual and performing artist, poet and playwright.
* Margaret Dyer-Howe, Montserrat&#x27;s second woman to be appointed a cabinet minister.
* Ettore Ewen, American professional wrestler and former WWE Heavyweight Champion, 11-time tag team champion, former college football player and powerlifter.
* Howard A. Fergus, author, poet and three time acting governor of Montserrat
* Patricia Griffin, pioneer nurse and volunteer social worker
* George Irish, writer, human rights activist
* Kadiff Kirwan, actor
* E. A. Markham, poet and author
* Dean Mason, association footballer
* Ellen Dolly Peters, teacher and trade unionist
* Q-Tip, rapper, songwriter and producer; his father emigrated to Cleveland, United States from Montserrat
* Shane Ryan, writer, human rights activist
* Veronica Ryan, sculptor, and winner of the 2022 Turner Prize
* M. P. Shiel, writer
* Lyle Taylor, association footballer
* Rowan Taylor, international footballer
* Maizie Williams, member of pop group Boney M
* Angela Yee, member of the syndicated morning radio show &quot;The Breakfast Club&quot;


== See also ==
* Bibliography of Montserrat
* Index of Montserrat-related articles
* Outline of Montserrat

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
*Akenson, Donald Harman – &quot;If the Irish Ran the World: Montserrat, 1630-1730.&quot;
*Brussell, David Eric – &quot;Potions, Poisons, and Panaceas: An Ethnobotanical Study of Montserrat.&quot;
*Dobbin, Jay D. – &quot;The Jombee Dance of Montserrat: A Study of Trance Ritual in the West Indies.&quot;
*Perrett, Frank A. – &quot;The Volcano-Seismic Crisis at Montserrat, 1933-37.&quot;
*Philpott, Stuart B. – &quot;West Indian Migration: The Montserrat Case.&quot;
*Possekel, Anja K. – &quot;Living with the Unexpected: Linking Disaster Recovery to Sustainable Development in Montserrat.&quot;

== External links ==
===Government===
* Government of Montserrat 
* Montserrat National Trust 
* Premier of Montserrat

===General information===
* Montserrat . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Montserrat from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;.
* Montserrat Webdirectory
* Story of the black Irish in Montserrat 

===News media===
* Montserrat Reporter news site
* Radio Montserrat—ZJB Listen live online 

===Travel===
* Montserrat Tourist Board 
* Montserrat Magazine Publications 
* Montserrat Magazine 

===Health reports===
* Toxicity of volcanic ash from Montserrat by RT Cullen, AD Jones, BG Miller, CL Tran, JMG Davis, K Donaldson, M Wilson, V Stone, and A Morgan. Institute of Occupational Medicine Research Report TM/02/01.
* A Health Survey of Workers on the Island of Montserrat by HA Cowie, MK Graham, A Searl, BG Miller, PA Hutchison, C Swales, S Dempsey, and M Russell. Institute of Occupational Medicine Research Report TM/02/02.
* A Health Survey of Montserratians Relocated to the UK by HA Cowie, A Searl, PJ Ritchie, MK Graham, PA Hutchison, and A Pilkington. Institute of Occupational Medicine Research Report TM/01/07.

===Others===
* Montserrat Volcano Observatory
* Official release archive 
* &quot;Antigua, Montserrat and Virgin Islands Gazette&quot; at the Digital Library of the Caribbean</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="0" end="10" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="22" end="48" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="56" end="65" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="85" end="100" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="130" end="145" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="159" end="170" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="332" end="339" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="352" end="366" title="Irish diaspora" label="Irish ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205995" start="457" end="476" title="Caribbean Community" label="Caribbean Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q392770" start="485" end="525" title="Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States" label="Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="642" end="665" title="Soufrière Hills volcano" label="Soufrière Hills volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="742" end="750" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="770" end="782" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="924" end="938" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584145" start="1201" end="1222" title="W. H. Bramble Airport" label="W. H. Bramble Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1323" end="1337" title="Exclusion zone#Natural disaster exclusion zones" label="exclusion zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="1523" end="1534" title="pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906590" start="1801" end="1831" title="Montserrat Volcano Observatory" label="Montserrat Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636466" start="1912" end="1922" title="Little Bay, Montserrat" label="Little Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q31006" start="2030" end="2036" title="Brades" label="Brades"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="2074" end="2084" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="2085" end="2089" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="2094" end="2099" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543915" start="2103" end="2107" title="Tropical cyclones in 2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2116" end="2133" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772571" start="2247" end="2273" title="Caribbean Development Bank" label="Caribbean Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="2321" end="2341" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q301779" start="2409" end="2429" title="Virgin of Montserrat" label="Virgin of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q771935" start="2437" end="2460" title="Santa Maria de Montserrat" label="Monastery of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="2466" end="2475" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="2479" end="2488" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2490" end="2495" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455385" start="2520" end="2528" title="Serration" label="serrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="2547" end="2554" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="2710" end="2716" title="Arawak peoples" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="2750" end="2753" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405634" start="2802" end="2810" title="Saladoid" label="Saladoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="2978" end="2988" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3054" end="3067" title="Soldier Ghaut" label="Soldier Ghaut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3281" end="3294" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus#Lesser Antilles and Puerto Rico" label="second voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="3368" end="3374" title="Island Caribs" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="3389" end="3397" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086358" start="3398" end="3419" title="Irish immigration to Montserrat" label="settled in Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q204989" start="3451" end="3462" title="Saint Kitts" label="Saint Kitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794896" start="3512" end="3525" title="Thomas Warner (explorer)" label="Thomas Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3566" end="3574" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="3881" end="3899" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="3943" end="3961" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="4005" end="4011" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431007" start="4355" end="4370" title="Treaty of Breda (1667)" label="Treaty of Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912273" start="4597" end="4607" title="neo-feudalism" label="neo-feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931533" start="4653" end="4660" title="redlegs" label="redlegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="4718" end="4737" title="black people" label="Sub-Saharan African"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="4809" end="4818" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="4863" end="4874" title="plantations" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940467" start="5006" end="5021" title="Montserrat slave rebellion of 1768" label="slave rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="5134" end="5155" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5338" end="5364" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037038" start="5403" end="5411" title="French capture of Montserrat" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="5546" end="5559" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="5570" end="5590" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="1783 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="5641" end="5658" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="abolished slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5808" end="5814" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287238" start="5987" end="6000" title="Joseph Sturge" label="Joseph Sturge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165354" start="6247" end="6255" title="Key lime" label="Key lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="6696" end="6708" title="smallholding" label="smallholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="6781" end="6793" title="crown colony" label="crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796551" start="6801" end="6824" title="British Leeward Islands" label="British Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="6865" end="6887" title="West Indies Federation" label="West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245464" start="6917" end="6945" title="Chief Minister of Montserrat" label="Chief Minister of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011904" start="6950" end="6971" title="William Henry Bramble" label="William Henry Bramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188484" start="6979" end="7002" title="Montserrat Labour Party" label="Montserrat Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167090" start="7174" end="7197" title="Percival Austin Bramble" label="Percival Austin Bramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188753" start="7299" end="7327" title="Progressive Democratic Party (Montserrat)" label="Progressive Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188495" start="7343" end="7378" title="1970 Montserratian general election" label="1970 Montserratian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699125" start="7509" end="7521" title="John Osborne (Montserrat politician)" label="John Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188720" start="7530" end="7563" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Movement (Montserrat)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q99897228" start="7661" end="7733" title="Caribbean Territories (Abolition of Death Penalty for Murder) Order 1991" label="Caribbean Territories (Abolition of Death Penalty for Murder) Order 1991"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7760" end="7770" title="Capital punishment in the United Kingdom#Abolition" label="abolishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="7775" end="7788" title="Capital punishment" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862326" start="7925" end="7937" title="Reuben Meade" label="Reuben Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="8087" end="8102" title="Soufrière Hills" label="Soufrière Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="8140" end="8148" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895884" start="8576" end="8592" title="Bertrand Osborne" label="Bertrand Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231691" start="8649" end="8661" title="David Brandt (politician)" label="David Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q715018" start="9022" end="9034" title="Lowell Lewis" label="Lowell Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906577" start="9042" end="9069" title="Montserrat Democratic Party" label="Montserrat Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245464" start="9198" end="9205" title="Premier of Montserrat" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="9262" end="9276" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Hurricane Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="9315" end="9330" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Hurricane Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q71333507" start="9354" end="9375" title="Easton Taylor-Farrell" label="Easton Taylor-Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926622" start="9383" end="9417" title="Movement for Change and Prosperity" label="Movement for Change and Prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="9533" end="9551" title="British overseas territory" label="overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9559" end="9573" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9579" end="9593" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="9649" end="9702" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="9722" end="9735" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="9739" end="9755" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="9795" end="9810" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="9870" end="9888" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="10108" end="10125" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="10148" end="10158" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21029427" start="10167" end="10187" title="Legislative Assembly of Montserrat" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="10226" end="10236" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="10256" end="10272" title="attorney general" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="10303" end="10312" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976993" start="10471" end="10479" title="Parish (administrative division)" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445994" start="11286" end="11317" title="Royal Montserrat Police Service" label="Royal Montserrat Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11422" end="11432" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508488" start="11544" end="11565" title="Royal Fleet Auxiliary" label="Royal Fleet Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643936" start="11916" end="11941" title="HMS Dauntless (D33)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Dauntless&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374502" start="12177" end="12207" title="Royal Montserrat Defence Force" label="Royal Montserrat Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q252564" start="12476" end="12488" title="Irish Guards" label="Irish Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q116692696" start="12785" end="12801" title="Radio Montserrat" label="Radio Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370074" start="12908" end="12919" title="Postal codes in the Pitcairn Islands" label="UK postcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="13153" end="13160" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q457261" start="13175" end="13182" title="Redonda" label="Redonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="13208" end="13227" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="13277" end="13287" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="13323" end="13328" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="13365" end="13383" title="St Kitts and Nevis" label="St Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31615" start="13735" end="13739" title="cove" label="cove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13839" end="13850" title="Silver Hill, Montserrat" label="Silver Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13852" end="13861" title="Katy Hill, Montserrat" label="Katy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="13893" end="13908" title="Soufrière Hills" label="Soufrière Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900385" start="13917" end="13938" title="South Soufriere Hills" label="South Soufrière Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="13960" end="13967" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q534282" start="14096" end="14105" title="lava dome" label="lava dome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14379" end="14393" title="Little Redonda" label="Little Redonda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14418" end="14431" title="Pinnacle Rock, Montserrat" label="Pinnacle Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14436" end="14447" title="Statue Rock" label="Statue Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758272" start="15275" end="15292" title="pyroclastic surge" label="pyroclastic surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010155" start="15324" end="15329" title="ghat" label="ghaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="15521" end="15544" title="British nationality law" label="British nationality law"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="15791" end="15810" title="British citizenship" label="British citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970593" start="15834" end="15870" title="British Overseas Territories citizen" label="British Overseas Territories citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="16050" end="16053" title="Volcanic ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943937" start="16331" end="16350" title="Vulcanian eruption" label="vulcanian explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="16361" end="16377" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q151754" start="17139" end="17152" title="Anne, Princess Royal" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431604" start="17194" end="17217" title="John A. Osborne Airport" label="John A. Osborne Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135063" start="17289" end="17311" title="FlyMontserrat" label="Fly Montserrat Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="17547" end="17554" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748726" start="17656" end="17682" title="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew" label="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17732" end="17752" title="Rondeletia buxifolia" label="Rondeletia buxifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17975" end="18000" title="Epidendrum montserratense" label="Epidendrum montserratense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704588" start="18164" end="18180" title="Leptodactylus fallax" label="giant ditch frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="18285" end="18293" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090290" start="18372" end="18388" title="Chytridiomycosis" label="Chytridiomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578510" start="18437" end="18472" title="Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust" label="Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994473" start="18558" end="18565" title="In-situ conservation" label="in-situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q994064" start="18634" end="18641" title="Ex-situ conservation" label="ex-situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q220198" start="18743" end="18771" title="Zoological Society of London" label="Zoological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139243" start="18773" end="18784" title="Chester Zoo" label="Chester Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300287" start="19030" end="19047" title="Montserrat oriole" label="Montserrat oriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="19081" end="19094" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="19257" end="19267" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345284" start="19269" end="19279" title="Jersey Zoo" label="Jersey Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284778" start="19284" end="19297" title="Edinburgh Zoo" label="Edinburgh Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q308436" start="19304" end="19324" title="Montserrat galliwasp" label="Montserrat galliwasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="19758" end="19799" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="19804" end="19828" title="Montana State University" label="Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647298" start="20467" end="20488" title="Cyrtopholis femoralis" label="Cyrtopholis femoralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="20650" end="20677" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20711" end="20740" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547976" start="20868" end="20886" title="Atlantic hurricane" label="Atlantic hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748702" start="21106" end="21146" title="Department for International Development" label="Department for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="21497" end="21513" title="geothermal power" label="geothermal wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="22200" end="22211" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="22221" end="22234" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q743026" start="22242" end="22264" title="AIR Montserrat" label="AIR Studios Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638615" start="22459" end="22473" title="Hurricane Hugo" label="Hurricane Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431604" start="22858" end="22881" title="John A. Osborne Airport" label="John A. Osborne Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584145" start="22939" end="22960" title="W. H. Bramble Airport" label="W. H. Bramble Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433157" start="23031" end="23038" title="V. C. Bird International Airport" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135063" start="23054" end="23067" title="FlyMontserrat" label="FlyMontserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069913" start="23072" end="23079" title="ABM Air" label="ABM Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q36262" start="23249" end="23285" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Antigua and Barbuda" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636466" start="23289" end="23299" title="Little Bay, Montserrat" label="Little Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906614" start="23683" end="23702" title="Montserratians in the United Kingdom" label="primarily to the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="24989" end="24996" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906575" start="25085" end="25102" title="Montserrat Creole" label="Montserrat Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244184" start="25117" end="25149" title="Leeward Caribbean Creole English" label="Leeward Caribbean Creole English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="25165" end="25177" title="Irish language" label="Irish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="25380" end="25398" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="25635" end="25649" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q180231" start="26203" end="26218" title="County Kilkenny" label="County Kilkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746069" start="26245" end="26269" title="Amhlaoibh Ó Súilleabháin" label="Amhlaoibh Ó Súilleabháin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="26415" end="26432" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="26720" end="26735" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="26951" end="26960" title="Connaught" label="Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q713249" start="27092" end="27104" title="William Butler (British Army officer)" label="W. F. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q755237" start="27114" end="27126" title="The Athenaeum (British magazine)" label="The Atheneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="27171" end="27175" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="27310" end="27321" title="Phonetics" label="phonetician"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811" start="27322" end="27335" title="John C. Wells" label="John C. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="27498" end="27509" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="27513" end="27525" title="Irish Gaelic" label="Irish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="27949" end="27957" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="28832" end="28847" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="28919" end="28946" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025447" start="29139" end="29157" title="Indo-Caribbean" label="East Indian/Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="29475" end="29491" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962221" start="29535" end="29562" title="Montserrat Secondary School" label="Montserrat Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332895" start="29572" end="29577" title="Salem, Montserrat" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799402" start="29579" end="29607" title="Montserrat Community College" label="Montserrat Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="29619" end="29636" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="29698" end="29727" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22088945" start="29766" end="29808" title="University of Science, Arts and Technology" label="University of Science, Arts and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q103902354" start="29840" end="29848" title="Olveston, Montserrat" label="Olveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047514" start="29913" end="29923" title="goat water" label="goat water"/>
<link wikidata="Q116692696" start="30654" end="30670" title="Radio Montserrat" label="Radio Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="30946" end="30958" title="Music video" label="music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716907" start="30993" end="31029" title="Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic" label="Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282696" start="31046" end="31075" title="Spirits in the Material World" label="Spirits in the Material World"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084758" start="31178" end="31183" title="Wendy (film)" label="Wendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885648" start="31192" end="31201" title="Ben Fogle" label="Ben Fogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603925" start="31254" end="31264" title="docuseries" label="docuseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="31314" end="31322" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="31343" end="31353" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="31391" end="31400" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q743026" start="31556" end="31559" title="Associated Independent Recording" label="AIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="31652" end="31665" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332895" start="31681" end="31686" title="Salem, Montserrat" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q599359" start="31880" end="31884" title="Neve Electronics" label="Neve"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="31885" end="31899" title="mixing console" label="mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107923" start="31911" end="31914" title="Music Center Incorporated" label="MCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748140" start="31941" end="31954" title="Ampex ATR-102" label="Ampex ATR-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="31955" end="31977" title="Multitrack recording" label="2-track tape recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q490339" start="32097" end="32114" title="Climax Blues Band" label="Climax Blues Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="32226" end="32238" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="32240" end="32250" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q28974" start="32252" end="32273" title="Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire" label="Earth, Wind, and Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="32275" end="32287" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="32289" end="32304" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="32306" end="32316" title="the Police" label="the Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="32318" end="32336" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="32342" end="32346" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638615" start="32438" end="32452" title="Hurricane Hugo" label="Hurricane Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q743026" start="32508" end="32519" title="Associated Independent Recording" label="AIR Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q258609" start="32560" end="32576" title="Brothers in Arms (album)" label="Brothers in Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="32585" end="32596" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478017" start="32610" end="32636" title="Seven and the Ragged Tiger" label="Seven and the Ragged Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="32645" end="32658" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064318" start="32740" end="32753" title="Synchronicity (The Police album)" label="Synchronicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q751468" start="32770" end="32790" title="Ghost in the Machine (The Police album)" label="Ghost in the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q515429" start="32818" end="32831" title="Power Windows (album)" label="Power Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q216100" start="32839" end="32858" title="Ian Anderson" label="Ian Anderson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="32863" end="32874" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637220" start="32919" end="32947" title="The Secret Language of Birds" label="The Secret Language of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328496" start="33235" end="33255" title="Music for Montserrat" label="Music for Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="33283" end="33300" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185343" start="33414" end="33427" title="Mark Knopfler" label="Mark Knopfler"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="33441" end="33446" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="33448" end="33460" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="33462" end="33474" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q355382" start="33480" end="33489" title="Midge Ure" label="Midge Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q202698" start="33738" end="33747" title="Yesterday (Beatles song)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="33799" end="33813" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403758" start="34135" end="34164" title="National Museum of Montserrat" label="National Museum of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906590" start="34224" end="34254" title="Montserrat Volcano Observatory" label="Montserrat Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34368" end="34381" title="Jack Boy Hill" label="Jack Boy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="34602" end="34620" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666593" start="34634" end="34648" title="Miguel Francis" label="Miguel Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="34801" end="34805" title="200m" label="200m"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="35242" end="35249" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="35342" end="35366" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193360" start="35368" end="35377" title="Jim Allen (cricketer)" label="Jim Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="35443" end="35463" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241814" start="35597" end="35609" title="Lionel Baker" label="Lionel Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931220" start="35687" end="35710" title="Montserrat cricket team" label="Montserrat cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590581" start="35731" end="35759" title="Leeward Islands cricket team" label="Leeward Islands cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q868200" start="35889" end="35897" title="Twenty20" label="Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598712" start="35913" end="35927" title="Stanford 20/20" label="Stanford 20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="35965" end="35976" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628961" start="36042" end="36053" title="Sturge Park" label="Sturge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404155" start="36177" end="36187" title="Salem Oval" label="Salem Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="36359" end="36363" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q497989" start="36375" end="36388" title="Montserrat national football team" label="football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q244431" start="36662" end="36668" title="Bhutan national football team" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q925937" start="36679" end="36694" title="The Other Final" label="The Other Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="36735" end="36749" title="2002 World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="36808" end="36822" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q189327" start="36870" end="36878" title="CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q528449" start="36883" end="36896" title="Caribbean Cup" label="Caribbean Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="36945" end="36953" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="36966" end="36973" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q729640" start="37027" end="37034" title="Curaçao national football team" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423762" start="37128" end="37151" title="Montserrat Championship" label="Montserrat Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="37659" end="37728" title="List of settlements abandoned after the 1997 Soufrière Hills eruption" label="List of settlements abandoned after the 1997 Soufrière Hills eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q31006" start="37810" end="37816" title="Brades" label="Brades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242199" start="37878" end="37887" title="Davy Hill" label="Davy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636466" start="38044" end="38054" title="Little Bay, Montserrat" label="Little Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q123914269" start="38057" end="38064" title="Lookout, Montserrat" label="Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332895" start="38163" end="38168" title="Salem, Montserrat" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="38359" end="38376" title="pyroclastic flows" label="pyroclastic flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402694" start="38456" end="38464" title="Amersham, Montserrat" label="Amersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q103826548" start="38599" end="38607" title="Elberton, Montserrat" label="Elberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="39014" end="39022" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864587" start="39294" end="39300" title="Weekes, Montserrat" label="Weekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193360" start="39362" end="39371" title="Jim Allen (cricketer)" label="Jim Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="39410" end="39430" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996937" start="39446" end="39461" title="Jennette Arnold" label="Jennette Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="39514" end="39529" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241814" start="39533" end="39545" title="Lionel Baker" label="Lionel Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q280415" start="39627" end="39662" title="Arrow (musician)" label="Alphonsus &amp;quot;Arrow&amp;quot; Cassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051735" start="39687" end="39691" title="Soca music" label="soca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084047" start="39703" end="39714" title="Hot Hot Hot (Arrow song)" label="Hot Hot Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120045" start="39723" end="39740" title="Chadd Cumberbatch" label="Chadd Cumberbatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q111987258" start="39795" end="39813" title="Margaret Dyer-Howe" label="Margaret Dyer-Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q601923" start="39884" end="39895" title="Ettore Ewen" label="Ettore Ewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20876909" start="40042" end="40058" title="Howard A. Fergus" label="Howard A. Fergus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40095" end="40117" title="Governor of Montserrat#Governors of Montserrat, 1971–present" label="governor of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957185" start="40120" end="40136" title="Patricia Griffin" label="Patricia Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540957" start="40182" end="40194" title="George Irish" label="George Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q58104104" start="40228" end="40241" title="Kadiff Kirwan" label="Kadiff Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321697" start="40251" end="40264" title="E. A. Markham" label="E. A. Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246342" start="40284" end="40294" title="Dean Mason" label="Dean Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q42723723" start="40321" end="40339" title="Ellen Dolly Peters" label="Ellen Dolly Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q42025" start="40370" end="40375" title="Q-Tip (musician)" label="Q-Tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206950" start="40477" end="40487" title="Shane Ryan (social activist)" label="Shane Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161547" start="40521" end="40534" title="Veronica Ryan" label="Veronica Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q284500" start="40569" end="40581" title="Turner Prize" label="Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517956" start="40584" end="40595" title="M. P. Shiel" label="M. P. Shiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707962" start="40606" end="40617" title="Lyle Taylor" label="Lyle Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371814" start="40644" end="40656" title="Rowan Taylor (footballer)" label="Rowan Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q446512" start="40685" end="40700" title="Maizie Williams" label="Maizie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q156298" start="40722" end="40729" title="Boney M" label="Boney M"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762592" start="40732" end="40742" title="Angela Yee" label="Angela Yee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867371" start="40794" end="40812" title="The Breakfast Club (radio show)" label="The Breakfast Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="40838" end="40864" title="Bibliography of Montserrat" label="Bibliography of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018467" start="40867" end="40903" title="Index of Montserrat-related articles" label="Index of Montserrat-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112369" start="40906" end="40927" title="Outline of Montserrat" label="Outline of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245464" start="41671" end="41692" title="Premier of Montserrat" label="Premier of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="41741" end="41759" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="41767" end="41794" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163473" start="42277" end="42311" title="Institute of Occupational Medicine" label="Institute of Occupational Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163473" start="42489" end="42523" title="Institute of Occupational Medicine" label="Institute of Occupational Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163473" start="42683" end="42717" title="Institute of Occupational Medicine" label="Institute of Occupational Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275909" start="42887" end="42919" title="Digital Library of the Caribbean" label="Digital Library of the Caribbean"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19283" wikidata="Q5535204" url="?curid=19283" title="Geography of Montserrat">
<text>Montserrat is an island in the Caribbean Sea, in the Leeward Islands. Its nearest neighbours in the island chain include Guadeloupe to the southeast, Antigua to the north-east and Nevis to the northwest. The island is 16 km (9.9 mi) long and 11 km (6.8 mi) wide, with a coastline of about 40 km.

The island is volcanic and largely mountainous. The Soufrière Hills volcano became active in 1995, causing widespread devastation, including the destruction of the capital and formerly largest settlement on the island, Plymouth. The southern part of the island is now uninhabitable and human settlement is constrained to the north.

Montserrat has two islets, Little Redonda and Virgin, as well as Statue Rock.

== Climate ==
Montserrat has a tropical climate, with little daily or seasonal temperature variation.

== Statistics ==

Location:
About 500 km southeast of Puerto Rico

Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Territorial sea:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;Exclusive fishing zone:&quot;
Terrain:
Volcanic islands, mostly mountainous, with small coastal lowland

Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Lowest point:&quot;
Caribbean Sea 0 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Highest point:&quot;
Prior to 1995, the highest point was Chances Peak (in the Soufrière Hills) at 915 m. Ongoing volcanic activity has created a lava dome estimated at 1,050 m in 2013.

Natural resources:
Negligible

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Arable land:&quot;
20%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Permanent crops:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Other:&quot;
80% (2011)

Natural hazards:
Severe hurricanes (June to November); volcanic eruptions

Environment - current issues:
Land erosion occurs on slopes that have been cleared for cultivation.

==References==
==Sources==
*CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="0" end="10" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="31" end="44" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="53" end="68" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="121" end="131" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="150" end="157" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="180" end="185" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="349" end="364" title="Soufrière Hills" label="Soufrière Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="516" end="524" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="866" end="877" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492240" start="1205" end="1217" title="Chances Peak" label="Chances Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="1226" end="1241" title="Soufrière Hills" label="Soufrière Hills"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19284" wikidata="Q616644" url="?curid=19284" title="Demographics of Montserrat">
<text>This is demography of the population of Montserrat including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Population==
Montserrat had a population of 7,119 in 1842.

In 1995, the Soufriere Hills Volcano eruption caused two-thirds of the population of about 11,500 people to evacuate the island. According to the 2001 census only 4,491 people were resident of Montserrat. The total local-born population was 69% while those born abroad were 31%.
According to The 2012 Revision of the World Population Prospects&#x27; medium fertility scenario, the anticipated mid-year population for 2014 is 5,100.
&quot;note:&quot;
Approximately two thirds of the population left the island following the resumption of volcanic activity in July 1995. According to the 2001 UK Census 7,983 Montserratian-born people were residing in the UK (almost twice the population of Montserrat itself).

===Structure of the population===



==Vital statistics==

=== Life Expectancy ===
Based on 2023 data:

* total: 75.9 years
* male: 76.8 years
* female: 75.0 years

Only in Montserrat life expectancy for men is higher than for women. The difference is 1.8 years.

==Ethnic groups==
The vast majority of the population of Montserrat are of African descent (92.4% at the 2001 census) or mixed (2.9%). There is also a European origin minority (3.0%; mostly descendants of Irish indentured servants or British colonists), East Indians (1.0%) groups.
Out of 403 Amerindians at the 1980 census only 3 persons were left in 2001.
==Religion==
==See also==
*Montserrat 
*Montserratian British

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="8" end="18" title="demographics" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="26" end="36" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="40" end="50" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="61" end="79" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="81" end="90" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="286" end="309" title="Soufriere Hills Volcano" label="Soufriere Hills Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="859" end="873" title="2001 UK Census" label="2001 UK Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1540" end="1551" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="1632" end="1642" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906614" start="1645" end="1666" title="Montserratian British" label="Montserratian British"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19285" wikidata="Q7225297" url="?curid=19285" title="Politics of Montserrat">
<text>Politics of [[Montserrat]] takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic dependency, whereby the Premier is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Montserrat is an internally self-governing overseas territory of the United Kingdom. The United Nations Committee on Decolonization includes Montserrat on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly.
The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Military defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom.

==Executive branch==
|King
|Charles III
|8 September 2022
|Governor
|Sarah Tucker
|6 April 2022
|Premier
|Reuben Meade
|UA
|25 October 2024
The Governor is appointed by the Monarch. The Premier is appointed by the Governor from among the members of the Legislative Assembly.

His cabinet is appointed by the Governor from among the elected members of the Legislative Assembly and consists also of the Attorney General, and the Finance Secretary.

The current Premier of the island is Reuben Meade, of the United Alliance, replacing the outgoing Premier, Easton Taylor-Farrell, of the Movement for Change and Prosperity.

==Legislative branch==
Montserrat elects on territorial level a legislature. The Legislative Assembly has nine members, elected for five-year terms in one constituency.

==Political parties and elections==
Political parties do not adhere to a single defined ideology and are difficult to distinguish from each other. Instead, policy emphasis shifts depending on the popular approval of the party leader and their policies.

===Most recent election===

==Judicial branch==
The Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, consists of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal.

==Administrative divisions==
Montserrat is divided in 3 parishes; Saint Anthony, Saint Georges, and Saint Peter.

==International organization participation==
CARICOM, Caribbean Development Bank, ECLAC (associate), ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, WCL

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7225297" start="0" end="26" title="Politics of Montserrat" label="Politics of [[Montserrat]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="59" end="72" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="73" end="98" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="99" end="109" title="Dependent territory" label="dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="138" end="156" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="167" end="185" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225297" start="187" end="197" title="Politics of Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="230" end="248" title="British overseas territory" label="overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="256" end="270" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="276" end="290" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="346" end="399" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="401" end="416" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="449" end="466" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="489" end="499" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21029427" start="508" end="528" title="Legislative Assembly of Montserrat" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="534" end="543" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="643" end="657" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="688" end="699" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q772727" start="719" end="727" title="Governor of Montserrat" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q111355657" start="729" end="741" title="Sarah Tucker (diplomat)" label="Sarah Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245464" start="757" end="764" title="Premier of Montserrat" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862326" start="766" end="778" title="Reuben Meade" label="Reuben Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q130652552" start="780" end="782" title="United Alliance (Montserrat)" label="UA"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="833" end="840" title="Monarch" label="Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862326" start="1144" end="1156" title="Reuben Meade" label="Reuben Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q130652552" start="1165" end="1180" title="United Alliance (Montserrat)" label="United Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q71333507" start="1214" end="1235" title="Easton Taylor-Farrell" label="Easton Taylor-Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926622" start="1244" end="1278" title="Movement for Change and Prosperity" label="Movement for Change and Prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1345" end="1356" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q21029427" start="1362" end="1382" title="Legislative Assembly of Montserrat" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001122" start="1757" end="1788" title="Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court" label="Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="1920" end="1933" title="Saint Anthony Parish, Montserrat" label="Saint Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="1935" end="1948" title="Saint Georges Parish, Montserrat" label="Saint Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="1954" end="1965" title="Saint Peter Parish, Montserrat" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q205995" start="2013" end="2020" title="CARICOM" label="CARICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772571" start="2022" end="2048" title="Caribbean Development Bank" label="Caribbean Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="2076" end="2084" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q392770" start="2098" end="2138" title="Organization of Eastern Caribbean States" label="Organization of Eastern Caribbean States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19286" wikidata="Q5333726" url="?curid=19286" title="Economy of Montserrat">
<text>The economy of Montserrat is an economical system which was severely disrupted by volcanic activity which began in July 1995. Prior to this date, the small island country of 12,000 had an export economy based on agriculture, clothing, electronic parts and plants, with a per capita gross national product of US$3,000 to 8,000.

Montserrat had an international reputation as a tourist getaway, and the record producer George Martin established an important recording studio there, Associated Independent Recording. Destroyed by Hurricane Hugo in 1989, the studio was never reestablished; however, Martin subsequently helped found the Montserrat Cultural Centre, which was opened in 2007. Some of the funds were raised in a London concert called &quot;Music for Montserrat&quot; (September 15, 1997).

== Collapse ==
A catastrophic eruption of Soufrière Hills in June 1997 closed the W. H. Bramble Airport and seaport at Plymouth, causing further economic and social dislocation. Two-thirds of the inhabitants fled the island. Some began to return in 1998, but lack of housing limited the number.

The agriculture sector continued to be affected by the lack of suitable land for farming and the destruction of crops. Prospects for the economy depend largely on developments in relation to the volcano and on public sector construction activity. The UK launched a three-year $122.8 million aid program to help reconstruct the economy. Half of the island was expected to remain uninhabitable for another decade.

Today, Montserrat&#x27;s main economic activity is in construction and government services which together accounted for about 50 percent of GDP in 2000 when it was EC$76 million. In contrast, banking and insurance together accounted for less than 10 percent of GDP. The unemployment rate in 1998 was estimated at 6 percent. Montserrat&#x27;s domestic financial sector is very small and has seen a reduction in offshore finance in recent years with only 11 offshore banks remaining. Real GDP declined from EC$122 million in 1995 to about EC$60 million in 1999, with the rate of decline peaking at -21.5 percent for 1996. The decline in economic activity reflected in large part the completion of major projects in both the private and public sectors. However, the rate of decline slowed markedly since 2000 and 2001, when GDP contracted by less than 3 percent. In 2002, the GDP growth rate reverted to a positive 4.6 percent reversing the declining trend over the past six years and maybe more.

== New Town ==
The Montserrat Development Corporation was an entity founded by the Government of Montserrat and the Department for International Development in 2008. The company&#x27;s primary mandate was to help foster private sector investment and development on the island. The company had announced plans to develop the new town of Little Bay on the northwest coast of Montserrat between Brades and Davy Hill, however an internal audit of the company in 2015 led to the company&#x27;s dissolution. The audit revealed that the company was not being prudent with the government&#x27;s funds.

Slated for completion by 2020, the new town will be the new focus of tourism, trade and housing and will also house the seat of government.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5333726" start="4" end="25" title="Economy of Montserrat" label="economy of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="328" end="338" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="417" end="430" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q743026" start="480" end="512" title="Associated Independent Recording" label="Associated Independent Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638615" start="527" end="541" title="Hurricane Hugo" label="Hurricane Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328496" start="750" end="770" title="Music for Montserrat" label="Music for Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q845239" start="842" end="857" title="Soufrière Hills" label="Soufrière Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584145" start="882" end="903" title="W. H. Bramble Airport" label="W. H. Bramble Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="919" end="927" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694059" start="1100" end="1118" title="Agriculture in Montserrat" label="agriculture sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1177" end="1184" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="1208" end="1213" title="crops" label="crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="1306" end="1319" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1347" end="1349" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="1965" end="1978" title="offshore bank" label="offshore bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225297" start="2587" end="2611" title="Government of Montserrat" label="Government of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748702" start="2620" end="2660" title="Department for International Development" label="Department for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="2724" end="2738" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="2828" end="2836" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636466" start="2840" end="2850" title="Little Bay, Montserrat" label="Little Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q31006" start="2896" end="2902" title="Brades" label="Brades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242199" start="2907" end="2916" title="Davy Hill" label="Davy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282797" start="2993" end="3004" title="dissolution (law)" label="dissolution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19287" wikidata="Q7695986" url="?curid=19287" title="Telecommunications in Montserrat">
<text>Montserrat possesses a number of telecommunications systems, including mobile and main line telephone, radio and television. The country code for Montserrat in the Domain Name System of the Internet is &quot;.ms&quot;.
Telephony uses the area code 664.

According to a July 2016 estimate by the CIA, Montserrat&#x27;s fully digitalized telephone service had 3,000 subscribers while an estimated 5,000 mobile handsets were in use. An estimated 2,860 users have internet access.

There are 17 internet service providers.

Montserrat possesses an AM radio station, and 2 FM stations. These serve 7,000 radios (by 1997 figures). There is one television broadcast station, which in 1997 was serving 3,000 televisions; the Peoples Television (PTV) is a free service providing news, documentaries, commercials and entertainment. Cable and satellite television service is also available.

==References==
==External links==
*CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="0" end="10" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695986" start="33" end="59" title="Telecommunications in Montserrat" label="telecommunications systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="71" end="77" title="Mobile telephone" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="92" end="101" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="164" end="182" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q43587" start="208" end="211" title=".ms" label=".ms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150254" start="238" end="251" title="area code 664" label="area code 664"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="491" end="517" title="internet service providers" label="internet service providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="544" end="552" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="568" end="570" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="638" end="648" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359939" start="717" end="735" title="People&amp;#x27;s Television (Montserrat)" label="Peoples Television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19288" wikidata="Q7835037" url="?curid=19288" title="Transport in Montserrat">
<text>Railways:
0 km

Highways:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
269 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;paved:&quot;
203 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;unpaved:&quot;
66 km (1995)

Waterways:
none

Ports and harbours:
Plymouth (abandoned), Little Bay (anchorages and ferry landing), Carr&#x27;s Bay

Merchant marine:
none (2002 est.)

[[List of airports in Montserrat|Airports]]:
One, Gerald&#x27;s Airport, opened on 11 July 2005 replacing W.H. Bramble Airport which was destroyed by volcanic eruption in 1997.

:&quot;See also :&quot; Montserrat

==Sources==
*CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7835037" start="0" end="9" title="Transport in Montserrat" label="Railways:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835037" start="16" end="25" title="Transport in Montserrat" label="Highways:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835037" start="143" end="153" title="Transport in Montserrat" label="Waterways:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835037" start="160" end="179" title="Transport in Montserrat" label="Ports and harbours:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835037" start="262" end="278" title="Transport in Montserrat" label="Merchant marine:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835037" start="297" end="341" title="Transport in Montserrat" label="[[List of airports in Montserrat|Airports]]:"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431604" start="347" end="368" title="Gerald&amp;#x27;s Airport" label="Gerald&amp;#x27;s Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584145" start="403" end="423" title="W.H. Bramble Airport" label="W.H. Bramble Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="499" end="509" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
</links>
</doc>
