<doc id="18839" wikidata="Q638" url="?curid=18839" title="Music">
<text>Music is the arrangement of sound to create some combination of form, harmony, melody, rhythm, or otherwise expressive content. Music is generally agreed to be a cultural universal that is present in all human societies. Definitions of music vary widely in substance and approach. While scholars agree that music is defined by a small number of specific elements, there is no consensus as to what these necessary elements are. Music is often characterized as a highly versatile medium for expressing human creativity. Diverse activities are involved in the creation of music, and are often divided into categories of composition, improvisation, and performance. Music may be performed using a wide variety of musical instruments, including the human voice. It can also be composed, sequenced, or otherwise produced to be indirectly played mechanically or electronically, such as via a music box, barrel organ, or digital audio workstation software on a computer.

Music often plays a key role in social events and religious ceremony. The techniques of making music are often transmitted as part of a cultural tradition. Music is played in public and private contexts, highlighted at events such as festivals and concerts for various different types of ensembles. Music is used in the production of other media, such as in soundtracks to films, TV shows, operas, and video games.

Listening to music is a common means of entertainment. The culture surrounding music extends into areas of academic study, journalism, philosophy, psychology, and therapy. The music industry includes songwriters, performers, sound engineers, producers, tour organizers, distributors of instruments, accessories, and publishers of sheet music and recordings. Technology facilitating the recording and reproduction of music has historically included sheet music, microphones, phonographs, and tape machines, with playback of digital musics being a common use for MP3 players, CD players, and smartphones.
== Etymology and terminology ==
The modern English word &#x27;&#x27; came into use in the 1630s. It is derived from a long line of successive precursors: the Old English &quot; of the mid-13th century; the Old French of the 12th century; and the Latin . The Latin word itself derives from the Ancient Greek ()— ()—literally meaning &quot;(art) of the Muses&quot;. The Muses were nine deities in Ancient Greek mythology who presided over the arts and sciences. They were included in tales by the earliest Western authors, Homer and Hesiod, and eventually came to be associated with music specifically. Over time, Polyhymnia would reside over music more prominently than the other muses. The Latin word was also the originator for both the Spanish and French via spelling and linguistic adjustment, though other European terms were probably loanwords, including the Italian , German , Dutch , Norwegian , Polish and Russian .

The modern Western world usually defines music as an all-encompassing term used to describe diverse genres, styles, and traditions. This is not the case worldwide, and languages such as modern Indonesian (&#x27;) and Shona (&#x27;) have recently adopted words to reflect this universal conception, as they did not have words that fit exactly the Western scope. Before Western contact in East Asia, neither Japan nor China had a single word that encompasses music in a broad sense, but culturally, they often regarded music in such a fashion. The closest word to mean music in Chinese, , shares a character with , meaning joy, and originally referred to all the arts before narrowing in meaning. Africa is too diverse to make firm generalizations, but the musicologist J. H. Kwabena Nketia has emphasized African music&#x27;s often inseparable connection to dance and speech in general. Some African cultures, such as the Songye people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Tiv people of Nigeria, have a strong and broad conception of &#x27;music&#x27; but no corresponding word in their native languages. Other words commonly translated as &#x27;music&#x27; often have more specific meanings in their respective cultures: the Hindi word for music, &#x27;, properly refers to art music, while the many Indigenous languages of the Americas have words for music that refer specifically to song but describe instrumental music regardless. Though the Arabic &#x27; can refer to all music, it is usually used for instrumental and metric music, while &quot;&quot; identifies vocal and improvised music.

== History ==
=== Origins and prehistory ===
It is often debated to what extent the origins of music will ever be understood, and there are competing theories that aim to explain it. Many scholars highlight a relationship between the origin of music and the origin of language, and there is disagreement surrounding whether music developed before, after, or simultaneously with language. A similar source of contention surrounds whether music was the intentional result of natural selection or was a byproduct spandrel of evolution. The earliest influential theory was proposed by Charles Darwin in 1871, who stated that music arose as a form of sexual selection, perhaps via mating calls. Darwin&#x27;s original perspective has been heavily criticized for its inconsistencies with other sexual selection methods, though many scholars in the 21st century have developed and promoted the theory. Other theories include that music arose to assist in organizing labor, improving long-distance communication, benefiting communication with the divine, assisting in community cohesion or as a defense to scare off predators.

Prehistoric music can only be theorized based on findings from paleolithic archaeology sites. The disputed Divje Babe flute, a perforated cave bear femur, is at least 40,000 years old, though there is considerable debate surrounding whether it is truly a musical instrument or an object formed by animals. The earliest objects whose designations as musical instruments are widely accepted are bone flutes from the Swabian Jura, Germany, namely from the Geissenklösterle, Hohle Fels and Vogelherd caves. Dated to the Aurignacian (of the Upper Paleolithic) and used by Early European modern humans, from all three caves there are eight examples, four made from the wing bones of birds and four from mammoth ivory; three of these are near complete. Three flutes from the Geissenklösterle are dated as the oldest, BP.

=== Antiquity ===

The earliest material and representational evidence of Egyptian musical instruments dates to the Predynastic period, but the evidence is more securely attested in the Old Kingdom when harps, flutes and double clarinets were played. Percussion instruments, lyres, and lutes were added to orchestras by the Middle Kingdom. Cymbals frequently accompanied music and dance, much as they still do in Egypt today. Egyptian folk music, including the traditional Sufi rituals, are the closest contemporary music genre to ancient Egyptian music, having preserved many of its features, rhythms and instruments.

The &quot;Hurrian Hymn to Nikkal&quot;, found on clay tablets in the ancient Syrian city of Ugarit, is the oldest surviving notated work of music, dating back to approximately 1400 BCE.

Music was an important part of social and cultural life in ancient Greece, in fact it was one of the main subjects taught to children. Musical education was considered important for the development of an individual&#x27;s soul. Musicians and singers played a prominent role in Greek theater, and those who received a musical education were seen as nobles and in perfect harmony (as can be read in the Republic, Plato). Mixed gender choruses performed for entertainment, celebration, and spiritual ceremonies. Instruments included the double-reed and a plucked string instrument, the &quot;lyre&quot;, principally a special kind called a . Music was an important part of education, and boys were taught music starting at age six. Greek musical literacy created significant musical development. Greek music theory included the Greek musical modes, that eventually became the basis for Western religious and classical music. Later, influences from the Roman Empire, Eastern Europe, and the Byzantine Empire changed Greek music. The Seikilos epitaph is the oldest surviving example of a complete musical composition, including musical notation, from anywhere in the world. The oldest surviving work written about music theory is &quot;Harmonika Stoicheia&quot; by Aristoxenus.

=== Asian cultures ===

Asian music covers a swath of music cultures surveyed in the articles on Arabia, Central Asia, East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. Several have traditions reaching into antiquity.
Indian classical music is one of the oldest musical traditions in the world. Sculptures from the Indus Valley civilization show dance and old musical instruments, like the seven-holed flute. Stringed instruments and drums have been recovered from Harappa and Mohenjo Daro by excavations carried out by Mortimer Wheeler. The Rigveda, an ancient Hindu text, has elements of present Indian music, with musical notation to denote the meter and mode of chanting. Indian classical music (marga) is monophonic, and based on a single melody line or raga rhythmically organized through talas. The poem &quot;Cilappatikaram&quot; provides information about how new scales can be formed by modal shifting of the tonic from an existing scale. Present day Hindi music was influenced by Persian traditional music and Afghan Mughals. Carnatic music, popular in the southern states, is largely devotional; the majority of the songs are addressed to the Hindu deities. There are songs emphasizing love and other social issues.
Indonesian music has been formed since the Bronze Age culture migrated to the Indonesian archipelago in the 2nd-3rd centuries BCE. Indonesian traditional music uses percussion instruments, especially kendang and gongs. Some of them developed elaborate and distinctive instruments, such as the sasando stringed instrument on the island of Rote, the Sundanese angklung, and the complex and sophisticated Javanese and Balinese gamelan orchestras. Indonesia is the home of gong chime, a general term for a set of small, high pitched pot gongs. Gongs are usually placed in order of note, with the boss up on a string held in a low wooden frame. The most popular form of Indonesian music is gamelan, an ensemble of tuned percussion instruments that include metallophones, drums, gongs and spike fiddles along with bamboo suling (like a flute).

Chinese classical music, the traditional art or court music of China, has a history stretching over about 3,000 years. It has its own unique systems of musical notation, as well as musical tuning and pitch, musical instruments and styles or genres. Chinese music is pentatonic-diatonic, having a scale of twelve notes to an octave (5 + 7 = 12) as does European-influenced music.

=== Western classical ===
==== Early music ====

The medieval music era (500 to 1400), which took place during the Middle Ages, started with the introduction of monophonic (single melodic line) chanting into Catholic Church services. Musical notation was used since ancient times in Greek culture, but in the Middle Ages, notation was first introduced by the Catholic Church, so chant melodies could be written down, to facilitate the use of the same melodies for religious music across the Catholic empire. The only European Medieval repertory that has been found, in written form, from before 800 is the monophonic liturgical plainsong chant of the Catholic Church, the central tradition of which was called Gregorian chant. Alongside these traditions of sacred and church music there existed a vibrant tradition of secular song (non-religious songs). Examples of composers from this period are Léonin, Pérotin, Guillaume de Machaut, and Walther von der Vogelweide.

Renaissance music ( to 1600) was more focused on secular themes, such as courtly love. Around 1450, the printing press was invented, which made printed sheet music much less expensive and easier to mass-produce (prior to the invention of the press, all notated music was hand-copied). The increased availability of sheet music spread musical styles quicker and across a larger area. Musicians and singers often worked for the church, courts and towns. Church choirs grew in size, and the church remained an important patron of music. By the middle of the 15th century, composers wrote richly polyphonic sacred music, in which different melody lines were interwoven simultaneously. Prominent composers from this era include Guillaume Du Fay, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Thomas Morley, Orlando di Lasso and Josquin des Prez. As musical activity shifted from the church to aristocratic courts, kings, queens and princes competed for the finest composers. Many leading composers came from the Netherlands, Belgium, and France; they are called the Franco-Flemish composers. They held important positions throughout Europe, especially in Italy. Other countries with vibrant musical activity included Germany, England, and Spain.

==== Common practice period ====
===== Baroque =====

The Baroque era of music took place from 1600 to 1750, coinciding with the flourishing of the Baroque artistic style in Europe. The start of the Baroque era was marked by the penning of the first operas. Polyphonic contrapuntal music (music with separate, simultaneous melodic lines) remained important during this period. German Baroque composers wrote for small ensembles including strings, brass, and woodwinds, as well as for choirs and keyboard instruments such as pipe organ, harpsichord, and clavichord. Musical complexity increased during this time. Several major musical forms were created, some of them which persisted into later periods, seeing further development. These include the fugue, the invention, the sonata, and the concerto. The late Baroque style was polyphonically complex and richly ornamented. Important composers from the Baroque era include Johann Sebastian Bach (&quot;Cello suites&quot;), George Frideric Handel (&quot;Messiah&quot;), Georg Philipp Telemann and Antonio Vivaldi (&quot;The Four Seasons&quot;).

===== Classicism =====

The music of the Classical period (1730 to 1820) aimed to imitate what were seen as the key elements of the art and philosophy of Ancient Greece and Rome: the ideals of balance, proportion and disciplined expression. (Note: the music from the Classical period should not be confused with Classical music in general, a term which refers to Western art music from the 5th century to the 2000s, which includes the Classical period as one of a number of periods). Music from the Classical period has a lighter, clearer and considerably simpler texture than the Baroque music which preceded it. The main style was homophony, where a prominent melody and a subordinate chordal accompaniment part are clearly distinct. Classical instrumental melodies tended to be almost voicelike and singable. New genres were developed, and the fortepiano, the forerunner to the modern piano, replaced the Baroque era harpsichord and pipe organ as the main keyboard instrument (though pipe organ continued to be used in sacred music, such as Masses).

Importance was given to instrumental music. It was dominated by further development of musical forms initially defined in the Baroque period: the sonata, the concerto, and the symphony. Other main kinds were the trio, string quartet, serenade and divertimento. The sonata was the most important and developed form. Although Baroque composers also wrote sonatas, the Classical style of sonata is completely distinct. All of the main instrumental forms of the Classical era, from string quartets to symphonies and concertos, were based on the structure of the sonata. The instruments used chamber music and orchestra became more standardized. In place of the basso continuo group of the Baroque era, which consisted of harpsichord, organ or lute along with a number of bass instruments selected at the discretion of the group leader (e.g., viol, cello, theorbo, serpent), Classical chamber groups used specified, standardized instruments (e.g., a string quartet would be performed by two violins, a viola and a cello). The practice of improvised chord-playing by the continuo keyboardist or lute player, a hallmark of Baroque music, underwent a gradual decline between 1750 and 1800.

One of the most important changes made in the Classical period was the development of public concerts. The aristocracy still played a significant role in the sponsorship of concerts and compositions, but it was now possible for composers to survive without being permanent employees of queens or princes. The increasing popularity of classical music led to a growth in the number and types of orchestras. The expansion of orchestral concerts necessitated the building of large public performance spaces. Symphonic music including symphonies, musical accompaniment to ballet and mixed vocal/instrumental genres, such as opera and oratorio, became more popular.

The best known composers of Classicism are Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Johann Christian Bach, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert. Beethoven and Schubert are also considered to be composers in the later part of the Classical era, as it began to move towards Romanticism.

===== Romanticism =====


Romantic music ( to 1900) from the 19th century had many elements in common with the Romantic styles in literature and painting of the era. Romanticism was an artistic, literary, and intellectual movement was characterized by its emphasis on emotion and individualism as well as glorification of all the past and nature. Romantic music expanded beyond the rigid styles and forms of the Classical era into more passionate, dramatic expressive pieces and songs. Romantic composers such as Wagner and Brahms attempted to increase emotional expression and power in their music to describe deeper truths or human feelings. With symphonic tone poems, composers tried to tell stories and evoke images or landscapes using instrumental music. Some composers promoted nationalistic pride with patriotic orchestral music inspired by folk music. The emotional and expressive qualities of music came to take precedence over tradition.

Romantic composers grew in idiosyncrasy, and went further in the syncretism of exploring different art-forms in a musical context, (such as literature), history (historical figures and legends), or nature itself. Romantic love or longing was a prevalent theme in many works composed during this period. In some cases, the formal structures from the classical period continued to be used (e.g., the sonata form used in string quartets and symphonies), but these forms were expanded and altered. In many cases, new approaches were explored for existing genres, forms, and functions. Also, new forms were created that were deemed better suited to the new subject matter. Composers continued to develop opera and ballet music, exploring new styles and themes.

In the years after 1800, the music developed by Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert introduced a more dramatic, expressive style. In Beethoven&#x27;s case, short motifs, developed organically, came to replace melody as the most significant compositional unit (an example is the distinctive four note figure used in his Fifth Symphony). Later Romantic composers such as Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, Antonín Dvořák, and Gustav Mahler used more unusual chords and more dissonance to create dramatic tension. They generated complex and often much longer musical works. During the late Romantic period, composers explored dramatic chromatic alterations of tonality, such as extended chords and altered chords, which created new sound &quot;colors.&quot; The late 19th century saw a dramatic expansion in the size of the orchestra, and the Industrial Revolution helped to create better instruments, creating a more powerful sound. Public concerts became an important part of well-to-do urban society. It also saw a new diversity in theatre music, including operetta, and musical comedy and other forms of musical theatre.

=== 20th and 21st century ===
In the 19th century, a key way new compositions became known to the public was by the sales of sheet music, which middle class amateur music lovers would perform at home, on their piano or other common instruments, such as the violin. With 20th-century music, the invention of new electric technologies such as radio broadcasting and mass market availability of gramophone records meant sound recordings heard by listeners (on the radio or record player) became the main way to learn about new songs and pieces. There was a vast increase in music listening as the radio gained popularity and phonographs were used to replay and distribute music; anyone with a radio or record player could hear operas, symphonies and big bands in their own living room. During the 19th century, the focus on sheet music had restricted access to new music to middle and upper-class people who could read music and who owned pianos and other instruments. Radios and record players allowed lower-income people, who could not afford an opera or symphony concert ticket, to hear this music. As well, people could hear music from different parts of the country, or even different parts of the world, even if they could not afford to travel to these locations. This helped to spread musical styles.

The focus of art music in the 20th century was characterized by exploration of new rhythms, styles, and sounds. The horrors of World War I influenced many of the arts, including music, and composers began exploring darker, harsher sounds. Traditional music styles such as jazz and folk music were used by composers as a source of ideas for classical music. Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg, and John Cage were influential composers in 20th-century art music. The invention of sound recording and the ability to edit music gave rise to new subgenres of classical music, including the acousmatic and Musique concrète schools of electronic composition. Sound recording was a major influence on the development of popular music genres, because it enabled recordings of songs and bands to be widely distributed. The introduction of the multitrack recording system had a major influence on rock music, because it could do more than record a band&#x27;s performance. Using a multitrack system, a band and their music producer could overdub many layers of instrument tracks and vocals, creating new sounds that would not be possible in a live performance.

Jazz evolved and became an important genre of music over the course of the 20th century, and during the second half, rock music did the same. Jazz is an American musical artform that originated in the beginning of the 20th century, in African American communities in the Southern United States from a confluence of African and European music traditions. The style&#x27;s West African pedigree is evident in its use of blue notes, improvisation, polyrhythms, syncopation, and the swung note.

Rock music is a genre of popular music that developed in the 1950s from rock and roll, rockabilly, blues, and country music. The sound of rock often revolves around the electric or acoustic guitar, and it uses a strong back beat laid down by a rhythm section. Along with the guitar or keyboards, saxophone and blues-style harmonica are used as soloing instruments. In its &quot;purest form&quot;, it &quot;has three chords, a strong, insistent back beat, and a catchy melody.&quot; The traditional rhythm section for popular music is rhythm guitar, electric bass guitar, drums. Some bands have keyboard instruments such as organ, piano, or, since the 1970s, analog synthesizers. In the 1980s, pop musicians began using digital synthesizers, such as the DX-7 synthesizer, electronic drum machines such as the TR-808 and synth bass devices (such as the TB-303) or synth bass keyboards. In the 1990s, an increasingly large range of computerized hardware musical devices and instruments and software (e.g. digital audio workstations) were used. In the 2020s, soft synths and computer music apps make it possible for bedroom producers to create and record types of music, such as electronic dance music, in their home, adding sampled and digital instruments and editing the recording digitally. In the 1990s, bands in genres such as nu metal began including DJs in their bands. DJs create music by manipulating recorded music, using a DJ mixer.

== Creation ==
=== Composition ===


&quot;Composition&quot; is the act or practice of creating a song, an instrumental music piece, a work with both singing and instruments, or another type of music. In many cultures, including Western classical music, the act of composing also includes the creation of music notation, such as a sheet music &quot;score&quot;, which is then performed by the composer or by other singers or musicians. In popular music and traditional music, the act of composing, which is typically called songwriting, may involve the creation of a basic outline of the song, called the lead sheet, which sets out the melody, lyrics and chord progression. In classical music, the composer typically orchestrates his or her own compositions, but in musical theatre and in pop music, songwriters may hire an arranger to do the orchestration. In some cases, a songwriter may not use notation at all, and instead, compose the song in her mind and then play or record it from memory. In jazz and popular music, notable recordings by influential performers are given the weight that written scores play in classical music.

Even when music is notated relatively precisely, as in classical music, there are many decisions that a performer has to make, because notation does not specify all of the elements of music precisely. The process of deciding how to perform music that has been previously composed and notated is termed &quot;interpretation&quot;. Different performers&#x27; interpretations of the same work of music can vary widely, in terms of the tempos that are chosen and the playing or singing style or phrasing of the melodies. Composers and songwriters who present their own music are interpreting their songs, just as much as those who perform the music of others. The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice, whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer.

Although a musical composition often uses musical notation and has a single author, this is not always the case. A work of music can have multiple composers, which often occurs in popular music when a band collaborates to write a song, or in musical theatre, when one person writes the melodies, a second person writes the lyrics, and a third person orchestrates the songs. In some styles of music, such as the blues, a composer/songwriter may create, perform and record new songs or pieces without ever writing them down in music notation. A piece of music can also be composed with words, images, or computer programs that explain or notate how the singer or musician should create musical sounds. Examples range from avant-garde music that uses graphic notation, to text compositions such as &quot;Aus den sieben Tagen&quot;, to computer programs that select sounds for musical pieces. Music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music, and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century, such as John Cage, Morton Feldman, and Witold Lutosławski. A commonly known example of chance-based music is the sound of wind chimes jingling in a breeze.

The study of composition has traditionally been dominated by examination of methods and practice of Western classical music, but the definition of composition is broad enough to include the creation of popular music and traditional music songs and instrumental pieces as well as spontaneously improvised works like those of free jazz performers and African percussionists such as Ewe drummers.

=== Performance ===

Performance is the physical expression of music, which occurs when a song is sung or piano piece, guitar melody, symphony, drum beat or other musical part is played. In classical music, a work is written in music notation by a composer and then performed once the composer is satisfied with its structure and instrumentation. However, as it gets performed, the interpretation of a song or piece can evolve and change. In classical music, instrumental performers, singers or conductors may gradually make changes to the phrasing or tempo of a piece. In popular and traditional music, the performers have more freedom to make changes to the form of a song or piece. As such, in popular and traditional music styles, even when a band plays a cover song, they can make changes such as adding a guitar solo or inserting an introduction.

A performance can either be planned out and rehearsed (practiced)—which is the norm in classical music, jazz big bands, and many popular music styles–or improvised over a chord progression (a sequence of chords), which is the norm in small jazz and blues groups. Rehearsals of orchestras, concert bands and choirs are led by a conductor. Rock, blues and jazz bands are usually led by the bandleader. A rehearsal is a structured repetition of a song or piece by the performers until it can be sung or played correctly and, if it is a song or piece for more than one musician, until the parts are together from a rhythmic and tuning perspective.

Many cultures have strong traditions of solo performance (in which one singer or instrumentalist performs), such as in Indian classical music, and in the Western art-music tradition. Other cultures, such as in Bali, include strong traditions of group performance. All cultures include a mixture of both, and performance may range from improvised solo playing to highly planned and organized performances such as the modern classical concert, religious processions, classical music festivals or music competitions. Chamber music, which is music for a small ensemble with only one or a few of each type of instrument, is often seen as more intimate than large symphonic works.

=== Improvisation ===

Musical improvisation is the creation of spontaneous music, often within (or based on) a pre-existing harmonic framework, chord progression, or riffs. Improvisers use the notes of the chord, various scales that are associated with each chord, and chromatic ornaments and passing tones which may be neither chord tones nor from the typical scales associated with a chord. Musical improvisation can be done with or without preparation. Improvisation is a major part of some types of music, such as blues, jazz, and jazz fusion, in which instrumental performers improvise solos, melody lines, and accompaniment parts.

In the Western art music tradition, improvisation was an important skill during the Baroque era and during the Classical era. In the Baroque era, performers improvised ornaments, and basso continuo keyboard players improvised chord voicings based on figured bass notation. As well, the top soloists were expected to be able to improvise pieces such as preludes. In the Classical era, solo performers and singers improvised virtuoso cadenzas during concerts.

However, in the 20th and early 21st century, as &quot;common practice&quot; Western art music performance became institutionalized in symphony orchestras, opera houses, and ballets, improvisation has played a smaller role, as more and more music was notated in scores and parts for musicians to play. At the same time, some 20th and 21st century art music composers have increasingly included improvisation in their creative work. In Indian classical music, improvisation is a core component and an essential criterion of performances.

== Art and entertainment ==

Music is composed and performed for many purposes, ranging from aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, or as an entertainment product for the marketplace. When music was only available through sheet music scores, such as during the Classical and Romantic eras, music lovers would buy the sheet music of their favourite pieces and songs so that they could perform them at home on the piano. With the advent of the phonograph, records of popular songs, rather than sheet music became the dominant way that music lovers would enjoy their favourite songs. With the advent of home tape recorders in the 1980s and digital music in the 1990s, music lovers could make tapes or playlists of favourite songs and take them with them on a portable cassette player or MP3 player. Some music lovers create mix tapes of favourite songs, which serve as a &quot;self-portrait, a gesture of friendship, prescription for an ideal party... [and] an environment consisting solely of what is most ardently loved&quot;.

Amateur musicians can compose or perform music for their own pleasure and derive income elsewhere. Professional musicians are employed by institutions and organisations, including armed forces (in marching bands, concert bands and popular music groups), religious institutions, symphony orchestras, broadcasting or film production companies, and music schools. Professional musicians sometimes work as freelancers or session musicians, seeking contracts and engagements in a variety of settings. There are often many links between amateur and professional musicians. Beginning amateur musicians take lessons with professional musicians. In community settings, advanced amateur musicians perform with professional musicians in a variety of ensembles such as community concert bands and community orchestras.

A distinction is often made between music performed for a live audience and music that is performed in a studio so that it can be recorded and distributed through the music retail system or the broadcasting system. However, there are also many cases where a live performance in front of an audience is also recorded and distributed. Live concert recordings are popular in both classical music and in popular music forms such as rock, where illegally taped live concerts are prized by music lovers. In the jam band scene, live, improvised jam sessions are preferred to studio recordings.

=== Notation ===
Music notation typically means the written expression of music notes and rhythms on paper using symbols. When music is written down, the pitches and rhythm of the music, such as the notes of a melody, are notated. Music notation often provides instructions on how to perform the music. For example, the sheet music for a song may state the song is a &quot;slow blues&quot; or a &quot;fast swing&quot;, which indicates the tempo and the genre. To read notation, a person must have an understanding of music theory, harmony and the performance practice associated with a particular song or piece&#x27;s genre.

Written notation varies with the style and period of music. Nowadays, notated music is produced as sheet music or, for individuals with computer scorewriter programs, as an image on a computer screen. In ancient times, music notation was put onto stone or clay tablets. To perform music from notation, a singer or instrumentalist requires an understanding of the rhythmic and pitch elements embodied in the symbols and the performance practice that is associated with a piece of music or genre. In genres requiring musical improvisation, the performer often plays from music where only the chord changes and form of the song are written, requiring the performer to have a great understanding of the music&#x27;s structure, harmony and the styles of a particular genre e.g., jazz or country music.

In Western art music, the most common types of written notation are scores, which include all the music parts of an ensemble piece, and parts, which are the music notation for the individual performers or singers. In popular music, jazz, and blues, the standard musical notation is the lead sheet, which notates the melody, chords, lyrics (if it is a vocal piece), and structure of the music. Fake books are also used in jazz; they may consist of lead sheets or simply chord charts, which permit rhythm section members to improvise an accompaniment part to jazz songs. Scores and parts are also used in popular music and jazz, particularly in large ensembles such as jazz &quot;big bands.&quot; In popular music, guitarists and electric bass players often read music notated in tablature (often abbreviated as &quot;tab&quot;), which indicates the location of the notes to be played on the instrument using a diagram of the guitar or bass fingerboard. Tablature was used in the Baroque era to notate music for the lute, a stringed, fretted instrument.

=== Oral and aural tradition ===
Many types of music, such as traditional blues and folk music were not written down in sheet music; instead, they were originally preserved in the memory of performers, and the songs were handed down orally, from one musician or singer to another, or aurally, in which a performer learns a song &quot;by ear&quot;. When the composer of a song or piece is no longer known, this music is often classified as &quot;traditional&quot; or as a &quot;folk song&quot;. Different musical traditions have different attitudes towards how and where to make changes to the original source material, from quite strict, to those that demand improvisation or modification to the music. A culture&#x27;s history and stories may also be passed on by ear through song.

== Elements ==

Music has many different fundamentals or elements. Depending on the definition of &quot;element&quot; being used, these can include pitch, beat or pulse, tempo, rhythm, melody, harmony, texture, style, allocation of voices, timbre or color, dynamics, expression, articulation, form, and structure. The elements of music feature prominently in the music curriculums of Australia, the UK, and the US. All three curriculums identify pitch, dynamics, timbre, and texture as elements, but the other identified elements of music are far from universally agreed upon. Below is a list of the three official versions of the &quot;elements of music&quot;:
* Australia: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics and expression, rhythm, form and structure.
* UK: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, duration, tempo, structure.
* USA: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, rhythm, form, harmony, style/articulation.

In relation to the UK curriculum, in 2013 the term: &quot;appropriate musical notations&quot; was added to their list of elements and the title of the list was changed from the &quot;elements of music&quot; to the &quot;inter-related dimensions of music&quot;. The inter-related dimensions of music are listed as: pitch, duration, dynamics, tempo, timbre, texture, structure, and appropriate musical notations.

The phrase &quot;the elements of music&quot; is used in a number of different contexts. The two most common contexts can be differentiated by describing them as the &quot;rudimentary elements of music&quot; and the &quot;perceptual elements of music&quot;.

=== Pitch ===

Pitch is an aspect of a sound that we can hear, reflecting whether one musical sound, note, or tone is &quot;higher&quot; or &quot;lower&quot; than another musical sound, note, or tone. We can talk about the highness or lowness of pitch in the more general sense, such as the way a listener hears a piercingly high piccolo note or whistling tone as higher in pitch than a deep thump of a bass drum. We also talk about pitch in the precise sense associated with musical melodies, basslines and chords. Precise pitch can only be determined in sounds that have a frequency that is clear and stable enough to distinguish from noise. For example, it is much easier for listeners to discern the pitch of a single note played on a piano than to try to discern the pitch of a crash cymbal that is struck.

=== Melody ===
A melody, also called a &quot;tune&quot;, is a series of pitches (notes) sounding in succession (one after the other), often in a rising and falling pattern. The notes of a melody are typically created using pitch systems such as scales or modes. Melodies also often contain notes from the chords used in the song. The melodies in simple folk songs and traditional songs may use only the notes of a single scale, the scale associated with the tonic note or key of a given song. For example, a folk song in the key of C (also referred to as C major) may have a melody that uses only the notes of the C major scale (the individual notes C, D, E, F, G, A, B, and C; these are the &quot;white notes&quot; on a piano keyboard. On the other hand, Bebop-era jazz from the 1940s and contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries may use melodies with many chromatic notes (i.e., notes in addition to the notes of the major scale; on a piano, a chromatic scale would include all the notes on the keyboard, including the &quot;white notes&quot; and &quot;black notes&quot; and unusual scales, such as the whole tone scale (a whole tone scale in the key of C would contain the notes C, D, E, F, G and A). A low musical line played by bass instruments, such as double bass, electric bass, or tuba, is called a bassline.

=== Harmony ===
Harmony refers to the &quot;vertical&quot; sounds of pitches in music, which means pitches that are played or sung together at the same time creates a chord. Usually, this means the notes are played at the same time, although harmony may also be implied by a melody that outlines a harmonic structure (i.e., by using melody notes that are played one after the other, outlining the notes of a chord). In music written using the system of major-minor tonality (&quot;keys&quot;), which includes most classical music written from 1600 to 1900 and most Western pop, rock, and traditional music, the key of a piece determines the &quot;home note&quot; or tonic to which the piece generally resolves, and the character (e.g. major or minor) of the scale in use. Simple classical pieces and many pop and traditional music songs are written so that all the music is in a single key. More complex Classical, pop, and traditional music songs and pieces may have two keys (and in some cases three or more keys). Classical music from the Romantic era (written from about 1820–1900) often contains multiple keys, as does jazz, especially Bebop jazz from the 1940s, in which the key or &quot;home note&quot; of a song may change every four bars or even every two bars.

=== Rhythm ===

Rhythm is the arrangement of sounds and silences in time. Meter animates time in regular pulse groupings, called measures or bars, which in Western classical, popular, and traditional music often group notes in sets of two (e.g., 2/4 time), three (e.g., 3/4 time, also known as Waltz time, or 3/8 time), or four (e.g., 4/4 time). Meters are made easier to hear because songs and pieces often (but not always) place an emphasis on the first beat of each grouping. Notable exceptions exist, such as the backbeat used in much Western pop and rock, in which a song that uses a measure that consists of four beats (called 4/4 time or common time) will have accents on beats two and four, which are typically performed by the drummer on the snare drum, a loud and distinctive-sounding percussion instrument. In pop and rock, the rhythm parts of a song are played by the rhythm section, which includes chord-playing instruments (e.g., electric guitar, acoustic guitar, piano, or other keyboard instruments), a bass instrument (typically electric bass or for some styles such as jazz and bluegrass, double bass) and a drum kit player.

=== Texture ===

Musical texture is the overall sound of a piece of music or song. The texture of a piece or song is determined by how the melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials are combined in a composition, thus determining the overall nature of the sound in a piece. Texture is often described in regard to the density, or thickness, and range, or width, between lowest and highest pitches, in relative terms as well as more specifically distinguished according to the number of voices, or parts, and the relationship between these voices (see common types below). For example, a thick texture contains many &#x27;layers&#x27; of instruments. One layer can be a string section or another brass. The thickness is affected by the amount and the richness of the instruments. Texture is commonly described according to the number of and relationship between parts or lines of music:
* monophony: a single melody (or &quot;tune&quot;) with neither instrumental accompaniment nor a harmony part. A mother singing a lullaby to her baby would be an example.
* heterophony: two or more instruments or singers playing/singing the same melody, but with each performer slightly varying the rhythm or speed of the melody or adding different ornaments to the melody. Two bluegrass fiddlers playing the same traditional fiddle tune together will typically each vary the melody by some degree and each add different ornaments.
* polyphony: multiple independent melody lines that interweave together, which are sung or played at the same time. Choral music written in the Renaissance music era was typically written in this style. A round, which is a song such as &quot;Row, Row, Row Your Boat&quot;, which different groups of singers all start to sing at a different time, is an example of polyphony.
* homophony: a clear melody supported by chordal accompaniment. Most Western popular music songs from the 19th century onward are written in this texture.

Music that contains a large number of independent parts (e.g., a double concerto accompanied by 100 orchestral instruments with many interweaving melodic lines) is generally said to have a &quot;thicker&quot; or &quot;denser&quot; texture than a work with few parts (e.g., a solo flute melody accompanied by a single cello).

=== Timbre ===
Timbre, sometimes called &quot;color&quot; or &quot;tone color&quot; is the quality or sound of a voice or instrument. Timbre is what makes a particular musical sound different from another, even when they have the same pitch and loudness. For example, a 440 Hz A note sounds different when it is played on oboe, piano, violin, or electric guitar. Even if different players of the same instrument play the same note, their notes might sound different due to differences in instrumental technique (e.g., different embouchures), different types of accessories (e.g., mouthpieces for brass players, reeds for oboe and bassoon players) or strings made out of different materials for string players (e.g., gut strings versus steel strings). Even two instrumentalists playing the same note on the same instrument (one after the other) may sound different due to different ways of playing the instrument (e.g., two string players might hold the bow differently).

The physical characteristics of sound that determine the perception of timbre include the spectrum, envelope, and overtones of a note or musical sound. For electric instruments developed in the 20th century, such as electric guitar, electric bass and electric piano, the performer can also change the tone by adjusting equalizer controls, tone controls on the instrument, and by using electronic effects units such as distortion pedals. The tone of the electric Hammond organ is controlled by adjusting drawbars.

=== Expression ===
Expressive qualities are those elements in music that create change in music without changing the main pitches or substantially changing the rhythms of the melody and its accompaniment. Performers, including singers and instrumentalists, can add musical expression to a song or piece by adding phrasing, by adding effects such as vibrato (with voice and some instruments, such as guitar, violin, brass instruments, and woodwinds), dynamics (the loudness or softness of piece or a section of it), tempo fluctuations (e.g., ritardando or accelerando, which are, respectively slowing down and speeding up the tempo), by adding pauses or fermatas on a cadence, and by changing the articulation of the notes (e.g., making notes more pronounced or accented, by making notes more legato, which means smoothly connected, or by making notes shorter).

Expression is achieved through the manipulation of pitch (such as inflection, vibrato, slides etc.), volume (dynamics, accent, tremolo etc.), duration (tempo fluctuations, rhythmic changes, changing note duration such as with legato and staccato, etc.), timbre (e.g. changing vocal timbre from a light to a resonant voice) and sometimes even texture (e.g. doubling the bass note for a richer effect in a piano piece). Expression therefore can be seen as a manipulation of all elements to convey &quot;an indication of mood, spirit, character etc.&quot; and as such cannot be included as a unique perceptual element of music, although it can be considered an important rudimentary element of music.

=== Form ===
In music, form describes the overall structure or plan of a song or piece of music, and it describes the layout of a composition as divided into sections. In the early 20th century, Tin Pan Alley songs and Broadway musical songs were often in AABA thirty-two-bar form, in which the A sections repeated the same eight bar melody (with variation) and the B section provided a contrasting melody or harmony for eight bars. From the 1960s onward, Western pop and rock songs are often in verse-chorus form, which comprises a sequence of verse and chorus (&quot;refrain&quot;) sections, with new lyrics for most verses and repeating lyrics for the choruses. Popular music often makes use of strophic form, sometimes in conjunction with the twelve bar blues.

In the tenth edition of &quot;The Oxford Companion to Music&quot;, Percy Scholes defines musical form as &quot;a series of strategies designed to find a successful mean between the opposite extremes of unrelieved repetition and unrelieved alteration.&quot; Examples of common forms of Western music include the fugue, the invention, sonata-allegro, canon, strophic, theme and variations, and rondo.

Scholes states that European classical music had only six stand-alone forms: simple binary, simple ternary, compound binary, rondo, air with variations, and fugue (although musicologist Alfred Mann emphasized that the fugue is primarily a method of composition that has sometimes taken on certain structural conventions.)

Where a piece cannot readily be broken into sectional units (though it might borrow some form from a poem, story or programme), it is said to be through-composed. Such is often the case with a fantasia, prelude, rhapsody, etude (or study), symphonic poem, Bagatelle, impromptu or similar composition. Professor Charles Keil classified forms and formal detail as &quot;sectional, developmental, or variational.&quot;

== Philosophy ==
The philosophy of music is the study of fundamental questions regarding music and has connections with questions in metaphysics and aesthetics. Questions include:
* What is the definition of music? (What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for classifying something as music?)
* What is the relationship between music and mind?
* What does music history reveal to us about the world?
* What is the connection between music and emotions?
* What is meaning in relation to music?

In ancient times, such as with the Ancient Greeks, the aesthetics of music explored the mathematical and cosmological dimensions of rhythmic and harmonic organization. In the 18th century, focus shifted to the experience of hearing music, and thus to questions about its beauty and human enjoyment (&quot;plaisir&quot; and &quot;jouissance&quot;) of music. The origin of this philosophic shift is sometimes attributed to Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten in the 18th century, followed by Immanuel Kant. Through their writing, the ancient term &#x27;aesthetics&#x27;, meaning sensory perception, received its present-day connotation. In the 2000s, philosophers have tended to emphasize issues besides beauty and enjoyment. For example, music&#x27;s capacity to express emotion has been foregrounded.

In the 20th century, important contributions were made by Peter Kivy, Jerrold Levinson, Roger Scruton, and Stephen Davies. However, many musicians, music critics, and other non-philosophers have contributed to the aesthetics of music. In the 19th century, a significant debate arose between Eduard Hanslick, a music critic and musicologist, and composer Richard Wagner regarding whether music can express meaning. Harry Partch and some other musicologists, such as Kyle Gann, have studied and tried to popularize microtonal music and the usage of alternate musical scales. Modern composers like La Monte Young, Rhys Chatham and Glenn Branca paid much attention to a scale called just intonation.

It is often thought that music has the ability to affect our emotions, intellect, and psychology; it can assuage our loneliness or incite our passions. The philosopher Plato suggests in &quot;The Republic&quot; that music has a direct effect on the soul. Therefore, he proposes that in the ideal regime music would be closely regulated by the state (Book VII). In Ancient China, the philosopher Confucius believed that music and rituals or rites are interconnected and harmonious with nature; he stated that music was the harmonization of heaven and earth, while the order was brought by the rites order, making them extremely crucial functions in society.

== Psychology ==

Modern music psychology aims to explain and understand musical behavior and experience. Research in this field and its subfields are primarily empirical; their knowledge tends to advance on the basis of interpretations of data collected by systematic observation of and interaction with human participants. In addition to its focus on fundamental perceptions and cognitive processes, music psychology is a field of research with practical relevance for many areas, including music performance, composition, education, criticism, and therapy, as well as investigations of human aptitude, skill, intelligence, creativity, and social behavior.

=== Neuroscience ===

Cognitive neuroscience of music is the scientific study of brain-based mechanisms involved in the cognitive processes underlying music. These behaviours include music listening, performing, composing, reading, writing, and ancillary activities. It also is increasingly concerned with the brain basis for musical aesthetics and musical emotion. The field is distinguished by its reliance on direct observations of the brain, using such techniques as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), magnetoencephalography (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG), and positron emission tomography (PET).

=== Cognitive musicology ===

Cognitive musicology is a branch of cognitive science concerned with computationally modeling musical knowledge with the goal of understanding both music and cognition. The use of computer models provides an exacting, interactive medium in which to formulate and test theories and has roots in artificial intelligence and cognitive science.

Cognitive musicology investigates topics such as the parallels between language and music in the brain. Research often includes biologically inspired models of computation, such as neural networks and evolutionary programs. This field seeks to model how musical knowledge is represented, stored, perceived, performed, and generated. By using a well-structured computer environment, the systematic structures of these cognitive phenomena can be investigated.

=== Psychoacoustics ===

Psychoacoustics is the scientific study of sound perception. More specifically, it is the branch of science studying the psychological and physiological responses associated with sound (including speech and music). It can be further categorized as a branch of psychophysics.

=== Evolutionary musicology ===

Evolutionary musicology concerns the &quot;origins of music, the question of animal song, selection pressures underlying music evolution&quot;, and &quot;music evolution and human evolution&quot;. It seeks to understand music perception and activity in the context of evolutionary theory. Charles Darwin speculated that music may have held an adaptive advantage and functioned as a protolanguage, a view which has spawned several competing theories of music evolution. An alternate view sees music as a by-product of linguistic evolution; a type of &quot;auditory cheesecake&quot; that pleases the senses without providing any adaptive function. This view has been directly countered by numerous music researchers.

=== Cultural effects ===
An individual&#x27;s culture or ethnicity plays a role in their music cognition, including their preferences, emotional reaction, and musical memory. Musical preferences are biased toward culturally familiar musical traditions beginning in infancy, and adults&#x27; classification of the emotion of a musical piece depends on both culturally specific and universal structural features. Additionally, individuals&#x27; musical memory abilities are greater for culturally familiar music than for culturally unfamiliar music.

=== Perceptual ===
Since the emergence of the study of psychoacoustics in the 1930s, most lists of elements of music have related more to how we &quot;hear&quot; music than how we learn to play it or study it. C.E. Seashore, in his book &quot;Psychology of Music&quot;, identified four &quot;psychological attributes of sound&quot;. These were: &quot;pitch, loudness, time, and timbre&quot; (p. 3). He did not call them the &quot;elements of music&quot; but referred to them as &quot;elemental components&quot; (p. 2). Nonetheless, these elemental components link precisely with four of the most common musical elements: &quot;Pitch&quot; and &quot;timbre&quot; match exactly, &quot;loudness&quot; links with dynamics, and &quot;time&quot; links with the time-based elements of rhythm, duration, and tempo. This usage of the phrase &quot;the elements of music&quot; links more closely with &quot;Webster&#x27;s New 20th Century Dictionary&quot; definition of an element as: &quot;a substance which cannot be divided into a simpler form by known methods&quot; and educational institutions&#x27; lists of elements generally align with this definition as well.

Although writers of lists of &quot;rudimentary elements of music&quot; can vary their lists depending on their personal (or institutional) priorities, the perceptual elements of music should consist of an established (or proven) list of discrete elements which can be independently manipulated to achieve an intended musical effect. It seems at this stage that there is still research to be done in this area.

A slightly different way of approaching the identification of the elements of music, is to identify the &quot;elements of sound&quot; as: pitch, duration, loudness, timbre, sonic texture and spatial location, and then to define the &quot;elements of music&quot; as: sound, structure, and artistic intent.

== Sociological aspects ==


Ethnographic studies demonstrate that music is a participatory, community-based activity. Music is experienced by individuals in a range of social settings from being alone, to attending a large concert, forming a music community, which cannot be understood as a function of individual will or accident; it includes both commercial and non-commercial participants with a shared set of common values. Musical performances take different forms in different cultures and socioeconomic milieus.

In Europe and North America, there was a divide between what types of music were viewed as &quot;high culture&quot; and &quot;low culture.&quot; &quot;High culture&quot; included Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and modern-era symphonies, concertos, and solo works, and are typically heard in formal concerts in concert halls and churches, with the audience sitting quietly. Other types of music—including jazz, blues, soul, and country—are often performed in bars, nightclubs, and theatres, where the audience may drink, dance and cheer. Until the 20th century, the division between &quot;high&quot; and &quot;low&quot; musical forms was accepted as a valid distinction that separated out &quot;art music&quot;, from popular music heard in bars and dance halls. Musicologists, such as David Brackett, note a &quot;redrawing of high-low cultural-aesthetic boundaries&quot; in the 20th century. And, &quot;when industry and public discourses link categories of music with categories of people, they tend to conflate stereotypes with actual listening communities.&quot; Stereotypes can be based on socioeconomic standing, or social class, of the performers or audience of the different types of music.

When composers introduce styles of music that break with convention, there can be strong resistance from academics and others. Late-period Beethoven string quartets, Stravinsky ballet scores, serialism, bebop, hip hop, punk rock, and electronica were controversial and criticised, when they were first introduced. Such themes are examined in the sociology of music, sometimes called sociomusicology, which is pursued in departments of sociology, media studies, or music, and is closely related to ethnomusicology.

=== Role of women ===

Women have played a major role in music throughout history, as composers, songwriters, instrumental performers, singers, conductors, music scholars, music educators, music critics/music journalists and other musical professions. In the 2010s, while women comprise a significant proportion of popular music and classical music singers, and a significant proportion of songwriters (many of them being singer-songwriters), there are few women record producers, rock critics and rock instrumentalists. Although there have been a huge number of women composers in classical music, from the medieval period to the present day, women composers are significantly underrepresented in the commonly performed classical music repertoire, music history textbooks and music encyclopedias; for example, in the &quot;Concise Oxford History of Music&quot;, Clara Schumann is one of the few female composers who is mentioned.

Women comprise a significant proportion of instrumental soloists in classical music and the percentage of women in orchestras is increasing. A 2015 article on concerto soloists in major Canadian orchestras, however, indicated that 84% of the soloists with the Montreal Symphony Orchestra were men. In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the top-ranked Vienna Philharmonic orchestra. Women are less common as instrumental players in popular music genres such as rock and heavy metal, although there have been a number of notable female instrumentalists and all-female bands. Women are particularly underrepresented in extreme metal genres. In the 1960s pop-music scene, &quot;[l]ike most aspects of the...music business, [in the 1960s,] songwriting was a male-dominated field. Though there were plenty of female singers on the radio, women ...were primarily seen as consumers:... Singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument, writing songs, or producing records simply wasn&#x27;t done.&quot; Young women &quot;...were not socialized to see themselves as people who create [music].&quot;

Women are also underrepresented in orchestral conducting, music criticism/music journalism, music producing, and sound engineering. While women were discouraged from composing in the 19th century, and there are few women musicologists, women became involved in music education &quot;...to such a degree that women dominated [this field] during the later half of the 19th century and well into the 20th century.&quot;

According to Jessica Duchen, a music writer for London&#x27;s &quot;The Independent&quot;, women musicians in classical music are &quot;...too often judged for their appearances, rather than their talent&quot; and they face pressure &quot;...to look sexy onstage and in photos.&quot; Duchen states that while &quot;[t]here are women musicians who refuse to play on their looks...the ones who do tend to be more materially successful.&quot; According to the UK&#x27;s Radio 3 editor, Edwina Wolstencroft, the music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles, but women are much less likely to have positions of authority, such as being the conductor of an orchestra. In popular music, while there are many women singers recording songs, there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers, the individuals who direct and manage the recording process. One of the most recorded artists is Asha Bhosle, an Indian singer best known as a playback singer in Hindi cinema.

== Media and technology ==
Since the 20th century, live music can be broadcast over the radio, television or the Internet, or recorded and listened to on a CD player or MP3 player.

In the early 20th century (in the late 1920s), as talking pictures emerged in the early 20th century, with their prerecorded musical tracks, an increasing number of moviehouse orchestra musicians found themselves out of work. During the 1920s, live musical performances by orchestras, pianists, and theater organists were common at first-run theaters. With the coming of the talking motion pictures, those featured performances were largely eliminated. The American Federation of Musicians (AFM) took out newspaper advertisements protesting the replacement of live musicians with mechanical playing devices. One 1929 ad that appeared in the &quot;Pittsburgh Press&quot; features an image of a can labeled &quot;Canned Music / Big Noise Brand / Guaranteed to Produce No Intellectual or Emotional Reaction Whatever&quot;

Sometimes, live performances incorporate prerecorded sounds. For example, a disc jockey uses disc records for scratching, and some 20th-century works have a solo for an instrument or voice that is performed along with music that is prerecorded onto a tape. Some pop bands use recorded backing tracks. Computers and many keyboards can be programmed to produce and play Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) music. Audiences can also &quot;become&quot; performers by participating in karaoke, an activity of Japanese origin centered on a device that plays voice-eliminated versions of well-known songs. Most karaoke machines also have video screens that show lyrics to songs being performed; performers can follow the lyrics as they sing over the instrumental tracks.

The advent of the Internet and widespread high-speed broadband access has transformed the experience of music, partly through the increased ease of access to recordings of music via streaming video and vastly increased choice of music for consumers. Another effect of the Internet arose with online communities and social media websites like YouTube and Facebook, a social networking service. These sites make it easier for aspiring singers and amateur bands to distribute videos of their songs, connect with other musicians, and gain audience interest. Professional musicians also use YouTube as a free publisher of promotional material. YouTube users, for example, no longer only download and listen to MP3s, but also actively create their own. According to Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams, in their book &quot;Wikinomics&quot;, there has been a shift from a traditional consumer role to what they call a &quot;prosumer&quot; role, a consumer who both creates content and consumes. Manifestations of this in music include the production of mashes, remixes, and music videos by fans.

== Education ==
=== Non-institutional ===

The incorporation of music into general education from preschool to post secondary education, is common in North America and Europe. Involvement in playing and singing music is thought to teach basic skills such as concentration, counting, listening, and cooperation while also promoting understanding of language, improving the ability to recall information, and creating an environment more conducive to learning in other areas. In elementary schools, children often learn to play instruments such as the recorder, sing in small choirs, and learn about the history of Western art music and traditional music. Some elementary school children also learn about popular music styles. In religious schools, children sing hymns and other religious music. In secondary schools (and less commonly in elementary schools), students may have the opportunity to perform in some types of musical ensembles, such as choirs (a group of singers), marching bands, concert bands, jazz bands, or orchestras. In some school systems, music lessons on how to play instruments may be provided. Some students also take private music lessons after school with a singing teacher or instrument teacher. Amateur musicians typically learn basic musical rudiments (e.g., learning about musical notation for musical scales and rhythms) and beginner- to intermediate-level singing or instrument-playing techniques.

At the university level, students in most arts and humanities programs can receive credit for taking a few music courses, which typically take the form of an overview course on the history of music, or a music appreciation course that focuses on listening to music and learning about different musical styles. In addition, most North American and European universities have some types of musical ensembles that students in arts and humanities are able to participate in, such as choirs, marching bands, concert bands, or orchestras. The study of Western art music is increasingly common outside of North America and Europe, such as the Indonesian Institute of the Arts in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, or the classical music programs that are available in Asian countries such as South Korea, Japan, and China. At the same time, Western universities and colleges are widening their curriculum to include music of non-Western cultures, such as the music of Africa or Bali (e.g. Gamelan music).

=== Institutional ===

People aiming to become professional musicians, singers, composers, songwriters, music teachers and practitioners of other music-related professions such as music history professors, sound engineers, and so on study in specialized post-secondary programs offered by colleges, universities and music conservatories. Some institutions that train individuals for careers in music offer training in a wide range of professions, as is the case with many of the top U.S. universities, which offer degrees in music performance (including singing and playing instruments), music history, music theory, music composition, music education (for individuals aiming to become elementary or high school music teachers) and, in some cases, conducting. On the other hand, some small colleges may only offer training in a single profession (e.g., sound recording).

While most university and conservatory music programs focus on training students in classical music, there are universities and colleges that train musicians for careers as jazz or popular music musicians and composers, with notable U.S. examples including the Manhattan School of Music and the Berklee College of Music. Two schools in Canada which offer professional jazz training are McGill University and Humber College. Individuals aiming at careers in some types of music, such as heavy metal music, country music or blues are unlikely to become professionals by completing degrees or diplomas. Instead, they typically learn about their style of music by singing or playing in bands (often beginning in amateur bands, cover bands and tribute bands), studying recordings on DVD and the Internet, and working with already-established professionals in their style of music, either through informal mentoring or regular music lessons. Since the 2000s, the increasing popularity and availability of Internet forums and YouTube &quot;how-to&quot; videos have enabled singers and musicians from metal, blues and similar genres to improve their skills. Many pop, rock and country singers train informally with vocal coaches and voice teachers.

== Academic study ==
=== Musicology ===

Musicology, the academic study of music, is studied in universities and music conservatories. The earliest definitions from the 19th century defined three sub-disciplines of musicology: systematic musicology, historical musicology, and comparative musicology or ethnomusicology. In 2010-era scholarship, one is more likely to encounter a division into music theory, music history, and ethnomusicology. Research in musicology has often been enriched by cross-disciplinary work, for example in the field of psychoacoustics. The study of music of non-Western cultures, and cultural study of music, is called ethnomusicology. Students can pursue study of musicology, ethnomusicology, music history, and music theory through different types of degrees, including bachelor&#x27;s, master&#x27;s and PhD.

=== Music theory ===

Music theory is the study of music, generally in a highly technical manner outside of other disciplines. More broadly it refers to any study of music, usually related in some form with compositional concerns, and may include mathematics, physics, and anthropology. What is most commonly taught in beginning music theory classes are guidelines to write in the style of the common practice period, or tonal music. Theory, even of music of the common practice period, may take other forms. Musical set theory is the application of mathematical set theory to music, first applied to atonal music. &quot;Speculative music theory&quot;, contrasted with &quot;analytic music theory&quot;, is devoted to the analysis and synthesis of music materials, for example tuning systems, generally as preparation for composition.

=== Zoomusicology ===

Zoomusicology is the study of the music of non-human animals, or the musical aspects of sounds produced by non-human animals. As George Herzog (1941) asked, &quot;do animals have music?&quot; François-Bernard Mâche&#x27;s &quot;Musique, mythe, nature, ou les Dauphins d&#x27;Arion&quot; (1983), a study of &quot;ornitho-musicology&quot; using a technique of Nicolas Ruwet&#x27;s &quot;Language, musique, poésie&quot; (1972) paradigmatic segmentation analysis, shows that bird songs are organised according to a repetition-transformation principle. Jean-Jacques Nattiez (1990), argues that &quot;in the last analysis, it is a human being who decides what is and is not musical, even when the sound is not of human origin. If we acknowledge that sound is not organised and conceptualised (that is, made to form music) merely by its producer, but by the mind that perceives it, then music is uniquely human.&quot;

=== Ethnomusicology ===
In the West, much of the history of music that is taught deals with the Western civilization&#x27;s art music, known as classical music. The history of music in non-Western cultures (&quot;world music&quot; or the field of &quot;ethnomusicology&quot;) is also taught in Western universities. This includes the documented classical traditions of Asian countries outside the influence of Western Europe, as well as the folk or indigenous music of various other cultures. Popular or folk styles of music in non-Western countries varied from culture to culture, and period to period. Different cultures emphasised different instruments, techniques, singing styles and uses for music. Music has been used for entertainment, ceremonies, rituals, religious purposes and for practical and artistic communication. Non-Western music has also been used for propaganda purposes, as was the case with Chinese opera during the Cultural Revolution.

There is a host of music classifications for non-Western music, many of which are caught up in the argument over the definition of music. Among the largest of these is the division between classical music (or &quot;art&quot; music), and popular music (or commercial music – including non-Western styles of rock, country, and pop music-related styles). Some genres do not fit neatly into one of these &quot;big two&quot; classifications, (such as folk music, world music, or jazz-related music).

As world cultures have come into greater global contact, their indigenous musical styles have often merged with other styles, which produces new styles. For example, the United States bluegrass style contains elements from Anglo-Irish, Scottish, Irish, German and African instrumental and vocal traditions, which were able to fuse in the United States&#x27; multi-ethnic &quot;melting pot&quot; society. Some types of world music contain a mixture of non-Western indigenous styles with Western pop music elements. Genres of music are determined as much by tradition and presentation as by the actual music. Some works, like George Gershwin&#x27;s &quot;Rhapsody in Blue&quot;, are claimed by both jazz and classical music, while Gershwin&#x27;s &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot; and Leonard Bernstein&#x27;s &quot;West Side Story&quot; are claimed by both opera and the Broadway musical tradition. Many music festivals for non-Western music, include bands and singers from a particular musical genre, such as world music.

Indian music, for example, is one of the oldest and longest living types of music, and is still widely heard and performed in South Asia, as well as internationally (especially since the 1960s). Indian music has mainly three forms of classical music, Hindustani, Carnatic, and Dhrupad styles. It has also a large repertoire of styles, which involve only percussion music such as the talavadya performances famous in South India.

== Therapy ==
Music therapy is an interpersonal process in which a trained therapist uses music and all of its facets—physical, emotional, mental, social, aesthetic, and spiritual—to help clients to improve or maintain their health. In some instances, the client&#x27;s needs are addressed directly through music; in others they are addressed through the relationships that develop between the client and therapist. Music therapy is used with individuals of all ages and with a variety of conditions, including: psychiatric disorders, medical problems, physical disabilities, sensory impairments, developmental disabilities, substance abuse issues, communication disorders, interpersonal problems, and aging. It is also used to improve learning, build self-esteem, reduce stress, support physical exercise, and facilitate a host of other health-related activities. Music therapists may encourage clients to sing, play instruments, create songs, or do other musical activities.

In the 10th century, the philosopher Al-Farabi described how vocal music can stimulate the feelings and souls of listeners. Music has long been used to help people deal with their emotions. In the 17th century, the scholar Robert Burton&#x27;s &quot;The Anatomy of Melancholy&quot; argued that music and dance were critical in treating mental illness, especially melancholia. He noted that music has an &quot;excellent power ...to expel many other diseases&quot; and he called it &quot;a sovereign remedy against despair and melancholy.&quot; He pointed out that in Antiquity, Canus, a Rhodian fiddler, used music to &quot;make a melancholy man merry, ...a lover more enamoured, a religious man more devout.&quot; In the Ottoman Empire, mental illnesses were treated with music. In November 2006, Michael J. Crawford and his colleagues also found that music therapy helped schizophrenic patients.

== See also ==
* Glossary of music terminology
* Lists of musicians
* List of musicology topics
* Music and emotion
* Music archaeology
* Music history
* Music-specific disorders

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Small, Christopher (1977). &quot;Music, Society, Education&quot;. John Calder Publishers, London. 


== External links ==

* Grove Music Online — online version of &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;.
* All ten volumes of the &quot;Garland Encyclopedia of World Music&quot; 
* Dolmetsch free online music dictionary, complete, with references to a list of specialised music dictionaries (by continent, by instrument, by genre, etc.)
* Some books on music by Carl Van Vechten (1880–1964)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="0" end="5" title="Music" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="28" end="33" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q862597" start="64" end="68" title="Musical form" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="70" end="77" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="79" end="85" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="87" end="93" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942545" start="108" end="126" title="Musical expression" label="expressive content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825100" start="162" end="180" title="cultural universal" label="cultural universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251607" start="221" end="241" title="Definitions of music" label="Definitions of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696608" start="345" end="362" title="elements of music" label="specific elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="506" end="516" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="617" end="628" title="musical composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="630" end="643" title="musical improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="649" end="660" title="performance" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="709" end="727" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="744" end="755" title="human voice" label="human voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365218" start="885" end="894" title="music box" label="music box"/>
<link wikidata="Q752638" start="896" end="908" title="barrel organ" label="barrel organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="913" end="938" title="digital audio workstation" label="digital audio workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="1014" end="1032" title="religious ceremony" label="religious ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="1198" end="1207" title="festivals" label="festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="1322" end="1332" title="soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1354" end="1360" title="Opera" label="operas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="1420" end="1433" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1487" end="1501" title="#academic study" label="academic study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="1503" end="1513" title="Music journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092865" start="1515" end="1525" title="Philosophy of music" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q476590" start="1527" end="1537" title="Music psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q209642" start="1543" end="1550" title="Music therapy" label="therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="1556" end="1570" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1605" end="1619" title="sound engineer" label="sound engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="1710" end="1721" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="1726" end="1735" title="recording (music)" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="1766" end="1801" title="recording and reproduction of music" label="recording and reproduction of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="1828" end="1839" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="1841" end="1852" title="microphones" label="microphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="1854" end="1865" title="phonographs" label="phonographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="1871" end="1883" title="tape recorder" label="tape machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="1903" end="1916" title="digital music" label="digital music"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="1941" end="1952" title="MP3 players" label="MP3 players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023100" start="1954" end="1964" title="CD players" label="CD players"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1970" end="1981" title="smartphones" label="smartphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2141" end="2152" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2189" end="2199" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2229" end="2234" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2276" end="2289" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="2351" end="2356" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="2367" end="2374" title="Deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="2378" end="2401" title="Ancient Greek mythology" label="Ancient Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="2420" end="2428" title="the arts" label="the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="2433" end="2440" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2504" end="2509" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="2514" end="2520" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q104425" start="2595" end="2605" title="Polyhymnia" label="Polyhymnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="2822" end="2830" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2919" end="2932" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="3125" end="3130" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="3295" end="3304" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="3484" end="3491" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q965420" start="3676" end="3696" title="J. H. Kwabena Nketia" label="J. H. Kwabena Nketia"/>
<link wikidata="Q810544" start="3829" end="3842" title="Songye people" label="Songye people"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="3850" end="3882" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235705" start="3891" end="3901" title="Tiv people" label="Tiv people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="4193" end="4202" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="4219" end="4255" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Indigenous languages of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4364" end="4370" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="4773" end="4791" title="origin of language" label="origin of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="4988" end="5005" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q693754" start="5025" end="5033" title="Spandrel (biology)" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="5096" end="5110" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="5161" end="5177" title="sexual selection" label="sexual selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="5554" end="5560" title="divine" label="divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q761684" start="5635" end="5652" title="Prehistoric music" label="Prehistoric music"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5698" end="5709" title="paleolithic" label="paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777287" start="5742" end="5758" title="Divje Babe flute" label="Divje Babe flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q188851" start="5773" end="5782" title="cave bear" label="cave bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="5783" end="5788" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="5890" end="5908" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146875" start="6028" end="6039" title="Paleolithic flute" label="bone flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19285921" start="6049" end="6061" title="Caves and Ice Age Art in the Swabian Jura" label="Swabian Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282892" start="6088" end="6104" title="Geissenklösterle" label="Geissenklösterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q875927" start="6106" end="6116" title="Hohle Fels" label="Hohle Fels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529989" start="6121" end="6130" title="Vogelherd Cave" label="Vogelherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q221901" start="6151" end="6162" title="Aurignacian" label="Aurignacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="6202" end="6230" title="Early European modern humans" label="Early European modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15719234" start="6298" end="6308" title="Bird wing" label="wing bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="6332" end="6345" title="mammoth ivory" label="mammoth ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208520" start="6566" end="6584" title="Predynastic Egypt" label="Predynastic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="6636" end="6647" title="Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="6653" end="6657" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="6660" end="6665" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q229717" start="6671" end="6686" title="double clarinet" label="double clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="6725" end="6729" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="6736" end="6740" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="6774" end="6788" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="6790" end="6796" title="Cymbal" label="Cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="6863" end="6868" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="6885" end="6895" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q948437" start="6923" end="6927" title="dhikr" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="6966" end="6977" title="music genre" label="music genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="6981" end="6994" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076491" start="7080" end="7102" title="Hurrian songs" label="Hurrian Hymn to Nikkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570005" start="7119" end="7130" title="clay tablet" label="clay tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="7147" end="7152" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="7162" end="7168" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="7316" end="7330" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q189072" start="7534" end="7547" title="Theatre of ancient Greece" label="Greek theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="7658" end="7673" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic, Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="7689" end="7697" title="choir" label="choruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="7817" end="7834" title="string instrument" label="string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="7846" end="7850" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="8056" end="8068" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="8088" end="8100" title="musical mode" label="musical mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065742" start="8148" end="8157" title="religious music" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="8162" end="8171" title="European classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8206" end="8218" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8244" end="8260" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059672" start="8286" end="8302" title="Seikilos epitaph" label="Seikilos epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908097" start="8488" end="8507" title="Elementa harmonica" label="Harmonika Stoicheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335156" start="8517" end="8528" title="Aristoxenus" label="Aristoxenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="8628" end="8634" title="Arabic music" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942044" start="8636" end="8648" title="Central Asian music" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q525073" start="8650" end="8659" title="East Asian music" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98528267" start="8661" end="8671" title="South Asian music" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10838732" start="8677" end="8691" title="Southeast Asian music" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="8742" end="8764" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="8839" end="8864" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="8989" end="8996" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="9001" end="9013" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo Daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q733878" start="9044" end="9060" title="Mortimer Wheeler" label="Mortimer Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="9066" end="9073" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="9234" end="9244" title="monophonic" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="9283" end="9287" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896571" start="9319" end="9324" title="Tala (music)" label="talas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115588" start="9341" end="9355" title="Cilappatikaram" label="Cilappatikaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="9485" end="9496" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindi music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223087" start="9515" end="9540" title="Persian traditional music" label="Persian traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q383103" start="9545" end="9551" title="Music of Afghanistan" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="9561" end="9575" title="Carnatic music" label="Carnatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210921" start="9752" end="9768" title="Music of Indonesia" label="Indonesian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="9795" end="9805" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q113276545" start="9830" end="9852" title="Indonesian archipelago" label="Indonesian archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553249" start="9952" end="9959" title="kendang" label="kendang"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="9964" end="9968" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585780" start="10045" end="10052" title="sasando" label="sasando"/>
<link wikidata="Q682079" start="10100" end="10109" title="Sundanese people" label="Sundanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q540049" start="10110" end="10118" title="angklung" label="angklung"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="10154" end="10162" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266626" start="10167" end="10175" title="Balinese people" label="Balinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="10176" end="10183" title="gamelan" label="gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581711" start="10221" end="10231" title="gong chime" label="gong chime"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="10467" end="10488" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165766" start="10503" end="10515" title="metallophone" label="metallophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553249" start="10518" end="10523" title="kendang" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="10525" end="10529" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630043" start="10535" end="10547" title="spike fiddle" label="spike fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="10560" end="10566" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997443" start="10567" end="10573" title="suling" label="suling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="10582" end="10587" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q277393" start="10591" end="10614" title="Chinese classical music" label="Chinese classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="10857" end="10867" title="pentatonic" label="pentatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="10868" end="10876" title="diatonic" label="diatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163775" start="11024" end="11038" title="medieval music" label="medieval music"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="11086" end="11097" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="11132" end="11142" title="monophony" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="11165" end="11173" title="Gregorian chant" label="chanting"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11179" end="11194" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="11205" end="11221" title="Musical notation" label="Musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="11254" end="11267" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="11588" end="11598" title="Liturgy" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707688" start="11599" end="11608" title="plainsong" label="plainsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="11681" end="11696" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065742" start="11728" end="11734" title="Religious music" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q8812109" start="11739" end="11751" title="church music" label="church music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707298" start="11789" end="11801" title="Secular music" label="secular song"/>
<link wikidata="Q297501" start="11868" end="11874" title="Léonin" label="Léonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206275" start="11876" end="11883" title="Pérotin" label="Pérotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200580" start="11885" end="11905" title="Guillaume de Machaut" label="Guillaume de Machaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q44385" start="11911" end="11937" title="Walther von der Vogelweide" label="Walther von der Vogelweide"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="11940" end="11957" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="12013" end="12025" title="courtly love" label="courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="12044" end="12058" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="12092" end="12103" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q207717" start="12663" end="12679" title="Guillaume Du Fay" label="Guillaume Du Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="12681" end="12713" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q438141" start="12715" end="12728" title="Thomas Morley" label="Thomas Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="12730" end="12746" title="Orlando di Lasso" label="Orlando di Lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q143100" start="12751" end="12767" title="Josquin des Prez" label="Josquin des Prez"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="13318" end="13325" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="13420" end="13425" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="13428" end="13438" title="polyphony" label="Polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="13439" end="13451" title="Counterpoint" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="13493" end="13506" title="Melody" label="melodic lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="13588" end="13597" title="Musical ensemble" label="ensembles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="13608" end="13615" title="String section" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q180744" start="13617" end="13622" title="Brass instrument" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="13628" end="13637" title="Woodwind instrument" label="woodwinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="13654" end="13659" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="13694" end="13704" title="organ (music)" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="13706" end="13717" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="13723" end="13733" title="clavichord" label="clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="13919" end="13924" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061398" start="13930" end="13939" title="Invention (musical composition)" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="13945" end="13951" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="13961" end="13969" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="14093" end="14114" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q756843" start="14122" end="14134" title="Bach cello suites" label="Cello suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="14143" end="14165" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207732" start="14173" end="14180" title="Handel&amp;#x27;s Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q75854" start="14189" end="14211" title="Georg Philipp Telemann" label="Georg Philipp Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="14216" end="14231" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016" start="14239" end="14255" title="The Four Seasons (Vivaldi)" label="The Four Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="14532" end="14548" title="Classical period (music)" label="Classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="14636" end="14645" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="14846" end="14859" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q207349" start="14898" end="14907" title="homophony" label="homophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="14927" end="14933" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="14960" end="14973" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521313" start="15112" end="15122" title="fortepiano" label="fortepiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="15185" end="15196" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="15201" end="15211" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="15343" end="15355" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="15465" end="15471" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="15495" end="15503" title="symphony" label="symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q281643" start="15531" end="15535" title="Trio (music)" label="trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="15537" end="15551" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q215911" start="15553" end="15561" title="serenade" label="serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q647653" start="15566" end="15578" title="divertimento" label="divertimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="15906" end="15919" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="15976" end="15990" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="16264" end="16278" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="17131" end="17139" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q76428" start="17206" end="17231" title="Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach" label="Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="17233" end="17258" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="Christoph Willibald Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q106641" start="17260" end="17281" title="Johann Christian Bach" label="Johann Christian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="17283" end="17295" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="17297" end="17320" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="17322" end="17342" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="17347" end="17361" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="17615" end="17623" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="18017" end="18023" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="18028" end="18034" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="18163" end="18172" title="tone poem" label="tone poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="18288" end="18301" title="Nationalism" label="nationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="18352" end="18362" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="18518" end="18528" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="18666" end="18679" title="Romantic love" label="Romantic love"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="18851" end="18862" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="18871" end="18885" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="18891" end="18901" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="19258" end="19278" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="19283" end="19297" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q908349" start="19376" end="19382" title="motif (music)" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="19423" end="19429" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q188709" start="19533" end="19547" title="Symphony No. 5 (Beethoven)" label="Fifth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="19583" end="19607" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="19609" end="19623" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="19629" end="19642" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="19661" end="19667" title="chord (music)" label="chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="19677" end="19687" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="19837" end="19846" title="Chromatic (music)" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="19862" end="19870" title="tonality" label="tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421879" start="19880" end="19894" title="extended chord" label="extended chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q207116" start="19900" end="19913" title="altered chord" label="altered chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="20045" end="20066" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q778407" start="20191" end="20196" title="urban culture" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777494" start="20237" end="20250" title="theatre music" label="theatre music"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="20262" end="20270" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346072" start="20276" end="20290" title="Edwardian musical comedy" label="musical comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="20453" end="20464" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288120" start="20598" end="20616" title="20th-century music" label="20th-century music"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095625" start="20639" end="20660" title="music technology (electric)" label="electric technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="20669" end="20687" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q984966" start="20692" end="20703" title="mass market" label="mass market"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="20720" end="20737" title="gramophone record" label="gramophone record"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="20745" end="20760" title="sound recording" label="sound recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="20950" end="20960" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="21060" end="21070" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="21075" end="21083" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="21647" end="21656" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="21873" end="21890" title="Traditional music" label="Traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="21906" end="21910" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="21915" end="21925" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="21991" end="22006" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="22008" end="22025" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="22031" end="22040" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001637" start="22219" end="22229" title="acousmatic" label="acousmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="22234" end="22250" title="Musique concrète" label="Musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="22467" end="22487" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="22520" end="22530" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="23100" end="23107" title="Music of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q151992" start="23203" end="23212" title="blue note" label="blue note"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="23215" end="23228" title="improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q747529" start="23230" end="23240" title="polyrhythm" label="polyrhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="23243" end="23254" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867674" start="23264" end="23274" title="swung note" label="swung note"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="23302" end="23315" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="23349" end="23362" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="23364" end="23374" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="23376" end="23381" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="23387" end="23400" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="23496" end="23505" title="Backbeat (music)" label="back beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="23521" end="23535" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268757" start="23935" end="23953" title="analog synthesizer" label="analog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q139300" start="24030" end="24034" title="DX-7" label="DX-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="24059" end="24071" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414221" start="24085" end="24091" title="TR-808" label="TR-808"/>
<link wikidata="Q507314" start="24128" end="24134" title="TB-303" label="TB-303"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398221" start="24139" end="24149" title="synth bass" label="synth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="24279" end="24304" title="digital audio workstation" label="digital audio workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897589" start="24332" end="24342" title="soft synth" label="soft synth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749416" start="24389" end="24406" title="bedroom producers" label="bedroom producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="24452" end="24474" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="24605" end="24613" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="24630" end="24632" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153925" start="24707" end="24715" title="DJ mixer" label="DJ mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="24825" end="24837" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="25023" end="25037" title="music notation" label="music notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="25049" end="25060" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810479" start="25323" end="25333" title="lead sheet" label="lead sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="25354" end="25360" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="25362" end="25368" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="25373" end="25390" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="25435" end="25447" title="orchestration" label="orchestrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130689" start="26345" end="26353" title="musical phrasing" label="phrasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344860" start="26614" end="26634" title="Historically informed performance" label="performance practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="26767" end="26783" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="26905" end="26918" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="27136" end="27141" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329869" start="27473" end="27489" title="graphic notation (music)" label="graphic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872063" start="27526" end="27546" title="Aus den sieben Tagen" label="Aus den sieben Tagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623715" start="27676" end="27691" title="aleatoric music" label="aleatoric music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="27775" end="27784" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q316427" start="27786" end="27800" title="Morton Feldman" label="Morton Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q156472" start="27806" end="27824" title="Witold Lutosławski" label="Witold Lutosławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621499" start="27889" end="27900" title="wind chimes" label="wind chimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="28126" end="28139" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="28144" end="28161" title="traditional music" label="traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="28217" end="28227" title="Music improvisation" label="improvised"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="28248" end="28257" title="free jazz" label="free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418945" start="28304" end="28316" title="Ewe drumming" label="Ewe drummers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401" start="28482" end="28494" title="Part (music)" label="musical part"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="28547" end="28561" title="music notation" label="music notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="29079" end="29089" title="cover song" label="cover song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446979" start="29130" end="29141" title="guitar solo" label="guitar solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="29282" end="29290" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="29326" end="29336" title="Musical improvisation" label="improvised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="29344" end="29361" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="29413" end="29417" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="29422" end="29427" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="29462" end="29474" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="29480" end="29485" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="30028" end="30032" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955280" start="30312" end="30329" title="music competition" label="music competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="30332" end="30345" title="Chamber music" label="Chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="30639" end="30656" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="30661" end="30666" title="riffs" label="riffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="31013" end="31018" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="31020" end="31024" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="31030" end="31041" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="31316" end="31330" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760262" start="31359" end="31372" title="chord voicing" label="chord voicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="31383" end="31395" title="figured bass" label="figured bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q212148" start="31485" end="31493" title="Prelude (music)" label="preludes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069389" start="31565" end="31572" title="cadenza" label="cadenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="31676" end="31685" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="31938" end="31947" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="32026" end="32048" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="32366" end="32377" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="32586" end="32596" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="32749" end="32762" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="32781" end="32794" title="digital music" label="digital music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569406" start="32842" end="32850" title="playlist" label="playlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q510176" start="32909" end="32924" title="cassette player" label="cassette player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892995" start="32965" end="32973" title="mix tape" label="mix tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="33270" end="33291" title="Professional musician" label="Professional musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="33368" end="33381" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="33384" end="33396" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="33486" end="33501" title="filmmaking" label="film production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="33517" end="33529" title="music school" label="music school"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="33588" end="33604" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q555027" start="33771" end="33778" title="music lesson" label="lessons"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="33938" end="33950" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="34379" end="34392" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="34419" end="34448" title="Bootleg recording" label="illegally taped live concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="34484" end="34492" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="34517" end="34528" title="jam session" label="jam session"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="34777" end="34783" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="35084" end="35096" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="35098" end="35105" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344860" start="35114" end="35134" title="performance practice" label="performance practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="35292" end="35303" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="35338" end="35349" title="scorewriter" label="scorewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="35377" end="35392" title="computer screen" label="computer screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="35708" end="35729" title="musical improvisation" label="musical improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="35783" end="35796" title="Chord progression" label="chord changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="35975" end="35988" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810479" start="36277" end="36287" title="lead sheet" label="lead sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="36323" end="36329" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="36487" end="36501" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="36526" end="36539" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="36669" end="36677" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q143217" start="36769" end="36778" title="tablature" label="tablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="37005" end="37009" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="37118" end="37123" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="37128" end="37138" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="37164" end="37175" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="37277" end="37283" title="Oral tradition" label="orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510187" start="37378" end="37384" title="Playing by ear (music)" label="by ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="38803" end="38819" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83509" start="39733" end="39740" title="piccolo" label="piccolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q864184" start="39749" end="39758" title="whistling" label="whistling"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="39806" end="39815" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="39887" end="39895" title="melody" label="melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="39897" end="39905" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="39911" end="39917" title="chord (music)" label="chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q93985" start="40186" end="40198" title="crash cymbal" label="crash cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="40461" end="40467" title="Musical scale" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="40471" end="40476" title="Musical mode" label="modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="40688" end="40691" title="key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="40914" end="40925" title="white notes" label="white notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="40972" end="40977" title="Bebop" label="Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458157" start="41085" end="41099" title="chromatic note" label="chromatic note"/>
<link wikidata="Q844877" start="41332" end="41348" title="whole tone scale" label="whole tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="41517" end="41521" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="41535" end="41543" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="41713" end="41718" title="chord (music)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="42011" end="42019" title="tonality" label="tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="42212" end="42217" title="tonic (music)" label="tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="42670" end="42674" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="42687" end="42692" title="Bebop" label="Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="42892" end="42897" title="Metre (music)" label="Meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="42947" end="42963" title="Bar (music)" label="measures or bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="43112" end="43117" title="Waltz" label="Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="43335" end="43343" title="backbeat" label="backbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="43463" end="43474" title="common time" label="common time"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="43569" end="43579" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="43698" end="43712" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="43905" end="43909" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="43914" end="43923" title="bluegrass (music)" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401" start="44822" end="44827" title="part (music)" label="parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="44849" end="44858" title="monophony" label="monophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="44869" end="44875" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="44924" end="44937" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="44944" end="44956" title="harmony part" label="harmony part"/>
<link wikidata="Q193605" start="44977" end="44984" title="lullaby" label="lullaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q630161" start="45020" end="45031" title="heterophony" label="heterophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q739589" start="45196" end="45205" title="ornament (music)" label="ornaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="45225" end="45234" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="45235" end="45242" title="fiddler" label="fiddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="45261" end="45272" title="traditional music" label="traditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="45381" end="45390" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="45495" end="45501" title="Choir" label="Choral"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="45523" end="45540" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145381" start="45584" end="45589" title="round (music)" label="round"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960010" start="45621" end="45644" title="Row, Row, Row Your Boat" label="Row, Row, Row Your Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q207349" start="45755" end="45764" title="homophony" label="homophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="45794" end="45801" title="chord (music)" label="chordal"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="45802" end="45815" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="45830" end="45843" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401" start="45959" end="45964" title="Part (music)" label="parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="46189" end="46194" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="46557" end="46561" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q175234" start="46763" end="46773" title="embouchure" label="embouchure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147086" start="46951" end="46961" title="gut string" label="gut string"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="46970" end="46983" title="steel strings" label="steel strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="47297" end="47305" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380913" start="47307" end="47315" title="envelope (waves)" label="envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="47321" end="47329" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095625" start="47363" end="47371" title="music technology (electric)" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="47458" end="47472" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="47526" end="47544" title="Graphic equalizer" label="equalizer controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="47592" end="47616" title="effects unit" label="electronic effects units"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="47625" end="47635" title="distortion (music)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="47669" end="47682" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47710" end="47718" title="Hammond organ#Drawbars" label="drawbars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130689" start="48034" end="48042" title="Musical phrasing" label="phrasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="48070" end="48077" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="48262" end="48272" title="ritardando" label="ritardando"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="48276" end="48287" title="Tempo" label="accelerando"/>
<link wikidata="Q830328" start="48374" end="48381" title="fermata" label="fermata"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088448" start="48388" end="48395" title="cadence (music)" label="cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="48513" end="48519" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="Q862597" start="49305" end="49309" title="Musical form" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="49477" end="49490" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="49501" end="49517" title="Musical theatre" label="Broadway musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346887" start="49543" end="49562" title="thirty-two-bar form" label="thirty-two-bar form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616514" start="49778" end="49795" title="verse-chorus form" label="verse-chorus form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616514" start="49827" end="49832" title="verse (popular music)" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="49851" end="49858" title="refrain" label="refrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="49885" end="49891" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707253" start="49980" end="49993" title="strophic form" label="strophic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089987" start="50029" end="50045" title="twelve bar blues" label="twelve bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755793" start="50078" end="50107" title="The Oxford Companion to Music" label="The Oxford Companion to Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167563" start="50115" end="50128" title="Percy Scholes" label="Percy Scholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="50359" end="50364" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061398" start="50370" end="50379" title="Invention (musical composition)" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="50381" end="50395" title="Sonata form" label="sonata-allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53831" start="50397" end="50402" title="Canon (music)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707253" start="50404" end="50412" title="strophic" label="strophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214981" start="50414" end="50434" title="theme and variations" label="theme and variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13323" start="50440" end="50445" title="rondo" label="rondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280511" start="50634" end="50645" title="Alfred Mann (musicologist)" label="Alfred Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q209741" start="50887" end="50896" title="Program music" label="programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267056" start="50916" end="50932" title="through-composed" label="through-composed"/>
<link wikidata="Q836571" start="50964" end="50972" title="Fantasia (musical form)" label="fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212148" start="50974" end="50981" title="Prelude (music)" label="prelude"/>
<link wikidata="Q464769" start="50983" end="50991" title="Rhapsody (music)" label="rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q207841" start="50993" end="50998" title="etude" label="etude"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="51011" end="51025" title="symphonic poem" label="symphonic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q788460" start="51027" end="51036" title="Bagatelle (music)" label="Bagatelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q852027" start="51038" end="51047" title="impromptu" label="impromptu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="51321" end="51332" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="51337" end="51347" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251607" start="51382" end="51401" title="definition of music" label="definition of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="51417" end="51441" title="necessary and sufficient" label="necessary and sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590700" start="51553" end="51566" title="music history" label="music history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353948" start="51630" end="51647" title="music and emotion" label="music and emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="51726" end="51740" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955326" start="51746" end="51765" title="aesthetics of music" label="aesthetics of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="51796" end="51808" title="cosmological" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="51823" end="51829" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q372218" start="51996" end="52003" title="plaisir" label="plaisir"/>
<link wikidata="Q467556" start="52020" end="52030" title="jouissance" label="jouissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q76517" start="52112" end="52141" title="Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten" label="Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="52175" end="52188" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="52262" end="52280" title="sensory perception" label="sensory perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175228" start="52545" end="52555" title="Peter Kivy" label="Peter Kivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812792" start="52557" end="52573" title="Jerrold Levinson" label="Jerrold Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="52575" end="52588" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609025" start="52594" end="52608" title="Stephen Davies (philosopher)" label="Stephen Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="52635" end="52648" title="music criticism" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q84246" start="52778" end="52793" title="Eduard Hanslick" label="Eduard Hanslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="52797" end="52809" title="music critic" label="music critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="52814" end="52826" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="52841" end="52855" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q201494" start="52901" end="52913" title="Harry Partch" label="Harry Partch"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="52929" end="52941" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795042" start="52952" end="52961" title="Kyle Gann" label="Kyle Gann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="53000" end="53016" title="microtonal music" label="microtonal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="53044" end="53057" title="musical scale" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q432822" start="53082" end="53096" title="La Monte Young" label="La Monte Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q554780" start="53098" end="53110" title="Rhys Chatham" label="Rhys Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q433661" start="53115" end="53127" title="Glenn Branca" label="Glenn Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="53166" end="53181" title="just intonation" label="just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="53245" end="53253" title="emotions" label="emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q353284" start="53255" end="53264" title="intellect" label="intellect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="53270" end="53280" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="53340" end="53351" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="53352" end="53357" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="53376" end="53388" title="Republic (Plato)" label="The Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="53579" end="53588" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="53923" end="53931" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q164359" start="53936" end="53946" title="experience" label="experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155640" start="54003" end="54012" title="Empirical research" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="54111" end="54122" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331083" start="54147" end="54165" title="human subject research" label="human participants"/>
<link wikidata="Q109659725" start="54341" end="54352" title="musical technique" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="54354" end="54365" title="music composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q27908" start="54367" end="54376" title="music education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="54378" end="54387" title="music criticism" label="criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209642" start="54393" end="54400" title="music therapy" label="therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347367" start="54437" end="54445" title="aptitude" label="aptitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="54454" end="54466" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="54484" end="54499" title="social behavior" label="social behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138951" start="54524" end="54546" title="Cognitive neuroscience" label="Cognitive neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="54973" end="55010" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="functional magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q263962" start="55019" end="55052" title="transcranial magnetic stimulation" label="transcranial magnetic stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q384188" start="55060" end="55082" title="magnetoencephalography" label="magnetoencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="55090" end="55112" title="electroencephalography" label="electroencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="55124" end="55152" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="55227" end="55244" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="55260" end="55284" title="computer model" label="computationally modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="55485" end="55508" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="55513" end="55530" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="56138" end="56151" title="psychological" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="56156" end="56169" title="physiological" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="56213" end="56219" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q500096" start="56277" end="56290" title="psychophysics" label="psychophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="56594" end="56613" title="evolutionary theory" label="evolutionary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="56615" end="56629" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="56708" end="56721" title="protolanguage" label="protolanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313085" start="56843" end="56863" title="linguistic evolution" label="linguistic evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="57099" end="57108" title="ethnicity" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q476590" start="57131" end="57146" title="music cognition" label="music cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256419" start="57164" end="57175" title="Psychology of music preference" label="preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353948" start="57177" end="57195" title="Music and emotion" label="emotional reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941384" start="57201" end="57215" title="music-related memory" label="musical memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q557399" start="57646" end="57661" title="psychoacoustics" label="psychoacoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="59283" end="59288" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="59299" end="59304" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16038819" start="59306" end="59314" title="Duration (music)" label="duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q622324" start="59316" end="59324" title="loudness" label="loudness"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="59326" end="59332" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q325944" start="59334" end="59347" title="Texture (music)" label="sonic texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q765652" start="59352" end="59368" title="Sound localization" label="spatial location"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378428" start="59710" end="59725" title="music community" label="music community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479257" start="60085" end="60097" title="high culture" label="high culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630264" start="60114" end="60125" title="low culture" label="low culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="60404" end="60408" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="60414" end="60421" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="61081" end="61094" title="socioeconomic" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="61378" end="61387" title="serialism" label="serialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="61389" end="61394" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="61396" end="61403" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="61405" end="61414" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="61420" end="61431" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955278" start="61569" end="61584" title="sociomusicology" label="sociomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="61683" end="61698" title="ethnomusicology" label="ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="61811" end="61834" title="Musician" label="instrumental performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="61857" end="61871" title="musicology" label="music scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27908" start="61873" end="61888" title="music teacher" label="music educators"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="61890" end="61903" title="music criticism" label="music critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="61904" end="61920" title="music journalist" label="music journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="62016" end="62029" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591288" start="62182" end="62194" title="music journalist" label="rock critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65279862" start="62264" end="62279" title="List of women composers" label="women composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q621154" start="62403" end="62448" title="Western canon" label="commonly performed classical music repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132232" start="62564" end="62578" title="Clara Schumann" label="Clara Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196259" start="62893" end="62920" title="Montreal Symphony Orchestra" label="Montreal Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="62986" end="63005" title="Vienna Philharmonic" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="63104" end="63115" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="63190" end="63205" title="all-female band" label="all-female band"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="63251" end="63264" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="63851" end="63866" title="Music producer" label="music producing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="63872" end="63889" title="sound engineering" label="sound engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="63980" end="63993" title="musicology" label="musicologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q27908" start="64020" end="64035" title="music education" label="music education"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460861" start="64190" end="64204" title="Jessica Duchen" label="Jessica Duchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="64245" end="64260" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="64855" end="64880" title="Conducting" label="conductor of an orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="64988" end="65001" title="Audio mixer" label="audio console"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="65126" end="65137" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="65332" end="65340" title="sound recording" label="recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023100" start="65362" end="65371" title="CD player" label="CD player"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="65438" end="65454" title="sound film" label="talking pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742272" start="65687" end="65700" title="theater organ" label="theater organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q975007" start="65845" end="65877" title="American Federation of Musicians" label="American Federation of Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199377" start="66035" end="66051" title="Pittsburgh Press" label="Pittsburgh Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="66284" end="66295" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="66301" end="66313" title="gramophone record" label="disc records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413166" start="66318" end="66328" title="scratching" label="scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027843" start="66493" end="66507" title="backing tracks" label="backing tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="66528" end="66537" title="keyboard (computing)" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="66576" end="66612" title="Musical Instrument Digital Interface" label="Musical Instrument Digital Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="66696" end="66703" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="67163" end="67178" title="streaming video" label="streaming video"/>
<link wikidata="Q210980" start="67273" end="67291" title="Virtual community" label="online communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="67296" end="67308" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="67347" end="67372" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q984369" start="67741" end="67753" title="Don Tapscott" label="Don Tapscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772355" start="67758" end="67777" title="Anthony D. Williams (author)" label="Anthony D. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q825718" start="67799" end="67809" title="Wikinomics" label="Wikinomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145220" start="67899" end="67907" title="prosumer" label="prosumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48445" start="68028" end="68034" title="mashup (music)" label="mashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="68036" end="68041" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="68170" end="68179" title="Preschool education" label="preschool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="68183" end="68207" title="Higher education" label="post secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q247154" start="68345" end="68353" title="counting" label="counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="68420" end="68428" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="68455" end="68461" title="memory" label="recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q187851" start="68622" end="68630" title="Recorder (musical instrument)" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="68833" end="68837" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="69019" end="69024" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="69048" end="69061" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="69064" end="69076" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q555027" start="69220" end="69232" title="music lesson" label="music lesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="69373" end="69389" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="69394" end="69407" title="musical scale" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="69552" end="69562" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q782369" start="69584" end="69590" title="Credit (education)" label="credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q846047" start="69682" end="69698" title="history of music" label="history of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q12472341" start="69705" end="69723" title="music appreciation" label="music appreciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152325" start="70137" end="70169" title="Indonesian Institute of the Arts, Yogyakarta" label="Indonesian Institute of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="70173" end="70183" title="Yogyakarta (city)" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="70185" end="70194" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="70441" end="70456" title="music of Africa" label="music of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="70471" end="70478" title="Gamelan" label="Gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590700" start="70668" end="70681" title="music history" label="music history"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="70694" end="70708" title="sound engineer" label="sound engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="70804" end="70824" title="music conservatory" label="music conservatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q27908" start="71124" end="71139" title="music education" label="music education"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="71341" end="71356" title="sound recording" label="sound recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="71541" end="71554" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="71621" end="71646" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="71655" end="71679" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="71746" end="71763" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939790" start="71768" end="71782" title="Humber College" label="Humber College"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="71846" end="71863" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="71865" end="71878" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="71882" end="71887" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q181847" start="72083" end="72093" title="cover band" label="cover band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190668" start="72099" end="72111" title="tribute band" label="tribute band"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="72260" end="72269" title="mentoring" label="mentoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q555027" start="72281" end="72293" title="music lesson" label="music lesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350126" start="72567" end="72578" title="vocal coach" label="vocal coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939609" start="72585" end="72598" title="voice teacher" label="voice teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663779" start="72829" end="72850" title="systematic musicology" label="systematic musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="72905" end="72920" title="ethnomusicology" label="ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="72995" end="73007" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590700" start="73009" end="73022" title="music history" label="music history"/>
<link wikidata="Q557399" start="73148" end="73163" title="psychoacoustics" label="psychoacoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="73702" end="73709" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="73715" end="73727" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753264" start="73836" end="73858" title="common practice period" label="common practice period"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="73863" end="73874" title="Tonality" label="tonal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456314" start="73951" end="73969" title="Set theory (music)" label="Musical set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="74005" end="74015" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="74043" end="74055" title="Atonality" label="atonal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="74219" end="74233" title="musical tuning" label="tuning systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246028" start="74493" end="74515" title="François-Bernard Mâche" label="François-Bernard Mâche"/>
<link wikidata="Q511680" start="74659" end="74672" title="Nicolas Ruwet" label="Nicolas Ruwet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845242" start="74725" end="74759" title="Paradigmatic analysis" label="paradigmatic segmentation analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126556" start="74772" end="74782" title="Bird vocalization" label="bird songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="75426" end="75437" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="75857" end="75868" title="musical instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q737994" start="76125" end="76138" title="Chinese opera" label="Chinese opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="76150" end="76169" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251607" start="76289" end="76308" title="definition of music" label="definition of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165023" start="76427" end="76443" title="Contemporary commercial music" label="commercial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="76484" end="76491" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="76618" end="76628" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="76630" end="76641" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="76646" end="76650" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="76701" end="76723" title="Globalization" label="greater global contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="76852" end="76861" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771297" start="76891" end="76896" title="Folk Music of England" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378776" start="76897" end="76902" title="Music of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048469" start="76904" end="76912" title="Music of Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743758" start="76921" end="76927" title="Music of Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q862085" start="77045" end="77056" title="melting pot" label="melting pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="77292" end="77307" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722599" start="77321" end="77337" title="Rhapsody in Blue" label="Rhapsody in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="77419" end="77433" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="77444" end="77461" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="77475" end="77490" title="West Side Story (musical)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="77531" end="77547" title="Broadway musical" label="Broadway musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="77684" end="77696" title="Music of India" label="Indian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="77935" end="77945" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="77947" end="77955" title="Carnatic music" label="Carnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59158" start="77961" end="77968" title="Dhrupad" label="Dhrupad"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="78100" end="78111" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420053" start="78894" end="78919" title="Exercise and music" label="support physical exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q160460" start="79129" end="79138" title="Al-Farabi" label="Al-Farabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q259132" start="79315" end="79328" title="Robert Burton (scholar)" label="Robert Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q469755" start="79342" end="79367" title="The Anatomy of Melancholy" label="The Anatomy of Melancholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="79428" end="79442" title="Mental disorder" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="79455" end="79466" title="melancholia" label="melancholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="79813" end="79827" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="79965" end="79978" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="80007" end="80036" title="Glossary of music terminology" label="Glossary of music terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370634" start="80039" end="80057" title="Lists of musicians" label="Lists of musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143148" start="80060" end="80085" title="List of musicology topics" label="List of musicology topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353948" start="80088" end="80105" title="Music and emotion" label="Music and emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621488" start="80108" end="80125" title="Music archaeology" label="Music archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590700" start="80128" end="80141" title="Music history" label="Music history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941385" start="80144" end="80168" title="Music-specific disorders" label="Music-specific disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="80450" end="80497" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523414" start="80536" end="80571" title="Garland Encyclopedia of World Music" label="Garland Encyclopedia of World Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q312851" start="80762" end="80778" title="Carl Van Vechten" label="Carl Van Vechten"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18842" wikidata="Q233975" url="?curid=18842" title="Mode">
<text>Mode ( meaning &quot;manner, tune, measure, due measure, rhythm, melody&quot;) may refer to:
== Arts and entertainment ==
* &quot;MO&quot;D&quot;E (magazine)&quot;, a defunct U.S. women&#x27;s fashion magazine 
* &quot;Mode&quot; magazine, a fictional fashion magazine which is the setting for the ABC series &quot;Ugly Betty&quot;
* &quot;Mode&quot; (video game), a 1996 video game 
* Mode Records, a record label
* Mode Media, a defunct digital media company
* &quot;Mode&quot; series, a quartet of novels by Piers Anthony
* Modern Organization for Dance Evolvement, known as MODE, a 1970s modern dance organisation in New York
* &quot;Mode&quot;, a defunct Indonesian women&#x27;s magazine

===Music===
* Mode (music), a system of musical tonality involving a type of scale coupled with a set of characteristic melodic behaviors
** Modus (medieval music)
*** Gregorian mode, a system of modes used in Gregorian chant (as opposed to ancient Greek modes or Byzantine octoechos)
* &quot;Mode&quot;, a song by PRhyme from the 2015 soundtrack &quot;Southpaw: Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture&quot;
* &quot;The Mode&quot; (album), a 1962 album by Sonny Red

== Computing ==
* MODE (command), a DOS and Windows command line utility for the configuration of devices and the console
* Mode (user interface), distinct method of operation within a computer system, in which the same user input can produce different results depending on the state of the system
** A game mode, a mode used as a game mechanic in video games
** Digital camera modes
** Direct mode, a software configuration where text input is processed outside of an application
** Immediate mode (computer graphics), a graphic library where commands produce direct rendering on the display
* Modes (Unix), permissions given to users and groups to access files and folders on Unix hosts

==Language==
* Grammatical mood, also known as mode, a category of verbal inflections that expresses an attitude of mind
** Imperative mood
** Subjunctive mood
* Mode (literature), the general category of a literary work, e.g. the pastoral mode
* Rhetorical modes, a category of discourse
** Narrative mode, the type of method voice and point of view used to convey a narrative
** Modes of persuasion, oratorical devices

==Mathematics==
* Mode (statistics), the most common value among a group
* Modes of convergence, a property of a series

==Places==
* Mode, Banmauk, a village in Burma
* Mode, Illinois, an unincorporated community in Shelby County, Illinois, United States

==Science==
* Mode (electromagnetism), a pattern of wave propagation.
** Longitudinal mode 
** Transverse mode
** Hybrid mode, such as longitudinal-section mode
* Normal mode, patterns of vibration in acoustics, electromagnetic theory, etc.
* Global mode, a concept in hydrodynamics
* Quasinormal mode, a type of energy dissipation of a perturbed object or field
* Starvation mode, a biological condition

==Other uses==
* Amateur radio modes
* Fashion
* IL Mode, a former name of Bærum SK, a Norwegian association football club
* Mode of transport, a means of transportation
* A technocomplex of stone tools
* Mode of production, a Marxist term for way of producing goods
*, several ships of the Swedish Navy

== See also ==

* Asynchronous Transfer Mode, a method of digital communication
* Block cipher mode of operation, in cryptography
* &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Mode&quot;, a collection of short stories by Anthony Burgess
* Edna Mode, a fictional character in Pixar&#x27;s animated superhero film &quot;The Incredibles&quot;
* &quot;Explosive Mode&quot;, a 1998 album by San Quinn and Messy Marv
* Modal (disambiguation)
* Modality (disambiguation)
* Switch mode (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233975" start="0" end="4" title="Mode" label="Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716994" start="130" end="157" title="MODE (magazine)" label="MO&amp;quot;D&amp;quot;E (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q276528" start="315" end="325" title="Ugly Betty" label="Ugly Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846190" start="334" end="363" title="Mode (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Mode&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317780" start="386" end="398" title="Mode Records" label="Mode Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529130" start="417" end="427" title="Mode Media" label="Mode Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888120" start="463" end="486" title="Mode series" label="&amp;quot;Mode&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q113657019" start="527" end="567" title="Modern Organization for Dance Evolvement" label="Modern Organization for Dance Evolvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="708" end="720" title="Mode (music)" label="Mode (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889852" start="835" end="857" title="Modus (medieval music)" label="Modus (medieval music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058106" start="862" end="876" title="Gregorian mode" label="Gregorian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645171" start="1047" end="1102" title="Southpaw (soundtrack)" label="Southpaw: Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751846" start="1117" end="1125" title="The Mode" label="The Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481838" start="1186" end="1200" title="MODE (command)" label="MODE (command)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888088" start="1292" end="1313" title="Mode (user interface)" label="Mode (user interface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="1471" end="1480" title="game mode" label="game mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616206" start="1531" end="1551" title="Digital camera modes" label="Digital camera modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280369" start="1555" end="1566" title="Direct mode" label="Direct mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195287" start="1652" end="1686" title="Immediate mode (computer graphics)" label="Immediate mode (computer graphics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896858" start="1763" end="1775" title="Modes (Unix)" label="Modes (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="1873" end="1889" title="Grammatical mood" label="Grammatical mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="1982" end="1997" title="Imperative mood" label="Imperative mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="2001" end="2017" title="Subjunctive mood" label="Subjunctive mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888090" start="2020" end="2037" title="Mode (literature)" label="Mode (literature)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320446" start="2105" end="2121" title="Rhetorical modes" label="Rhetorical modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="2150" end="2164" title="Narrative mode" label="Narrative mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354854" start="2239" end="2258" title="Modes of persuasion" label="Modes of persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="2298" end="2315" title="Mode (statistics)" label="Mode (statistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889154" start="2355" end="2375" title="Modes of convergence" label="Modes of convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888081" start="2414" end="2427" title="Mode, Banmauk" label="Mode, Banmauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888082" start="2450" end="2464" title="Mode, Illinois" label="Mode, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q21658398" start="2551" end="2574" title="Mode (electromagnetism)" label="Mode (electromagnetism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674010" start="2610" end="2627" title="Longitudinal mode" label="Longitudinal mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q597069" start="2632" end="2647" title="Transverse mode" label="Transverse mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792085" start="2672" end="2697" title="longitudinal-section mode" label="longitudinal-section mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="2700" end="2711" title="Normal mode" label="Normal mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325283" start="2780" end="2791" title="Global mode" label="Global mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="2806" end="2819" title="hydrodynamics" label="hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48937708" start="2822" end="2838" title="Quasinormal mode" label="Quasinormal mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14901436" start="2902" end="2917" title="Starvation mode" label="Starvation mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q359022" start="2960" end="2979" title="Amateur radio modes" label="Amateur radio modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="2982" end="2989" title="Fashion" label="Fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019345" start="3018" end="3026" title="Bærum SK" label="Bærum SK"/>
<link wikidata="Q334166" start="3068" end="3085" title="Mode of transport" label="Mode of transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="3134" end="3144" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548084" start="3148" end="3166" title="Mode of production" label="Mode of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q206047" start="3266" end="3292" title="Asynchronous Transfer Mode" label="Asynchronous Transfer Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q154021" start="3330" end="3360" title="Block cipher mode of operation" label="Block cipher mode of operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729934" start="3386" end="3407" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Mode" label="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490541" start="3466" end="3475" title="Edna Mode" label="Edna Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302237" start="3575" end="3589" title="Explosive Mode" label="Explosive Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q444956" start="3640" end="3662" title="Modal (disambiguation)" label="Modal (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q345621" start="3665" end="3690" title="Modality (disambiguation)" label="Modality (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125243067" start="3693" end="3721" title="Switch mode (disambiguation)" label="Switch mode (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18845" wikidata="Q2751034" url="?curid=18845" title="Mouse">
<text>A mouse (: mice) is a small rodent. Characteristically, mice are known to have a pointed snout, small rounded ears, a body-length scaly tail, and a high breeding rate. The best known mouse species is the common house mouse (&quot;Mus musculus&quot;). Mice are also popular as pets. In some places, certain kinds of field mice are locally common. They are known to invade homes for food and shelter.

Mice are typically distinguished from rats by their size. Generally, when a muroid rodent is discovered, its common name includes the term &quot;mouse&quot; if it is smaller, or &quot;rat&quot; if it is larger. The common terms &quot;rat&quot; and &quot;mouse&quot; are not taxonomically specific. Typical mice are classified in the genus &quot;Mus&quot;, but the term &quot;mouse&quot; is not confined to members of &quot;Mus&quot; and can also apply to species from other genera such as the deer mouse (&quot;Peromyscus&quot;).

Domestic mice sold as pets often differ substantially in size from the common house mouse. This is attributable to breeding and different conditions in the wild. The best-known strain of mouse is the white lab mouse. It has more uniform traits that are appropriate to its use in research.

Cats, wild dogs, foxes, birds of prey, snakes and certain kinds of arthropods have been known to prey upon mice. Despite this, mice populations remain plentiful. Due to its remarkable adaptability to almost any environment, the mouse is one of the most successful mammalian genera living on Earth today.

In certain contexts, mice can be considered vermin. Vermin are a major source of crop damage, as they are known to cause structural damage and spread disease. Mice spread disease through their feces and are often carriers of parasites. In North America, breathing dust that has come in contact with mouse excrement has been linked to hantavirus, which may lead to hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS).

Primarily nocturnal animals, mice compensate for their poor eyesight with a keen sense of hearing. They depend on their sense of smell to locate food and avoid predators.

In the wild, mice are known to build intricate burrows. These burrows have long entrances and are equipped with escape tunnels. In at least one species, the architectural design of a burrow is a genetic trait.

==Types of animals known as mice==
The most common mice are murines, in the same clade as common rats. They are murids, along with gerbils and other close relatives. 
*order Dasyuromorphia
**marsupial mice, smaller species of Dasyuridae
*order Rodentia
**suborder Castorimorpha
*** family Heteromyidae
**** Kangaroo mouse, genus &quot;Microdipodops&quot;
**** Pocket mouse, tribe Perognathinae
**** Spiny pocket mouse, genus &quot;Heteromys&quot;
**suborder Anomaluromorpha
*** family Anomaluridae
**** flying mouse
**suborder Myomorpha
*** family Cricetidae
**** Brush mouse, &quot;Peromyscus boylii&quot;
**** Florida mouse
**** Golden mouse
**** American harvest mouse, genus &quot;Reithrodontomys&quot;
**** Voles Often referred to as &quot;Field or Meadow mice&quot;
*** family Muridae
**** typical mice, the genus &quot;Mus&quot;
**** Field mice, genus &quot;Apodemus&quot;
***** Wood mouse, &quot;Apodemus sylvaticus&quot;
***** Yellow-necked mouse, &quot;Apodemus flavicollis&quot;
**** Large Mindoro forest mouse
**** Big-eared hopping mouse
**** Luzon montane forest mouse
**** Forrest&#x27;s mouse
**** Pebble-mound mouse
**** Bolam&#x27;s mouse
**** Eurasian harvest mouse, genus &quot;Micromys&quot;

==Emotions==
Researchers at the Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology have confirmed that mice have a range of facial expressions. They used machine vision to spot familiar human emotions like pleasure, disgust, nausea, pain, and fear.

==Diet==
In nature, mice are largely herbivores, consuming any kind of fruit or grain from plants. However, mice adapt well to urban areas and are known for eating almost all types of food scraps. In captivity, mice are commonly fed commercial pelleted mouse diet. These diets are nutritionally complete, but they still need a large variety of vegetables.

Despite popular belief, most mice do not have a special appetite for cheese. They will only eat cheese for lack of better options.

== Human use ==
=== As experimental animals ===

Mice are common experimental animals in laboratory research of biology and psychology fields primarily because they are mammals, and also because they share a high degree of homology with humans. They are the most commonly used mammalian model organism, more common than rats. The mouse genome has been sequenced, and virtually all mouse genes have human homologs. The mouse has approximately 2.7 billion base pairs and 20 pairs of chromosomes.
They can also be manipulated in ways that are illegal with humans, although animal rights activists often object. A knockout mouse is a genetically modified mouse that has had one or more of its genes made inoperable through a gene knockout. Experimental mouse model systems include mouse models of colorectal and intestinal cancer, mouse models of Down syndrome and mouse models of breast cancer metastasis.

Reasons for common selection of mice are that they are small and inexpensive, have a widely varied diet, are easily maintained, and can reproduce quickly. Several generations of mice can be observed in a relatively short time. Mice are generally very docile if raised from birth and given sufficient human contact. However, certain strains have been known to be quite temperamental.

=== As pets ===
Many people buy mice as companion pets. They can be playful, loving and can grow used to being handled. Like pet rats, pet mice should not be left unsupervised outside as they have many natural predators, including (but not limited to) birds, snakes, lizards, cats, and dogs. Male mice tend to have a stronger odor than the females. However, mice are careful groomers and as pets they never need bathing. Well looked-after mice can make ideal pets. Some common mouse care products are:
* Cage – Usually a hamster or gerbil cage, but a variety of special mouse cages are now available. Most should have a secure door.
* Food – Special pelleted and seed-based food is available. Mice can generally eat most rodent food (for rats, mice, hamsters, gerbils, etc.)
* Bedding – Usually made of hardwood pulp, such as aspen, sometimes from shredded, uninked paper or recycled virgin wood pulp. Using corn husk bedding is avoided because it promotes &quot;Aspergillus&quot; fungus, and can grow mold once it gets wet, which is rough on their feet.

=== As feed ===

Mice are a staple in the diet of many small carnivores. In various countries mice are used as feed for pets such as snakes, lizards, frogs, tarantulas, and birds of prey, and many pet stores carry mice for this purpose. Such mice are sold in various sizes and with various amounts of fur. Mice without fur are easier for the animal to consume; however, mice with fur may be more convincing as animal feed.

=== As food ===
Humans have eaten mice since prehistoric times. In Victorian Britain, fried mice were still given to children as a folk remedy for bed-wetting; while Jared Diamond reports creamed mice being used in England as a dietary supplement during Second World War rationing. Mice are a delicacy throughout eastern Zambia and northern Malawi, where they are a seasonal source of protein. Field rat is a popular food in Vietnam and neighboring countries. In many countries, however, mouse is no longer a food item.

Prescribed cures in Ancient Egypt included mice as medicine. In Ancient Egypt, when infants were ill, mice were eaten as treatment by their mothers. It was believed that mouse eating by the mother would help heal the baby who was ill.

==See also==

* Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey, mice who orbited the Moon a record 75 times in 1972 on Apollo 17
* List of fictional rodents
* Mouse brain development timeline
* Mousetrap
* Musophobia (fear of mice)
* Rodentology

==References==
==External links==

* Fancy Mice: extensive information about breeding mice and keeping them as pets
* High-resolution images of cross sections of mice brains
* History of the mouse (with focus on their use in genetics studies)
* Mouse tracks: How to identify mouse tracks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="2" end="7" title="Mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="11" end="15" title="Mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="28" end="34" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="211" end="222" title="house mouse" label="house mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="276" end="280" title="pets" label="pets"/>
<link wikidata="Q739059" start="315" end="325" title="Apodemus" label="field mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="438" end="441" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58949" start="476" end="482" title="muroid" label="muroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="509" end="520" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="674" end="687" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomically"/>
<link wikidata="Q39275" start="745" end="748" title="Mus (genus)" label="Mus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232962" start="893" end="928" title="deer mouse" label="deer mouse (&amp;quot;Peromyscus&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055393" start="931" end="944" title="Fancy mouse" label="Domestic mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842787" start="1137" end="1146" title="Laboratory mouse" label="lab mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="1221" end="1224" title="Cat" label="Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="1232" end="1235" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="1238" end="1241" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="1245" end="1258" title="bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="1260" end="1265" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="1288" end="1297" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="1432" end="1443" title="ecological niche" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1485" end="1494" title="mammalian" label="mammalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q987269" start="1570" end="1576" title="vermin" label="vermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="1607" end="1611" title="crops" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="1676" end="1683" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="1719" end="1724" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="1751" end="1760" title="Parasitism" label="parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q29001073" start="1860" end="1870" title="hantavirus" label="hantavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137239" start="1890" end="1919" title="hantavirus pulmonary syndrome" label="hantavirus pulmonary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="1938" end="1947" title="Nocturnality" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30266" start="2371" end="2378" title="Murinae" label="murines"/>
<link wikidata="Q36396" start="2401" end="2412" title="Rattus" label="common rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q213333" start="2485" end="2499" title="Dasyuromorphia" label="Dasyuromorphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23133" start="2502" end="2516" title="marsupial mice" label="marsupial mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q23133" start="2537" end="2547" title="Dasyuridae" label="Dasyuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="2555" end="2563" title="Rodentia" label="Rodentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849836" start="2575" end="2588" title="Castorimorpha" label="Castorimorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q607610" start="2600" end="2612" title="Heteromyidae" label="Heteromyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q922132" start="2618" end="2632" title="Kangaroo mouse" label="Kangaroo mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q922132" start="2646" end="2659" title="Microdipodops" label="Microdipodops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232952" start="2671" end="2683" title="Pocket mouse" label="Pocket mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232952" start="2691" end="2704" title="Perognathinae" label="Perognathinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q308751" start="2710" end="2728" title="Spiny pocket mouse" label="Spiny pocket mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035905" start="2742" end="2751" title="Heteromys" label="Heteromys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066173" start="2769" end="2784" title="Anomaluromorpha" label="Anomaluromorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q135251" start="2796" end="2808" title="Anomaluridae" label="Anomaluridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q928256" start="2814" end="2826" title="flying mouse" label="flying mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q212242" start="2838" end="2847" title="Myomorpha" label="Myomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q193061" start="2859" end="2869" title="Cricetidae" label="Cricetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q599917" start="2875" end="2886" title="Brush mouse" label="Brush mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q262948" start="2923" end="2936" title="Florida mouse" label="Florida mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449308" start="2942" end="2954" title="Golden mouse" label="Golden mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676881" start="2969" end="2982" title="Harvest mouse (disambiguation)" label="harvest mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q246808" start="2996" end="3011" title="Reithrodontomys" label="Reithrodontomys"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="3023" end="3028" title="Voles" label="Voles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25916" start="3094" end="3101" title="Muridae" label="Muridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39275" start="3137" end="3140" title="Mus (genus)" label="Mus"/>
<link wikidata="Q739059" start="3176" end="3184" title="Apodemus" label="Apodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212185" start="3197" end="3207" title="Wood mouse" label="Wood mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q216871" start="3247" end="3266" title="Yellow-necked mouse" label="Yellow-necked mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q307840" start="3306" end="3332" title="Large Mindoro forest mouse" label="Large Mindoro forest mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549496" start="3338" end="3361" title="Big-eared hopping mouse" label="Big-eared hopping mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q307898" start="3367" end="3393" title="Luzon montane forest mouse" label="Luzon montane forest mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q306649" start="3399" end="3419" title="Forrest&amp;#x27;s mouse" label="Forrest&amp;#x27;s mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158498" start="3425" end="3443" title="Pebble-mound mouse" label="Pebble-mound mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765757" start="3449" end="3467" title="Bolam&amp;#x27;s mouse" label="Bolam&amp;#x27;s mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676881" start="3482" end="3495" title="Harvest mouse (disambiguation)" label="harvest mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895175" start="3509" end="3517" title="Micromys" label="Micromys"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="3798" end="3807" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="4315" end="4325" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="4362" end="4369" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="4374" end="4384" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4419" end="4425" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="4473" end="4481" title="homology (biology)" label="homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4527" end="4533" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="4537" end="4551" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="4570" end="4574" title="rats" label="rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="4586" end="4592" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="4637" end="4641" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="4654" end="4662" title="Homologous chromosome" label="homologs"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="4820" end="4833" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364740" start="4860" end="4874" title="knockout mouse" label="knockout mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532934" start="4880" end="4906" title="genetically modified mouse" label="genetically modified mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133550" start="4971" end="4984" title="gene knockout" label="gene knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163050" start="5027" end="5075" title="mouse model of colorectal and intestinal cancer" label="mouse models of colorectal and intestinal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896019" start="5077" end="5106" title="mouse models of Down syndrome" label="mouse models of Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975390" start="5111" end="5151" title="mouse models of breast cancer metastasis" label="mouse models of breast cancer metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="5317" end="5327" title="generation" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6042" end="6046" title="Fancy mouse#Caging" label="Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573" start="6059" end="6066" title="hamster" label="hamster"/>
<link wikidata="Q649817" start="6070" end="6076" title="gerbil" label="gerbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q129211" start="6077" end="6081" title="Cage (enclosure)" label="cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648982" start="6173" end="6177" title="Pet food" label="Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087592" start="6364" end="6369" title="aspen" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="6398" end="6401" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="6404" end="6409" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="6429" end="6438" title="wood pulp" label="wood pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524280" start="6446" end="6455" title="corn husk" label="corn husk"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="6501" end="6512" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="6519" end="6525" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="6540" end="6544" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="6655" end="6665" title="carnivores" label="carnivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="6727" end="6733" title="snakes" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="6735" end="6742" title="lizards" label="lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="6744" end="6749" title="frogs" label="frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213383" start="6751" end="6761" title="tarantulas" label="tarantulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="6767" end="6780" title="bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="7063" end="7080" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448862" start="7165" end="7176" title="Enuresis" label="bed-wetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q205772" start="7184" end="7197" title="Jared Diamond" label="Jared Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7272" end="7288" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="7339" end="7345" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="7359" end="7365" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7403" end="7410" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792971" start="7791" end="7818" title="Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey" label="Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="7875" end="7884" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254634" start="7887" end="7912" title="List of fictional rodents" label="List of fictional rodents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926047" start="7915" end="7947" title="Mouse brain development timeline" label="Mouse brain development timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q658353" start="7950" end="7959" title="Mousetrap" label="Mousetrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440772" start="7962" end="7972" title="Fear of mice" label="Musophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76749558" start="7990" end="8001" title="Rodentology" label="Rodentology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18847" wikidata="Q739186" url="?curid=18847" title="Multics">
<text>Multics (&quot;MULTiplexed Information and Computing Service&quot;) is an influential early time-sharing operating system based on the concept of a single-level memory. It has been written that Multics &quot;has influenced all modern operating systems since, from microcomputers to mainframes.&quot;

Initial planning and development for Multics started in 1964, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Originally it was a cooperative project led by MIT (Project MAC with Fernando Corbató) along with General Electric and Bell Labs. It was developed on the GE 645 computer, which was specially designed for it; the first one was delivered to MIT in January 1967. GE offered their earlier 635 systems with the Dartmouth Time-Sharing System which they called &quot;Mark I&quot; and intended to offer the 645 with Multics as a larger successor. Bell withdrew from the project in 1969 as it became clear it would not deliver a working system in the short term. Shortly thereafter, GE decided to exit the computer industry entirely and sold the division to Honeywell in 1970. Honeywell offered Multics commercially, but with limited success.

Multics has numerous features intended to ensure high availability so that it would support a computing utility similar to the telephone and electricity utilities. Modular hardware structure and software architecture are used to achieve this. The system can grow in size by simply adding more of the appropriate resource, be it computing power, main memory, or disk storage. Separate access control lists on every file provide flexible information sharing, but complete privacy when needed. Multics has a number of standard mechanisms to allow engineers to analyze the performance of the system, as well as a number of adaptive performance optimization mechanisms.

Due to its many novel and valuable ideas, Multics has had a significant influence on computer science despite its faults. Its most lasting effect on the computer industry was to inspire the creation of Unix, which carried forward many Multics features, but was able to run on less-expensive hardware. Unix was developed at Bell to allow their Multics team to continue their research using smaller machines, first a PDP-7 and ultimately the PDP-11.

==Novel ideas==
Multics implements a single-level store for data access, discarding the clear distinction between files (called &quot;segments&quot; in Multics) and &quot;process memory&quot;. The memory of a process consists solely of segments that were mapped into its address space. To read or write to them, the process simply uses normal central processing unit (CPU) instructions, and the operating system takes care of making sure that all the modifications were saved to disk. In POSIX terminology, it is as if every file were codice_1ed; however, in Multics there is no concept of &quot;process memory&quot;, separate from the memory used to hold mapped-in files, as Unix has. &quot;All&quot; memory in the system is part of &quot;some&quot; segment, which appears in the file system; this includes the temporary scratch memory of the process, its kernel stack, etc.

Segments are limited to 256 kilowords, just over 1 MB, because Multics hardware had 18-bit word addresses for the content of a segment. Larger files are &quot;multisegment files&quot; and are handled differently. The 256 kiloword limit was rarely encountered in practice, because at the time, one megabyte of memory was prohibitively expensive.

Another major new idea of Multics was dynamic linking, in which a running process can make external routines available by adding the segments containing them to its address space. This allows applications to always use the latest version of any external routine, since those routines are kept in other segments, which are dynamically linked only when a process first attempts to begin execution in them. Since different processes can use different search rules, different users can end up using different versions of external routines. Equally importantly, with the appropriate settings in the Multics security facilities, the code in the other segment can gain access to data structures maintained in a different process. Dynamic linking in Multics does not require special dynamic-link libraries (DLLs); a program can dynamically link to any executable segment to which it has access rights.

Thus, to interact with an application running in part as a daemon (in another process), a user&#x27;s process simply performs a normal procedure-call instruction to a code segment to which it had dynamically linked (a code segment that implemented some operation associated with the daemon). The code in that segment can then modify data maintained and used in the daemon. When the action necessary to commence the request is completed, a simple procedure return instruction returns control of the user&#x27;s process to the user&#x27;s code.

Multics also supports extremely aggressive on-line reconfiguration: central processing units, memory banks, disk drives, etc. can be added and removed while the system continues operating. At the MIT system, where most early software development was done, it was common practice to split the multiprocessor system into two separate systems during off-hours by incrementally removing enough components to form a second working system, leaving the rest still running for the original logged-in users. System software development testing could be done on the second system, then the components of the second system were added back to the main user system, without ever having shut it down. Multics is one of the earliest multiprocessor systems.

Multics is the first major operating system to be designed as a secure system from the outset. Despite this, early versions of Multics were compromised repeatedly. This led to further work that made the system more secure, and prefigured modern security engineering techniques. Break-ins became very rare once the second-generation hardware base was adopted; it has hardware support for ring-oriented security, a multilevel refinement of the concept of master mode. A US Air Force tiger team project tested Multics security in 1973 under the codeword ZARF. On 28 May 1997, the American National Security Agency declassified this use of the codeword ZARF.

Multics is the first operating system to provide a hierarchical file system, and file names can be of almost arbitrary length and syntax. A given file or directory can have multiple names (typically a long and short form), and symbolic links between directories are also supported. Multics is the first to use the now-standard concept of per-process stacks in the kernel, with a separate stack for each security ring. It is also the first to have a command processor implemented as ordinary user code – an idea later used in the Unix shell. It is also one of the first written in a high-level language (Multics PL/I), after the Burroughs MCP system written in ESPOL, an expanded version of ALGOL.

The deployment of Multics into secure computing environments also spurred the development of innovative supporting applications. In 1975, Morrie Gasser of MITRE Corporation developed a pronounceable random word generator to address password requirements of installations such as the Air Force Data Services Center (AFDSC) processing classified information. To avoid guessable passwords, the AFDSC decided to assign passwords but concluded the manual assignment required too much administrative overhead. Thus, a random word generator was researched and then developed in PL/I. Instead of being based on phonemes, the system employed phonemic segments (second order approximations of English) and other rules to enhance pronounceability and randomness, which was statistically modeled against other approaches. A descendant of this generator was added to Multics during Project Guardian.

==Project history==
In 1964, Multics was developed initially for the GE-645 mainframe, a 36-bit system. GE&#x27;s computer business, including Multics, was taken over by Honeywell in 1970; around 1973, Multics was supported on the Honeywell 6180 machines, which included security improvements including hardware support for protection rings.

Bell Labs pulled out of the project in 1969; some of the people who had worked on it there went on to create the Unix system. Multics development continued at MIT and General Electric. At MIT in 1975, use of Multics was declining and did not recover by 1976 to prior levels. Finally by slashing prices, MIT managed to lure users back to Multics in 1978.

In 1974 Honeywell entered into a development contract with the Air Force (with MIT as a sub-contractor) to develop a security kernel for Multics. This would involve reducing the size of the Multics hardcore by moving specific components of the supervisor out of Ring 0. One of the initial steps after carrying out a security evaluation was the implementation of a multilevel security framework within Multics called AIM (Access Isolation Mechanism). This provided mandatory access control which could be enabled to supplement the already existing discretionary access control that Multics already possessed. The resulting Project Guardian ran until termination in 1976; whilst most of its changes were not added to Multics, some parts of the project such as the proposed Secure Front End Processor was productized by Honeywell as SCOMP (Secure Communications Processor). The SCOMP and its STOP operating system eventually evolved via XTS-200 and XTS-300 into current XTS-400 offering of secure operating systems.

Honeywell continued system development until 1985. About 80 multimillion-dollar sites were installed, at universities, industry, and government sites. The French university system had several installations in the early 1980s. After Honeywell stopped supporting Multics, users migrated to other systems, such as Unix.

In 1985, Multics was issued certification as a B2 level secure operating system using the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria from the National Computer Security Center (NCSC), a division of the NSA; it was the first operating system evaluated to this level.

Multics was distributed from 1975 to 2000 by Groupe Bull in Europe, and by Bull HN Information Systems Inc. in the United States. In 2006, Bull SAS released the source code of Multics versions MR10.2, MR11.0, MR12.0, MR12.1, MR12.2, MR12.3, MR12.4 &amp; MR12.5 under a free software license.

The last known Multics installation running natively on Honeywell hardware was shut down on October 30, 2000, at the Canadian Department of National Defence in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

===Current status===
In 2006 Bull HN released the source code for MR12.5, the final 1992 Multics release, to MIT. Most of the system is now available as free software with the exception of some optional pieces such as TCP/IP.

In 2014, Multics was successfully run on current hardware using an emulator created by Multicians Harry Reed and Charles Anthony. The 1.0 release of the emulator is available . Release 12.6f of Multics accompanies the 1.0 release of the emulator, and adds a few new features, including command line recall and editing using the video system.

==Commands==
The following is a list of programs and commands for common computing tasks that are supported by the Multics command-line interface.

=== File and directory access commands ===
* () - change the working directory
* () - create a directory
* () - copy files
* () - list files and directories
* () - print the contents of a text file
* () - print the working directory
* () - move a file or directory to a different directory
* () - rename a file without moving it

=== Text editors ===
* - a simple line editor
* - Multics Emacs

=== Document formatters ===

=== Compilers, assemblers, and interpreters ===
* 
* 
* ()
* 
=== Email ===
* ()


=== On-line documentation ===


=== Scripting ===
* 

=== Data processing ===
* () - simulator to run GCOS programs
* , - sorting and merging of text and binary files

=== Login sessions ===
* 

=== Active functions ===
The Multics shell language supports &quot;active functions&quot;, which are similar to commands, but which return a string value. An active function is called by putting the active function name and the arguments to the active function in square brackets and . The string returned by the active function is substituted into the command in place of the call to the active function. For example, when the command is processed, the active function is run; it returns the full path of the working directory, which is substituted into the command, so that the command prints the working directory.

Some programs can act either as commands or as active functions; when run as a command, its result is printed, and when run as an active function, its result is returned as a string.

Some common active functions are:

* - returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to the argument
* - returns the largest integer less than or equal to the argument
* () - returns the home directory
* 
* - returns the integer part of the argument
* () - returns the working directory

==Retrospective observations==
Peter H. Salus, author of a book covering Unix&#x27;s early years, stated one position: &quot;With Multics they tried to have a much more versatile and flexible operating system, and it failed miserably&quot;. This position, however, is said to have been discredited in the computing community because many of Multics&#x27; technical innovations are used in modern commercial computing systems.

The permanently resident kernel of Multics, a system derided in its day as being too large and complex, was 135 KB of code. The first MIT GE-645 had 512 kilowords of memory (2 MiB), a truly enormous amount at the time, and the kernel used a moderate portion of Multics main memory.

The entire system, including the operating system and the complex PL/I compiler, user commands, and subroutine libraries, consists of about 1500 source modules. These average roughly 200 lines of source code each, and compile to a total of roughly 4.5 MiB of procedure code, which was fairly large by the standards of the day.

Multics compilers generally optimise more for code density than CPU performance, for example using small sub-routines called &quot;operators&quot; for short standard code sequences, which makes comparison of object code size with modern systems less useful. High code density is a good optimisation choice for Multics as a multi-user system with expensive main memory.

During its commercial product history, it was often commented internally that the Honeywell Information Systems (HIS) (later Honeywell-Bull) sales and marketing staff were more familiar with and comfortable making the business case for Honeywell&#x27;s other computer line, the DPS 6 running GCOS. The DPS-6 and GCOS was a well-regarded and reliable platform for inventory, accounting, word processing, and vertical market applications, such as banking, where it had a sizeable customer base. In contrast, the full potential of Multics’ flexibility for even mundane tasks was not easy to comprehend in that era and its features were generally outside the skill set of contemporary business analysts. The scope of this disconnect was concretized by an anecdote conveyed by Paul Stachour, CNO/CSC:

When American Telephone and Telegraph was changing its name to just AT&amp;T in 1983, a staffer from Honeywell’s legal department showed up and asked a Multician if he could arrange to have the name changed in all of their computerized documents. When asked when the process could be completed, the Multician replied, &quot;It&#x27;s done.&quot; The staffer repeated that he needed &quot;hundreds perhaps thousands&quot; of documents updated. The Multician explained that he had executed a global search and replace as the staffer was speaking, and the task was in fact completed.

==Influence on other projects==

===Unix===
The design and features of Multics influenced the Unix operating system, which was originally written by two Multics programmers, Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie. Influence of Multics on Unix is evident in many areas, including the hierarchical file system, redirection, the shell, and the naming of some commands. But the internal design philosophy is quite different, focusing on keeping the system small and simple, and so correcting some perceived deficiencies of Multics because of its high resource demands on the limited computer hardware of the time.

The name &quot;Unix&quot; (originally &quot;Unics&quot;) is itself a pun on &quot;Multics&quot;. The &quot;U&quot; in Unix is rumored to stand for &quot;ed&quot; as opposed to the &quot;ed&quot; of Multics, further underscoring the designers&#x27; rejections of Multics&#x27; complexity in favor of a more straightforward and workable approach for smaller computers. (Garfinkel and Abelson cite an alternative origin: Peter Neumann at Bell Labs, watching a demonstration of the prototype, suggested the pun name UNICS – pronounced &quot;eunuchs&quot; – as a &quot;castrated Multics&quot;, although Dennis Ritchie is said to have denied this.)

Ken Thompson, in a transcribed 2007 interview with Peter Seibel refers to Multics as &quot;overdesigned and overbuilt and over everything. It was close to unusable. They [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] still claim it&#x27;s a monstrous success, but it just clearly wasn&#x27;t&quot;. On the influence of Multics on Unix, Thompson stated that &quot;the things that I liked enough (about Multics) to actually take were the hierarchical file system and the shell — a separate process that you can replace with some other process&quot;.

Dennis Ritchie wrote that the design of UNIX was influenced by CTSS.

===Other operating systems===
The Prime Computer operating system, PRIMOS, was referred to as &quot;Multics in a shoebox&quot; by William Poduska, a founder of the company. Poduska later moved on to found Apollo Computer, whose AEGIS and later Domain/OS operating systems, sometimes called &quot;Multics in a matchbox&quot;, extends the Multics design to a networked graphics workstation environment.

The Stratus VOS operating system of Stratus Computer (now Stratus Technologies) is very strongly influenced by Multics, and both its external user interface and internal structure bear many close resemblances to the older project. The high-reliability, availability, and security features of Multics are extended in Stratus VOS to support a new line of fault tolerant computer systems supporting secure, reliable transaction processing. Stratus VOS is the most directly related descendant of Multics still in active development and production usage today.

General Motors&#x27; Multiple Console Time Sharing System (MCTS) for the Control Data Corporation STAR-100 computer was based on Multics.

The protection architecture of Multics, restricting the ability of code at one level of the system to access resources at another, was adopted as the basis for the security features of ICL&#x27;s VME operating system.

The Edinburgh Multiple Access System (EMAS) draws particularly on the one-level store concept used by Multics, providing access to files only by mapping them into memory. All memory space is associated with a segment.
==See also==

* Time-sharing system evolution
* Peter J. Denning
* Jack B. Dennis
* Robert Fano – director of Project MAC at MIT (1963–1968)
* Robert M. Graham (computer scientist)
* J. C. R. Licklider – director of Project MAC at MIT (1968–1971)
* Peter G. Neumann
* Elliott Organick
* Louis Pouzin – introduced the term &quot;shell&quot; for the command language used in Multics
* Jerome H. Saltzer
* Roger R. Schell
* Glenda Schroeder – implemented the first command line user interface shell and proposed the first email system with Pouzin and Crisman
* Victor A. Vyssotsky

==References==
==Further reading==
The literature contains a large number of papers about Multics, and various components of it; a fairly complete list is available at the Multics Bibliography page and on a second, briefer 1994 Multics bibliography (text format). The most important and/or informative ones are listed below.
* F. J. Corbató, V. A. Vyssotsky, &quot;Introduction and Overview of the Multics System&quot; (AFIPS 1965) is a good introduction to the system.
* F. J. Corbató, C. T. Clingen, J. H. Saltzer, &quot;Multics – The First Seven Years&quot; (AFIPS, 1972) is an excellent review, written after a considerable period of use and improvement over the initial efforts.
* J. J. Donovan, S. Madnick, Operating Systems, is a fundamental read on operating systems.
* J. J. Donovan, Systems Programming, is a good introduction into systems programming and operating systems.

===Technical details===
* Jerome H. Saltzer, &quot;Introduction to Multics&quot; (MIT Project MAC, 1974) is a considerably longer introduction to the system, geared towards actual users.
* Elliott I. Organick, &quot;The Multics System: An Examination of Its Structure&quot; (MIT Press, 1972) is the standard work on the system, although it documents an early version, and some features described therein never appeared in the actual system.
* V. A. Vyssotsky, F. J. Corbató, R. M. Graham, &quot;Structure of the Multics Supervisor&quot; (AFIPS 1965) describes the basic internal structure of the Multics kernel.
* Jerome H. Saltzer, &quot;Traffic Control in a Multiplexed Computer System&quot; (MIT Project MAC, June 1966) is the original description of the idea of switching kernel stacks; one of the classic papers of computer science.
* R. C. Daley, P. G. Neumann, &quot;A General Purpose File System for Secondary Storage&quot; (AFIPS, 1965) describes the file system, including the access control and backup mechanisms.
* R. J. Feiertag, E. I. Organick, &quot;The Multics Input/Output System&quot;. Describes the lower levels of the I/O implementation.
* A. Bensoussan, C. T. Clingen, R. C. Daley, &quot;The Multics Virtual Memory: Concepts and Design&quot;, (ACM SOSP, 1969) describes the Multics memory system in some detail.
* Paul Green, &quot;Multics Virtual Memory – Tutorial and Reflections&quot; is a good in-depth look at the Multics storage system.
* Roger R. Schell, &quot;Dynamic Reconfiguration in a Modular Computer System&quot; (MIT Project MAC, 1971) describes the reconfiguration mechanisms.

===Security===
* Paul A. Karger, Roger R. Schell, &quot;Multics Security Evaluation: Vulnerability Analysis&quot; (Air Force Electronic Systems Division, 1974) describes the classic attacks on Multics security by a &quot;tiger team&quot;.
* Jerome H. Saltzer, Michael D. Schroeder, &quot;The Protection of Information in Computer Systems&quot; (Proceedings of the IEEE, September 1975) describes the fundamentals behind the first round of security upgrades; another classic paper.
* M. D. Schroeder, D. D. Clark, J. H. Saltzer, D. H. Wells. &quot;Final Report of the Multics Kernel Design Project&quot; (MIT LCS, 1978) describes the security upgrades added to produce an even more improved version.
* Paul A. Karger, Roger R. Schell, &quot;Thirty Years Later: Lessons from the Multics Security Evaluation&quot; (IBM, 2002) is an interesting retrospective which compares actual deployed security in today&#x27;s hostile environment with what was demonstrated to be possible decades ago. It concludes that Multics offered considerably stronger security than most systems commercially available in 2002.

==External links==

* multicians.org is a comprehensive site with a lot of material
** Multics papers online
** Multics glossary
** Myths discusses numerous myths about Multics in some detail, including the myths that it failed, that it was big and slow, as well as a few understandable misapprehensions
** Multics security
** Unix and Multics
** Multics general info and FAQ Includes extensive overview of other software systems influenced by Multics
* Open source emulator for the GE Large Systems / Honeywell / Bull 600/6000‑series mainframe computers
* Honeywell, Inc., MULTICS records, 1965–1982. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Multics development records include the second MULTICS System Programmers Manual; MULTICS Technical Bulletins that describe procedures, applications, and problems, especially concerning security; and returned &quot;Request for Comments Forms&quot; that include technical papers and thesis proposals.
* Current Multics development home page
* Official historical source code archive at MIT
* 
* Multics at Universitaet Mainz
* Various scanned Multics manuals 
* , a critical review of Multicians.org, plus a capsule history of Multics.



 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="0" end="7" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="15" end="60" title="Multics" label="MULTiplexed Information and Computing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="92" end="104" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="105" end="121" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523743" start="148" end="167" title="single-level store" label="single-level memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="366" end="390" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="439" end="442" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="444" end="455" title="Project MAC" label="Project MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q92625" start="461" end="477" title="Fernando Corbató" label="Fernando Corbató"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="490" end="506" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="511" end="520" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="546" end="552" title="GE 645" label="GE 645"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348530" start="698" end="727" title="Dartmouth Time-Sharing System" label="Dartmouth Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="1041" end="1050" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188445" start="1221" end="1238" title="computing utility" label="computing utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="1254" end="1263" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="1268" end="1279" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="1280" end="1289" title="public utility" label="utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q338966" start="1511" end="1530" title="access control list" label="access control list"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="1878" end="1894" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1995" end="1999" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270176" start="2208" end="2213" title="PDP-7" label="PDP-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="2233" end="2239" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523743" start="2279" end="2297" title="single-level store" label="single-level store"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="2356" end="2360" title="computer file" label="file"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="2413" end="2420" title="computer process" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="2421" end="2427" title="computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="2513" end="2526" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="2585" end="2608" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="2721" end="2725" title="disk storage" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="2730" end="2735" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="2918" end="2922" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="3023" end="3034" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="3147" end="3155" title="kiloword" label="kiloword"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="3170" end="3172" title="megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8095398" start="3503" end="3518" title="shared library" label="dynamic linking"/>
<link wikidata="Q817775" start="3913" end="3925" title="PATH (variable)" label="search rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q380319" start="4240" end="4269" title="Dynamic-link library" label="dynamic-link libraries (DLLs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="4419" end="4425" title="daemon (computer software)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="4495" end="4509" title="procedure call" label="procedure-call"/>
<link wikidata="Q630802" start="4947" end="4970" title="hot-swapping" label="on-line reconfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="4972" end="4995" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="5196" end="5210" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="5711" end="5724" title="computer security" label="secure system"/>
<link wikidata="Q365674" start="5892" end="5912" title="security engineering" label="security engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="6034" end="6056" title="ring (computer security)" label="ring-oriented security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="6100" end="6111" title="kernel mode" label="master mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292008" start="6354" end="6378" title="hierarchical file system" label="hierarchical file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="6645" end="6652" title="process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="6653" end="6658" title="Stack (data structure)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="6667" end="6673" title="kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="6752" end="6769" title="command processor" label="command processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663" start="6832" end="6842" title="Unix shell" label="Unix shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="6914" end="6918" title="PL/I" label="PL/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326534" start="6931" end="6944" title="Burroughs MCP" label="Burroughs MCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275955" start="6963" end="6968" title="Executive Systems Problem Oriented Language" label="ESPOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="6993" end="6998" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="7604" end="7611" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="7958" end="7964" title="GE-645" label="GE-645"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271378" start="7978" end="7984" title="36-bit" label="36-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893978" start="8120" end="8134" title="Honeywell 6000 series" label="Honeywell 6180"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="8213" end="8228" title="protection ring" label="protection ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="8345" end="8349" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938664" start="8704" end="8719" title="security kernel" label="security kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047485" start="8951" end="8970" title="multilevel security" label="multilevel security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888932" start="9051" end="9075" title="mandatory access control" label="mandatory access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228590" start="9134" end="9162" title="discretionary access control" label="discretionary access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042513" start="9554" end="9561" title="XTS-400" label="XTS-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="10009" end="10052" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="10062" end="10095" title="National Computer Security Center" label="National Computer Security Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="10122" end="10125" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004175" start="10232" end="10243" title="Groupe Bull" label="Groupe Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="10247" end="10253" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004175" start="10326" end="10334" title="Groupe Bull" label="Bull SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="10456" end="10469" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187908" start="10524" end="10532" title="native (computing)" label="natively"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191463" start="10606" end="10636" title="Department of National Defence (Canada)" label="Department of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="10824" end="10837" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="10889" end="10895" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079196" start="11294" end="11302" title="command (computing)" label="commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="11364" end="11386" title="command-line interface" label="command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192634" start="11450" end="11467" title="working directory" label="working directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192634" start="11604" end="11621" title="working directory" label="working directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184900" start="11753" end="11764" title="line editor" label="line editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934621" start="11769" end="11782" title="Multics Emacs" label="Multics Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501565" start="11998" end="12002" title="General Comprehensive Operating System" label="GCOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="12128" end="12133" title="shell (computing)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192634" start="12601" end="12618" title="working directory" label="working directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q818391" start="13086" end="13100" title="home directory" label="home directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192634" start="13168" end="13185" title="working directory" label="working directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174458" start="13218" end="13232" title="Peter H. Salus" label="Peter H. Salus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="13748" end="13751" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="13752" end="13758" title="GE 645" label="GE-645"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="13968" end="13976" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="14271" end="14283" title="code density" label="code density"/>
<link wikidata="Q876057" start="14548" end="14558" title="multi-user" label="multi-user"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148817" start="14873" end="14878" title="Honeywell Level 6" label="DPS 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501565" start="14887" end="14891" title="General Comprehensive Operating System" label="GCOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="16068" end="16072" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107006" start="16148" end="16160" title="Ken Thompson" label="Ken Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q45575" start="16165" end="16179" title="Dennis Ritchie" label="Dennis Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292008" start="16250" end="16274" title="hierarchical file system" label="hierarchical file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8143062" start="16276" end="16287" title="Redirection (computing)" label="redirection"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="16293" end="16298" title="Shell (computing)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="16647" end="16650" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="17115" end="17122" title="eunuchs" label="eunuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="17827" end="17831" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="CTSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270618" start="17868" end="17882" title="Prime Computer" label="Prime Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109710" start="17901" end="17907" title="PRIMOS" label="PRIMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016972" start="17964" end="17979" title="William Poduska" label="William Poduska"/>
<link wikidata="Q619107" start="18039" end="18054" title="Apollo Computer" label="Apollo Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289795" start="18078" end="18087" title="Domain/OS" label="Domain/OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622298" start="18240" end="18251" title="Stratus VOS" label="Stratus VOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126511" start="18294" end="18314" title="Stratus Technologies" label="Stratus Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="18589" end="18603" title="fault tolerant" label="fault tolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q844565" start="18649" end="18671" title="transaction processing" label="transaction processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="18793" end="18807" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934886" start="18814" end="18850" title="Multiple Console Time Sharing System" label="Multiple Console Time Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="18866" end="18890" title="Control Data Corporation" label="Control Data Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648629" start="18891" end="18899" title="CDC STAR-100" label="STAR-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413338" start="19117" end="19120" title="International Computers Limited" label="ICL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052546" start="19128" end="19131" title="ICL VME" label="VME"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338225" start="19155" end="19187" title="Edinburgh Multiple Access System" label="Edinburgh Multiple Access System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804832" start="19385" end="19414" title="Time-sharing system evolution" label="Time-sharing system evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49813" start="19417" end="19433" title="Peter J. Denning" label="Peter J. Denning"/>
<link wikidata="Q266386" start="19436" end="19450" title="Jack B. Dennis" label="Jack B. Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q93052" start="19453" end="19464" title="Robert Fano" label="Robert Fano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347126" start="19512" end="19549" title="Robert M. Graham (computer scientist)" label="Robert M. Graham (computer scientist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="19552" end="19570" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174137" start="19618" end="19634" title="Peter G. Neumann" label="Peter G. Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365706" start="19637" end="19653" title="Elliott Organick" label="Elliott Organick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083180" start="19656" end="19668" title="Louis Pouzin" label="Louis Pouzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184376" start="19752" end="19769" title="Jerome H. Saltzer" label="Jerome H. Saltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358826" start="19772" end="19787" title="Roger R. Schell" label="Roger R. Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9537" start="19790" end="19806" title="Glenda Schroeder" label="Glenda Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="19831" end="19843" title="command line" label="command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="19844" end="19858" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="19859" end="19864" title="shell (computing)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="19888" end="19893" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q93079" start="19927" end="19946" title="Victor A. Vyssotsky" label="Victor A. Vyssotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q92625" start="20275" end="20288" title="Fernando J. Corbató" label="F. J. Corbató"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487461" start="20290" end="20305" title="Michael Schroeder" label="V. A. Vyssotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743752" start="20368" end="20373" title="AFIPS" label="AFIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184376" start="20450" end="20463" title="J. H. Saltzer" label="J. H. Saltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626804" start="20649" end="20659" title="Stuart Madnick" label="S. Madnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184376" start="20860" end="20877" title="Jerome H. Saltzer" label="Jerome H. Saltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365706" start="21023" end="21042" title="Elliott Organick" label="Elliott I. Organick"/>
<link wikidata="Q93079" start="21277" end="21292" title="Victor A. Vyssotsky" label="V. A. Vyssotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q92625" start="21294" end="21307" title="Fernando J. Corbató" label="F. J. Corbató"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184376" start="21448" end="21465" title="Jerome H. Saltzer" label="Jerome H. Saltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174137" start="21687" end="21700" title="Peter G. Neumann" label="P. G. Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="22099" end="22102" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661886" start="22103" end="22107" title="SOSP" label="SOSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150990" start="22169" end="22179" title="Paul Green (engineer)" label="Paul Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358826" start="22300" end="22315" title="Roger R. Schell" label="Roger R. Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413754" start="22670" end="22680" title="tiger team" label="tiger team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184376" start="22690" end="22707" title="Jerome H. Saltzer" label="Jerome H. Saltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="22813" end="22817" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487461" start="22932" end="22947" title="Michael Schroeder" label="M. D. Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184376" start="22962" end="22975" title="J. H. Saltzer" label="J. H. Saltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="24153" end="24178" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18849" wikidata="Q6778650" url="?curid=18849" title="Marxist film theory">
<text>Marxist film theory is an approach to film theory centered on concepts that make a political understanding of the medium possible. An individual studying a Marxist representation in a film, might take special interest in its representations of political hierarchy and social injustices.

== Overview ==
Sergei Eisenstein and many other Soviet filmmakers in the 1920s expressed ideas of Marxism through film. The Hegelian dialectic was considered best displayed in film editing through the Kuleshov Experiment and the development of montage. While this structuralist approach to Marxism and filmmaking was used, the more outspoken complaint that the Russian filmmakers had, was with the narrative structure of the United States cinema.

Eisenstein&#x27;s solution was to shun narrative structure by eliminating the individual protagonist and tell stories where the action is moved by the group and the story is told through a clash of one image against the next (whether in composition, motion, or idea) so that the audience is never lulled into believing that they are watching something that has not been worked over. Eisenstein himself was accused by the Soviet authorities under Joseph Stalin of &quot;formalist error&quot;, of highlighting form as a thing of beauty instead of portraying the worker nobly.

French Marxist film makers, such as Jean-Luc Godard, employed radical editing and choice of subject matter as well as subversive parody to heighten class consciousness and promote Marxist ideas. Situationist film maker Guy Debord, author of &quot;The Society of the Spectacle&quot;, began his film &quot;In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni&quot; with a radical critique of the spectator who goes to the cinema to forget about their dispossessed daily life. Situationist film makers produced a number of important films, where the only contribution by the situationist film cooperative was the sound-track. In &quot;Can dialectics break bricks?&quot; (1973), a Chinese Kung Fu film was transformed by redubbing into an epistle on state capitalism and Proletarian revolution. The intellectual technique of using capitalism&#x27;s own structures against itself is known as détournement.

== See also ==
* Karl Marx in film
* Screen theory, a Marxist-psychoanalytic film theory associated with the British journal &quot;Screen&quot; in the 1970s

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* James, David E. (1989) &quot;Allegories of Cinema: American Film in the Sixties&quot; Princeton. Princeton University Press. ISBN : 9780691047553</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6778650" start="0" end="19" title="Marxist film theory" label="Marxist film theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793" start="38" end="49" title="film theory" label="film theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="244" end="263" title="Social stratification" label="political hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="268" end="285" title="Social justice" label="social injustices"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="303" end="320" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Sergei Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="386" end="393" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="412" end="430" title="Hegelian dialectic" label="Hegelian dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377326" start="489" end="508" title="Kuleshov Experiment" label="Kuleshov Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321104" start="532" end="539" title="Soviet montage theory" label="montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="552" end="565" title="structuralism" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428845" start="686" end="695" title="Literary technique" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="713" end="733" title="United States cinema" label="United States cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="825" end="836" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="1182" end="1195" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="1347" end="1362" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="1506" end="1518" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q298075" start="1530" end="1540" title="Guy Debord" label="Guy Debord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213022" start="1558" end="1586" title="The Society of the Spectacle" label="The Society of the Spectacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q286497" start="1929" end="1957" title="Can dialectics break bricks?" label="Can dialectics break bricks?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567942" start="1974" end="1981" title="Media of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="1982" end="1989" title="Kung Fu" label="Kung Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q548235" start="2043" end="2059" title="state capitalism" label="state capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="2064" end="2075" title="Proletarian" label="Proletarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045377" start="2184" end="2196" title="détournement" label="détournement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372071" start="2216" end="2233" title="Karl Marx in film" label="Karl Marx in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439047" start="2236" end="2249" title="Screen theory" label="Screen theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438983" start="2330" end="2336" title="Screen (journal)" label="Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q112511841" start="2398" end="2412" title="David E. James" label="James, David E"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18851" wikidata="Q426315" url="?curid=18851" title="Mars (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Mars]] is the fourth planet from the Sun.

Mars also commonly refers to:
*Mars (mythology), the Ancient Roman god of war, equivalent to the Greek god &quot;Ares&quot;
*Mars Inc., a confectioner and food company
**Mars bar, produced by Mars, Inc.

Mars may also refer to:
==Biology and medicine==
*MARS (gene), a human enzyme
*Medication Administration Record Sheet
*MARS, the Molecular Adsorbents Recirculation System for liver dialysis

==Geography==
*Mars Glacier, Alexander Island, Antarctica

===Canada===
*MaRS Discovery District, a scientific research centre in Toronto
*McGill Arctic Research Station, Nunavut, Canada

===France===
*Mars, Ardèche, France
*Mars-sous-Bourcq, Ardennes, France
*Mars, Gard, France
*Mars, Loire, France
*Mars-la-Tour, Meurthe-et-Moselle, France
*Mars-sur-Allier, Nièvre, France

===United States===
*Monterey Accelerated Research System, a cabled-based ocean observatory in Monterey Bay, California
*Mars, California, a populated place
*Mars Bluff, South Carolina, an unincorporated community
*Outingdale, California, formerly called Mars, a populated place
*Le Mars, Iowa, a city in and the county seat of Plymouth County
*Mars Hill, Maine, a town
*Mars Hotel (Arches National Park), a summit in Utah
*Mars, Nebraska, a ghost town
*Mars, Pennsylvania, a borough
*Mars, Texas, a ghost town

===Ukraine===
*Mars, Chernihiv Oblast, a village in the North of Ukraine

==Media, music and arts==
===Fictional entities===
*Mars (&quot;Black Clover&quot;), a character in &quot;Black Clover&quot;
*Mars (&quot;Biker Mice from Mars&quot;), the planet as it appears in &quot;Biker Mice from Mars&quot;
*Military Armament Research Syndicate, a fictional organization in the G.I. Joe universe
*Commander Mars, a &quot;Pokémon&quot; character
*Mars or Scarface, an &quot;Ultimate Muscle&quot; character
*The Megaversity Association for Reenactments and Simulations, a fictional association in &quot;The Big U&quot;
*Mars the Dog, canine star of &quot;A Dog&#x27;s Breakfast&quot;

===Film and television===
*&quot;Mars&quot; (1930 film), an animated short film in the Oswald the Lucky Rabbit series
*&quot;Mars&quot; (1968 film), a soviet science education/fiction film
*&quot;Mars&quot; (1997 film), a film starring Shari Belafonte
*&quot;Mars&quot; (1998 film), a film starring Olivier Gruner
*&quot;Mars&quot; (2004 film), a Russian film set in Mars, a small town on the Black Sea
*&quot;Mars&quot; (2010 film), a 2010 animated film
*&quot;Mars&quot; (American TV series), a 2016 docudrama science fiction series
*&quot;Mars&quot; (Taiwanese TV series), a 2004 drama series based on the manga by Fuyumi Soryo
*&quot;Mars&quot; (talk show), a Philippine female talk show on GMA News TV and GMA
*&quot;Mars&quot;, an upcoming animated film by The Whitest Kids U&#x27; Know
*&quot;Mars: Zero&#x27;s Rebellion&quot;, a 2024 drama series starring Shunsuke Michieda

===Literature===
*&quot;Mars&quot; (Fritz Zorn), a 1976 autobiographical essay by Fritz Angst
*&quot;Mars&quot; (comics), a comic book series
*&quot;Mars&quot; (manga), a 1996 manga series by Fuyumi Soryo
*&quot;Mars&quot; trilogy, three science fiction novels by Kim Stanley Robinson
*&quot;Mars&quot;, a novel by Ben Bova in the &quot;Grand Tour&quot; series
*&quot;Mars&quot;, 1976 manga series by Mitsuteru Yokoyama
*&quot;The Mars Project&quot;, a non-fiction science book by Wernher von Braun
*&quot;Project Mars: A Technical Tale&quot;, a science fiction novel by Wernher von Braun

===Music albums===
*&quot;Mars&quot; (B&#x27;z album)
*&quot;Mars&quot; (Gackt album)
*&quot;Mars&quot;, disk two of the Red Hot Chili Peppers double album &quot;Stadium Arcadium&quot;
*&quot;Mars&quot;, an album by Sinkane

===Music groups===
*Mars Music, a now defunct U.S. music store chain
*Mars (band), a No Wave band
*M.A.R.S., a heavy metal supergroup that released the 1986 album &quot;Project Driver&quot;
*MARRS, British electronic music group

===Songs and movements===
*&quot;Mars&quot; (song), a 2008 single by Fake Blood
*&quot;Mars, the Bringer of War&quot;, a movement in Holst&#x27;s &quot;The Planets&quot;
*&quot;Mars&quot;, a song by Jay Sean from &quot;Neon&quot;
*&quot;Mars&quot;, a song by Mario from &quot;Closer to Mars&quot;
*&quot;Mars&quot;, a song by Soulfly from &quot;Prophecy&quot;

===Video gaming===
*Project Mars, codename for the Sega 32X add-on video game console
*Memory Array Redcode Simulator, the environment for the competitive programming game Core War

==Military==
*MARS (missile), air to ground missile built by Israel Military Industries
*Mars Automatic Pistol, a semi-automatic pistol developed in 1900
*MARS tanker programme, which resulted in the four Tide-class tankers that entered service with the British Royal Fleet Auxiliary from 2017
*ITL MARS, a reflex sight made by International Technologies Lasers
*Operation Mars, codename of the Second Rzhev-Sychevka Offensive, a Soviet offensive during World War II
*Military Auxiliary Radio System, an auxiliary communications system of amateur radio operators for the United States armed forces
* or M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System
*&quot;Operation Mars&quot;, 28 March 1918 German offensive in World War I, part of the Spring Offensive
*Machine-Assisted Analytic Rapid-Repository System, a US Defense Intelligence Agency data repository 

===Warships===
*Dutch frigate &quot;Mars&quot;, later HMS &quot;Mars&quot;, a 32-gun fifth rate ship of the line built in 1769
*French ship &quot;Mars&quot;, a list of French warships
**French privateer &quot;Mars&quot; (1746), later HMS &quot;Mars&quot;, a 64-gun third-rate
*German trawler V 621 &quot;Mars&quot;, a German &quot;vorpostenboot&quot; in service in 1944
*HMS &quot;Mars&quot;, a list of ships of the Royal Navy
**HMS &quot;Mars&quot; (1759), a 74-gun third rate
**HMS &quot;Mars&quot; (1794), a 74-gun third rate
***&quot;Mars&quot;-class ship of the line
**HMS &quot;Mars&quot; (1848), an 80-gun second rate
**HMS &quot;Mars&quot; (1896), a &quot;Majestic&quot;-class battleship
**HMS &quot;Mars&quot; (R76), a &quot;Colossus&quot;-class aircraft carrier renamed HMS &quot;Pioneer&quot; in 1944
**&quot;Mars&quot;, a planned &quot;Minotaur&quot;-class cruiser of the Royal Navy, cancelled in 1946
*SMS &quot;Mars&quot;, a list of ships
**SMS &quot;Mars&quot; (1879), a German gunnery training ship
**SMS &quot;Tegetthoff&quot; (1878) or SMS &quot;Mars&quot;, an Austro-Hungarian central battery ship
*Swedish warship &quot;Mars&quot;, a ship sunk in 1564
*USS &quot;Mars&quot;, several ships of the US Navy
**USS &quot;Mars&quot; (1798), a galley
**USS &quot;Mars&quot; (AC-6), launched in 1909
**USS &quot;Mars&quot; (AFS-1), launched in 1963
***&quot;Mars&quot;-class combat stores ship
*&quot;Mars&quot; class, several ship classes

==Organizations and products==
*Mars (beer), a type of lambic ale
*Mars (motorcycle), a defunct German motorcycle manufacturer
*Mars (oil platform), an oil drilling platform in the Gulf of Mexico
*Mars (supermarket), a U.S. grocery chain
*Icaro Mars, an Italian hang glider design
*MARS Group, a British architectural think tank founded in 1933
*Mauritius Amateur Radio Society
*Mongolian Amateur Radio Society
*Mumbai Amateur Radio Society, Mumbai, India
*Mars Tver, a former name of THK Tver, a minor professional ice hockey club in Tver, Russia

==People==
*Mars (surname), a list of people with the surname
*Cheung Wing-fat (born 1954), nicknamed Mars, Hong Kong actor, action director, stuntman and martial artist
*Mars (rapper) (born 1980), stage name of Mario Delgado, American horrorcore rapper
*Mars (record producer), moniker of Lamar Edwards from production teams 1500 or Nothin&#x27; and Smash Factory
*Jean-Baptiste Belley or Mars (1740s–1805), Senegalese Haitian politician
*Xueyang &quot;Mars&quot; Ma, member of Mandopop boy band Top Combine
*Mars (drag queen), based in Portland, Oregon, USA

===People with the given name===
*Mars Argo, stage name of Brittany Sheets, American singer, songwriter, actress, photographer, Internet personality and YouTuber
*Mars Bonfire (born 1943), Canadian musician and songwriter
*Mars Di Bartolomeo (born 1952), Luxembourgish politician
*Mars Ravelo (1916–1988), Filipino comic book cartoonist and graphic novelist

==Technology==
*MARS (cipher), a block cipher, IBM&#x27;s submission for the AES
*Cisco Security Monitoring, Analysis, and Response System, a security monitoring tool for network devices
*Mars computer, a family of PDP-10-compatible digital computers built by Systems Concepts
*Mars program, a series of uncrewed spacecraft launched by the Soviet Union
*Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport, a space launch site on Wallops Island, Virginia
*Mars Analogue Research Station Program, of The Mars Society
*Marketing and Reporting Sales system, a customer relationship management software package produced and sold by Phoenix American

==Transportation==
*Mars Light, an oscillating railroad safety light found on locomotives
*MARS (ticket reservation system), a train seat reservation system used in Japan
*Mars (Metra), a station on Metra&#x27;s Milwaukee District/West in Chicago, Illinois
*JRM Mars, a flying boat
*Mars, a West Cornwall Railway locomotive

==Other uses==
*Mars (astrology), a set of qualities and influences
*Mars (surname)
**Mars family, the family that owns Mars, Incorporated
*Multivariate adaptive regression spline, a statistical analysis technique

==See also==
*Ares (disambiguation)
*Colonization of Mars for the Mars colony concept
*Exploration of Mars, for various Mars projects and programmes
*Champ de Mars (disambiguation)
*Field of Mars (disambiguation)
*Mars 1 (disambiguation)
*Mars II (disambiguation)
*Mars Hill (disambiguation)
*Mars station (disambiguation)
*Marrs, an American surname
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q426315" start="0" end="8" title="Mars (disambiguation)" label="[[Mars]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q426315" start="45" end="49" title="Mars (disambiguation)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="76" end="92" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="170" end="179" title="Mars Inc." label="Mars Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q31305" start="215" end="223" title="Mars bar" label="Mars bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q426315" start="249" end="253" title="Mars (disambiguation)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028883" start="299" end="310" title="MARS (gene)" label="MARS (gene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806657" start="328" end="360" title="Medication Administration Record" label="Medication Administration Record"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="378" end="419" title="Liver support system#The MARS System" label="Molecular Adsorbents Recirculation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773125" start="455" end="467" title="Mars Glacier" label="Mars Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882212" start="513" end="536" title="MaRS Discovery District" label="MaRS Discovery District"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190335" start="579" end="609" title="McGill Arctic Research Station" label="McGill Arctic Research Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q137393" start="642" end="655" title="Mars, Ardèche" label="Mars, Ardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q429153" start="665" end="681" title="Mars-sous-Bourcq" label="Mars-sous-Bourcq"/>
<link wikidata="Q31348" start="701" end="711" title="Mars, Gard" label="Mars, Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116491" start="721" end="732" title="Mars, Loire" label="Mars, Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q228791" start="742" end="754" title="Mars-la-Tour" label="Mars-la-Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141685" start="784" end="799" title="Mars-sur-Allier" label="Mars-sur-Allier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905283" start="838" end="874" title="Monterey Accelerated Research System" label="Monterey Accelerated Research System"/>
<link wikidata="Q618630" start="938" end="954" title="Mars, California" label="Mars, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773108" start="975" end="1001" title="Mars Bluff, South Carolina" label="Mars Bluff, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112086" start="1032" end="1054" title="Outingdale, California" label="Outingdale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q570073" start="1097" end="1110" title="Le Mars, Iowa" label="Le Mars, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449060" start="1162" end="1178" title="Mars Hill, Maine" label="Mars Hill, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130390677" start="1188" end="1221" title="Mars Hotel (Arches National Park)" label="Mars Hotel (Arches National Park)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356542" start="1241" end="1255" title="Mars, Nebraska" label="Mars, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185928" start="1271" end="1289" title="Mars, Pennsylvania" label="Mars, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27997533" start="1302" end="1313" title="Mars, Texas" label="Mars, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282418" start="1344" end="1366" title="Mars, Chernihiv Oblast" label="Mars, Chernihiv Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915681" start="1455" end="1486" title="Mars (Black Clover)" label="Mars (&amp;quot;Black Clover&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068331" start="1529" end="1568" title="Mars (Biker Mice from Mars)" label="Mars (&amp;quot;Biker Mice from Mars&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265313" start="1632" end="1668" title="Military Armament Research Syndicate" label="Military Armament Research Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1739" end="1768" title="List of Pokémon characters#Team Galactic" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon&amp;quot; character"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1791" end="1828" title="List of Ultimate Muscle characters#HF Second Year Replacement Matches Arc" label="&amp;quot;Ultimate Muscle&amp;quot; character"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717845" start="1925" end="1934" title="The Big U" label="The Big U"/>
<link wikidata="Q353640" start="1942" end="1954" title="Mars the Dog" label="Mars the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152116" start="2034" end="2062" title="Mars (1930 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1930 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282423" start="2126" end="2154" title="Mars (1968 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1968 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2197" end="2225" title="Mars (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1997 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q546551" start="2243" end="2258" title="Shari Belafonte" label="Shari Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2260" end="2288" title="Mars (1998 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1998 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q949296" start="2306" end="2320" title="Olivier Gruner" label="Olivier Gruner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646034" start="2322" end="2350" title="Mars (2004 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (2004 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2411" end="2439" title="Mars (2010 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (2010 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605924" start="2443" end="2461" title="List of animated feature films of 2010" label="2010 animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q27888038" start="2463" end="2500" title="Mars (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (American TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849859" start="2543" end="2581" title="Mars (Taiwanese TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (Taiwanese TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356547" start="2639" end="2667" title="Mars (talk show)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (talk show)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089766" start="2770" end="2799" title="The Whitest Kids U&amp;#x27; Know" label="The Whitest Kids U&amp;#x27; Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q30883330" start="2871" end="2888" title="Shunsuke Michieda" label="Shunsuke Michieda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400203" start="2908" end="2937" title="Mars (Fritz Zorn)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (Fritz Zorn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773092" start="2985" end="3010" title="Mars (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31333" start="3033" end="3057" title="Mars (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q970160" start="3096" end="3120" title="Mars trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595160" start="3221" end="3250" title="Grand Tour (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;Grand Tour&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q471133" start="3291" end="3309" title="Mitsuteru Yokoyama" label="Mitsuteru Yokoyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169724" start="3317" end="3333" title="The Mars Project" label="The Mars Project"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3396" end="3426" title="Project Mars: A Technical Tale" label="Project Mars: A Technical Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282609" start="3500" end="3533" title="Mars (B&amp;#x27;z album)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (B&amp;#x27;z album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046367" start="3535" end="3565" title="Mars (Gackt album)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (Gackt album)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3642" end="3658" title="Stadium Arcadium#Disc two: Mars" label="Stadium Arcadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163837" start="3696" end="3703" title="Sinkane" label="Sinkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773152" start="3725" end="3735" title="Mars Music" label="Mars Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q31342" start="3775" end="3786" title="Mars (band)" label="Mars (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922854" start="3874" end="3888" title="Project Driver" label="Project Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753348" start="3896" end="3901" title="MARRS" label="MARRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773097" start="3962" end="3985" title="Mars (song)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q303508" start="4022" end="4046" title="Mars, the Bringer of War" label="Mars, the Bringer of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14325097" start="4154" end="4158" title="Neon (Jay Sean album)" label="Neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177131" start="4194" end="4199" title="Mario (singer)" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113046" start="4280" end="4288" title="Prophecy (Soulfly album)" label="Prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="4347" end="4355" title="Sega 32X" label="Sega 32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132500" start="4468" end="4476" title="Core War" label="Core War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312030" start="4492" end="4506" title="MARS (missile)" label="MARS (missile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773113" start="4567" end="4588" title="Mars Automatic Pistol" label="Mars Automatic Pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9006219" start="4683" end="4700" title="Tide-class tanker" label="Tide-class tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3789893" start="4773" end="4781" title="ITL MARS" label="ITL MARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q311787" start="4841" end="4855" title="Operation Mars" label="Operation Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q194785" start="4946" end="4977" title="Military Auxiliary Radio System" label="Military Auxiliary Radio System"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="5204" end="5220" title="German spring offensive" label="Spring Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5278" end="5305" title="Defense Intelligence Agency#MARS" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q22293817" start="5340" end="5370" title="Dutch frigate Mars" label="Dutch frigate &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502526" start="5452" end="5480" title="French ship Mars" label="French ship &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001239" start="5510" end="5550" title="French privateer Mars (1746)" label="French privateer &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1746)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503898" start="5601" end="5638" title="German trawler V 621 Mars" label="German trawler V 621 &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125062" start="5695" end="5715" title="HMS Mars" label="HMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633305" start="5753" end="5780" title="HMS Mars (1759)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1759)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018229" start="5804" end="5831" title="HMS Mars (1794)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1794)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252766" start="5856" end="5895" title="Mars-class ship of the line" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;-class ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633303" start="5898" end="5925" title="HMS Mars (1848)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1848)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633307" start="5951" end="5978" title="HMS Mars (1896)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1896)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629087" start="6022" end="6048" title="HMS Mars (R76)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (R76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592369" start="6166" end="6200" title="Minotaur-class cruiser (1943)" label="&amp;quot;Minotaur&amp;quot;-class cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391350" start="6239" end="6259" title="SMS Mars" label="SMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206983" start="6279" end="6306" title="SMS Mars (1879)" label="SMS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1879)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016799" start="6341" end="6374" title="SMS Tegetthoff (1878)" label="SMS &amp;quot;Tegetthoff&amp;quot; (1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31357" start="6442" end="6474" title="Swedish warship Mars" label="Swedish warship &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547418" start="6497" end="6517" title="USS Mars" label="USS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868233" start="6550" end="6577" title="USS Mars (1798)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (1798)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871564" start="6590" end="6617" title="USS Mars (AC-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (AC-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871565" start="6638" end="6666" title="USS Mars (AFS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (AFS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773075" start="6688" end="6729" title="Mars-class combat stores ship" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;-class combat stores ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q111214839" start="6731" end="6753" title="Mars class" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="6809" end="6820" title="Mars (beer)" label="Mars (beer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q471452" start="6844" end="6861" title="Mars (motorcycle)" label="Mars (motorcycle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773096" start="6905" end="6924" title="Mars (oil platform)" label="Mars (oil platform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773098" start="6974" end="6992" title="Mars (supermarket)" label="Mars (supermarket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985072" start="7016" end="7026" title="Icaro Mars" label="Icaro Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136006" start="7059" end="7069" title="MARS Group" label="MARS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793784" start="7123" end="7154" title="Mauritius Amateur Radio Society" label="Mauritius Amateur Radio Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301651" start="7156" end="7187" title="Mongolian Amateur Radio Society" label="Mongolian Amateur Radio Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935267" start="7189" end="7217" title="Mumbai Amateur Radio Society" label="Mumbai Amateur Radio Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q984216" start="7262" end="7270" title="THK Tver" label="THK Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876471" start="7338" end="7352" title="Mars (surname)" label="Mars (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773093" start="7389" end="7404" title="Cheung Wing-fat" label="Cheung Wing-fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773095" start="7497" end="7510" title="Mars (rapper)" label="Mars (rapper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820712" start="7581" end="7603" title="Mars (record producer)" label="Mars (record producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163868" start="7692" end="7712" title="Jean-Baptiste Belley" label="Jean-Baptiste Belley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014451" start="7823" end="7834" title="Top Combine" label="Top Combine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130288643" start="7836" end="7853" title="Mars (drag queen)" label="Mars (drag queen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365040" start="7921" end="7930" title="Mars Argo" label="Mars Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354354" start="8050" end="8062" title="Mars Bonfire" label="Mars Bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q204094" start="8110" end="8128" title="Mars Di Bartolomeo" label="Mars Di Bartolomeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975877" start="8168" end="8179" title="Mars Ravelo" label="Mars Ravelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881198" start="8262" end="8275" title="MARS (cipher)" label="MARS (cipher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122168" start="8328" end="8384" title="Cisco Security Monitoring, Analysis, and Response System" label="Cisco Security Monitoring, Analysis, and Response System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663837" start="8434" end="8447" title="Mars computer" label="Mars computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="8524" end="8536" title="Mars program" label="Mars program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660820" start="8600" end="8631" title="Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport" label="Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427829" start="8682" end="8720" title="Mars Analogue Research Station Program" label="Mars Analogue Research Station Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186788" start="8854" end="8870" title="Phoenix American" label="Phoenix American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773148" start="8892" end="8902" title="Mars Light" label="Mars Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714492" start="8963" end="8995" title="MARS (ticket reservation system)" label="MARS (ticket reservation system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773089" start="9044" end="9056" title="Mars (Metra)" label="Mars (Metra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501559" start="9130" end="9138" title="JRM Mars" label="JRM Mars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9163" end="9195" title="West Cornwall Railway#Locomotives" label="West Cornwall Railway locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460138" start="9213" end="9229" title="Mars (astrology)" label="Mars (astrology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876471" start="9266" end="9280" title="Mars (surname)" label="Mars (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065338" start="9283" end="9294" title="Mars family" label="Mars family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455882" start="9337" end="9376" title="Multivariate adaptive regression spline" label="Multivariate adaptive regression spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q642910" start="9426" end="9447" title="Ares (disambiguation)" label="Ares (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q838950" start="9449" end="9469" title="Colonization of Mars" label="Colonization of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q716774" start="9499" end="9518" title="Exploration of Mars" label="Exploration of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069864" start="9562" end="9592" title="Champ de Mars (disambiguation)" label="Champ de Mars (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q233778" start="9594" end="9624" title="Field of Mars (disambiguation)" label="Field of Mars (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876472" start="9626" end="9649" title="Mars 1 (disambiguation)" label="Mars 1 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354112" start="9651" end="9675" title="Mars II (disambiguation)" label="Mars II (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q413632" start="9677" end="9703" title="Mars Hill (disambiguation)" label="Mars Hill (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876474" start="9705" end="9734" title="Mars station (disambiguation)" label="Mars station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21449019" start="9736" end="9741" title="Marrs" label="Marrs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18852" wikidata="Q43249" url="?curid=18852" title="Morpheme">
<text>A morpheme is any of the smallest meaningful constituents within a linguistic expression and particularly within a word. Many words are themselves standalone morphemes, while other words contain multiple morphemes; in linguistic terminology, this is the distinction, respectively, between free and bound morphemes. The field of linguistic study dedicated to morphemes is called morphology.

In English, inside a word with multiple morphemes, the main morpheme that gives the word its basic meaning is called a root (such as &quot;cat&quot; inside the word &quot;cats&quot;), which can be bound or free. Meanwhile, additional bound morphemes, called affixes, may be added before or after the root, like the &quot;-s&quot; in &quot;cats&quot;, which indicates plurality but is always bound to a root noun and is not regarded as a word on its own. However, in some languages, including English and Latin, even many roots cannot stand alone; i.e., they are bound morphemes. For instance, the Latin root &quot;reg-&quot; (&#x27;king&#x27;) must always be suffixed with a case marker: &quot;regis&quot;, &quot;regi&quot;, &quot;rex&quot; (&quot;reg+s&quot;), etc. The same is true of the English root &quot;nat(e)&quot; — ultimately inherited from a Latin root meaning &quot;birth, born&quot; — which appears in words like &quot;native&quot;, &quot;nation&quot;, &quot;nature&quot;, &quot;innate&quot;, and &quot;neonate&quot;. 

These sample English words have the following morphological analyses:
* &quot;Unbreakable&quot; is composed of three morphemes: &quot;un-&quot; (a bound morpheme signifying negation), &quot;break&quot; (a verb that is the root of &quot;unbreakable&quot;: a free morpheme), and &quot;-able&quot; (a bound morpheme as an adjective suffix signifying &quot;capable of, fit for, or worthy of&quot;).
* The plural morpheme for regular nouns (&quot;-s&quot;) has three allomorphs: it is pronounced (e.g., in &quot;cats&quot; ), (e.g., in &quot;dishes&quot; ), and (e.g., in &quot;dogs&quot; ), depending on the pronunciation of the root.

== Classification ==
===Free and bound morphemes===

Every morpheme can be classified as free or bound:
* Free morphemes can function independently as words (e.g. &quot;town&quot;, &quot;dog&quot;) and can appear within lexemes (e.g. &quot;town hall&quot;, &quot;doghouse&quot;).
* Bound morphemes appear only as parts of words, always in conjunction with a root and sometimes with other bound morphemes. For example, &quot;un-&quot; appears only when accompanied by other morphemes to form a word. Most bound morphemes in English are affixes, specifically prefixes and suffixes. Examples of suffixes are &quot;-tion&quot;, &quot;-sion&quot;, &quot;-tive&quot;, &quot;-ation&quot;, &quot;-ible&quot;, and &quot;-ing&quot;. Bound morphemes that are not affixed are called cranberry morphemes.

=== Classification of bound morphemes ===
Bound morphemes can be further classified as derivational or inflectional morphemes. The main difference between them is their function in relation to words.

==== Derivational bound morphemes ====
* Derivational morphemes, when combined with a root, change the semantic meaning or the part of speech of the affected word. For example, in the word &quot;happiness&quot;, the addition of the bound morpheme &quot;-ness&quot; to the root &quot;happy&quot; changes the word from an adjective (&quot;happy&quot;) to a noun (&quot;happiness&quot;). In the word &quot;unkind&quot;, &quot;un-&quot; functions as a derivational morpheme since it inverts the meaning of the root morpheme (word) &quot;kind&quot;. Generally, morphemes that affix to a root morpheme (word) are bound morphemes.

==== Inflectional bound morphemes ====
* Inflectional morphemes modify the tense, aspect, mood, person, or number of a verb or the number, grammatical gender, or case of a noun, adjective, or pronoun without affecting the word&#x27;s meaning or class (part of speech). Examples of applying inflectional morphemes to words are adding &quot;-s&quot; to the root &quot;dog&quot; to form &quot;dogs&quot; and adding &quot;-ed&quot; to &quot;wait&quot; to form &quot;waited&quot;. An inflectional morpheme changes the form of a word. English has eight inflections.

===Allomorphs===
Allomorphs are variants of a morpheme that differ in form but are semantically similar. For example, the English plural marker has three allomorphs: (&quot;bugs), (&quot;bats), or (&quot;buses&quot;). An allomorph is a concrete realization of a morpheme, which is an abstract unit. That is parallel to the relation of an allophone and a phoneme.

===Zero-morpheme===

A zero-morpheme is a type of morpheme that carries semantic meaning but is not represented by auditory phoneme. A word with a zero-morpheme is analyzed as having the morpheme for grammatical purposes, but the morpheme is not realized in speech. They are often represented by /∅/ within glosses.

Generally, such morphemes have no visible changes. For instance, &quot;sheep&quot; is both the singular and the plural form of that noun; rather than taking the usual plural suffix &quot;-s&quot; to form hypothetical &quot;*sheeps&quot;, the plural is analyzed as being composed of &quot;sheep + -∅&quot;, the null plural suffix. The intended meaning is thus derived from the co-occurrence determiner (in this case, &quot;some-&quot; or &quot;a-&quot;).

In some cases, a zero-morpheme may also be used to contrast with other inflected forms of a word that contain an audible morpheme. For example, the plural noun &quot;cats&quot; in English consists of the root &quot;cat&quot; and the plural suffix &quot;-s,&quot; and so the singular &quot;cat&quot; may be analyzed as the root inflected with the null singular suffix -&quot;∅&quot;.

===Content vs. function===
Content morphemes express a concrete meaning or &quot;content&quot;, and function morphemes have more of a grammatical role. For example, the morphemes &quot;fast&quot; and &quot;sad&quot; can be considered content morphemes. On the other hand, the suffix &quot;-ed&quot; is a function morpheme since it has the grammatical function of indicating past tense.

Both categories may seem very clear and intuitive, but the idea behind them is occasionally more difficult to grasp since they overlap with each other. Examples of ambiguous situations are the preposition &quot;over&quot; and the determiner &quot;your&quot;, which seem to have concrete meanings but are considered function morphemes since their role is to connect ideas grammatically. Here is a general rule to determine the category of a morpheme:
* Content morphemes include free morphemes that are nouns, adverbs, adjectives, and main verbs and bound morphemes that are bound roots and derivational affixes.
* Function morphemes may be free morphemes that are prepositions, pronouns, determiners, auxiliary verbs and conjunctions. They may be bound morphemes that are inflectional affixes.

==Other features==
Roots are composed of only one morpheme, but stems can be composed of more than one morpheme. Any additional affixes are considered morphemes. For example, in the word &quot;quirkiness&quot;, the root is &quot;quirk&quot;, but the stem is &quot;quirky&quot;, which has two morphemes.

Moreover, some pairs of affixes have identical phonological form but different meanings. For example, the suffix &quot;-er&quot; can be either derivational (e.g. &quot;sell&quot; ⇒ &quot;seller&quot;) or inflectional (e.g. &quot;small&quot; ⇒ &quot;smaller&quot;). Such morphemes are called homophonous.

Some words might seem to be composed of multiple morphemes but are not. Therefore, not only form but also meaning must be considered when identifying morphemes. For example, the word &quot;Madagascar&quot; is long and might seem to have morphemes like &quot;mad&quot;, &quot;gas&quot;, and &quot;car&quot;, but it does not. Conversely, some short words have multiple morphemes (e.g. &quot;dogs&quot; = &quot;dog&quot; + &quot;s&quot;).

== Morphological analysis ==
In natural language processing for Japanese, Chinese, and other languages, morphological analysis is the process of segmenting a sentence into a row of morphemes. Morphological analysis is closely related to part-of-speech tagging, but word segmentation is required for those languages because word boundaries are not indicated by blank spaces.

The purpose of morphological analysis is to determine the minimal units of meaning in a language (morphemes) by comparison of similar forms: such as comparing &quot;She is walking&quot; and &quot;They are walking&quot; with each other, rather than either with something less similar like &quot;You are reading&quot;. Those forms can be effectively broken down into parts, and the different morphemes can be distinguished.

Both meaning and form are equally important for the identification of morphemes. An agent morpheme is an affix like &quot;-er&quot; that in English transforms a verb into a noun (e.g. &quot;teach&quot; → &quot;teacher&quot;). English also has another morpheme that is identical in pronunciation (and written form) but has an unrelated meaning and function: a comparative morpheme that changes an adjective into another degree of comparison (but remains the same adjective) (e.g. &quot;small&quot; → &quot;smaller&quot;). The opposite can also occur: a pair of morphemes with identical meaning but different forms.

==Changing definitions==

In generative grammar, the definition of a morpheme depends heavily on whether syntactic trees have morphemes as leaves or features as leaves.
* Direct surface-to-syntax mapping in lexical functional grammar (LFG) – leaves are words
* Direct syntax-to-semantics mapping
** Leaves in syntactic trees spell out morphemes: distributed morphology – leaves are morphemes
** Branches in syntactic trees spell out morphemes: radical minimalism and nanosyntax – leaves are &quot;nano-&quot; (small) morpho-syntactic features

Given the definition of a morpheme as &quot;the smallest meaningful unit&quot;, nanosyntax aims to account for idioms in which an entire syntactic tree often contributes &quot;the smallest meaningful unit&quot;. An example idiom is &quot;Don&#x27;t let the cat out of the bag&quot;. There, the idiom is composed of &quot;let the cat out of the bag&quot;. That might be considered a semantic morpheme, which is itself composed of many syntactic morphemes. Other cases of the &quot;smallest meaningful unit&quot; being longer than a word include some collocations such as &quot;in view of&quot; and &quot;business intelligence&quot; in which the words, when together, have a specific meaning.

The definition of morphemes also plays a significant role in the interfaces of generative grammar in the following theoretical constructs:
* Event semantics: the idea that each productive morpheme must have a compositional semantic meaning (a denotation), and if the meaning is there, there must be a morpheme (whether null or overt).
* Spell-out: the interface with which syntactic/semantic structures are &quot;spelled out&quot; by using words or morphemes with phonological content. That can also be thought of as lexical insertion into the syntactic.

== See also ==
* Alternation (linguistics)
* Floating tone
* Hybrid word
* List of Greek morphemes used in English
* Morphological parsing
* Morphophonology
* Morphotactics
* &quot;Motif-Index of Folk-Literature&quot;, featuring a comparable concept in folklore studies
* Theoretical linguistics
* Word stem

== References ==
* 


== External links ==

* Glossary of reading terms
* Comprehensive and searchable morpheme reference
* Linguistics 001 — Lecture 7 — Morphology by Mark Lieberman
* Pronunciation of the word morpheme </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="2" end="10" title="Morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q119039690" start="289" end="313" title="bound and free morphemes" label="free and bound morphemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="328" end="338" title="linguistics" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="378" end="388" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="510" end="514" title="root (linguistics)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="649" end="654" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="798" end="802" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="895" end="900" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="1407" end="1414" title="neonate" label="neonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745428" start="1597" end="1605" title="Affirmation and negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124301" start="1886" end="1895" title="allomorph" label="allomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q111352" start="2276" end="2282" title="lexeme" label="lexeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="2414" end="2418" title="root (linguistics)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="2613" end="2621" title="prefixes" label="prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="2626" end="2634" title="suffixes" label="suffixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q639512" start="2827" end="2845" title="cranberry morpheme" label="cranberry morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="3091" end="3103" title="Derivation (linguistics)" label="Derivational"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="3177" end="3191" title="part of speech" label="part of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="3370" end="3379" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="3405" end="3409" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3716" end="3726" title="Inflection" label="Inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="3750" end="3755" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="3757" end="3763" title="aspect (linguistics)" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="3765" end="3769" title="mood (linguistics)" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3771" end="3777" title="personal pronoun#Person and number" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="3782" end="3788" title="number (linguistics)" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="3794" end="3798" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="3806" end="3812" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="3826" end="3832" title="gender (linguistics)" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="3837" end="3841" title="case (linguistics)" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="3867" end="3874" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="3927" end="3941" title="part of speech" label="part of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124301" start="4253" end="4262" title="Allomorph" label="Allomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q631256" start="4373" end="4379" title="marker (linguistics)" label="marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="4574" end="4583" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="4590" end="4597" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="4672" end="4680" title="semantics" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q821413" start="4715" end="4723" title="auditory system" label="auditory"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="4897" end="4898" title="∅" label="∅"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="4907" end="4914" title="gloss (annotation)" label="glosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756768" start="5293" end="5306" title="co-occurrence" label="co-occurrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674864" start="5783" end="5799" title="Content morpheme" label="Content morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="6130" end="6140" title="past tense" label="past tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="6336" end="6347" title="preposition" label="preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q576271" start="6373" end="6383" title="determiner" label="determiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="6652" end="6659" title="adverbs" label="adverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="6661" end="6671" title="adjectives" label="adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="6821" end="6828" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="6864" end="6876" title="Conjunction (grammar)" label="conjunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="7533" end="7544" title="homophonous" label="homophonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="8016" end="8043" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="8048" end="8056" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="8058" end="8065" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271424" start="8221" end="8243" title="part-of-speech tagging" label="part-of-speech tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="9426" end="9444" title="generative grammar" label="generative grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="9586" end="9592" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q634155" start="9604" end="9630" title="lexical functional grammar" label="lexical functional grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229551" start="9743" end="9765" title="distributed morphology" label="distributed morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964156" start="9864" end="9874" title="nanosyntax" label="nanosyntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="10164" end="10169" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10774" end="10789" title="Event semantics" label="Event semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189753" start="10876" end="10886" title="denotation" label="denotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789027" start="10952" end="10956" title="null morpheme" label="null"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10970" end="10979" title="Spell-out" label="Spell-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q438358" start="11206" end="11231" title="Alternation (linguistics)" label="Alternation (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459937" start="11234" end="11247" title="Floating tone" label="Floating tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377255" start="11250" end="11261" title="Hybrid word" label="Hybrid word"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909629" start="11264" end="11303" title="List of Greek morphemes used in English" label="List of Greek morphemes used in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9323070" start="11306" end="11327" title="Morphological parsing" label="Morphological parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q661093" start="11330" end="11345" title="Morphophonology" label="Morphophonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913463" start="11348" end="11361" title="Morphotactics" label="Morphotactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19062048" start="11370" end="11400" title="Motif-Index of Folk-Literature" label="Motif-Index of Folk-Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q351625" start="11461" end="11484" title="Theoretical linguistics" label="Theoretical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="11487" end="11496" title="Word stem" label="Word stem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18856" wikidata="Q43359" url="?curid=18856" title="MTV">
<text>MTV (originally an initialism of Music Television) is an American cable television channel. It serves as the flagship property of the MTV Entertainment Group, which is part of Paramount Media Networks, a division of Paramount Global. The channel launched on August 1, 1981, and originally aired music videos and related programming as guided by television personalities known as video jockeys, or VJs. MTV, as one of the American cable channels available in other countries, eventually gained a massive cult following, becoming one of the major factors in cable programming&#x27;s rise to fame and American corporations dominating the television economy in the 1990s. 

In the years since its inception, the channel significantly toned down its focus on music in favor of original reality programming for teenagers and young adults. , MTV is available to approximately 67,000,000 pay television households in the United States, down from its 2011 peak of 99,000,000 households.

== History ==
MTV was launched on Saturday, August 1, 1981, at 12:01 a.m., under the ownership of Warner-Amex Satellite Entertainment. On June 25, 1984, Warner Communications spun-off Nickelodeon, MTV into a new public corporation called MTV Networks. Warner would later acquire American Express&#x27; 50% stake the following year. From August 27, 1985 to May 20, 1986, Warner would sell 31%, and later, 69% of MTV Networks to Viacom.

== Programming ==
As MTV expanded, music videos and VJ-guided programming were no longer the centerpiece of its programming. The channel&#x27;s programming has covered a wide variety of genres and formats aimed at adolescents and young adults. In addition to its original programming, MTV has also aired original and syndicated programs from Paramount-owned siblings and third-party networks.

MTV is also a producer of films aimed at young adults through its production label, MTV Films, and has aired both its own theatrically released films and original made-for-television movies from MTV Studios in addition to acquired films.

In 2010, a study by the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation found that of 207.5 hours of prime time programming on MTV, 42% included content reflecting the lives of gay, bisexual and transgender people. This was the highest in the industry and the highest percentage ever.

In 2018, MTV launched a new production unit under the MTV Studios name focused on producing new versions of MTV&#x27;s library shows. It was later consolidated into MTV Entertainment Studios

=== Video Music Awards ===
In 1984, the channel produced its first MTV Video Music Awards show, or VMAs. The first award show, in 1984, was punctuated by a live performance by Madonna of &quot;Like a Virgin&quot;. The statuettes that are handed out at the Video Music Awards are of the MTV moonman, the channel&#x27;s original image from its first broadcast in 1981. , the Video Music Awards were MTV&#x27;s most watched annual event.

=== Special, annual events ===
MTV began its annual &quot;Spring Break&quot; coverage in 1986, setting up temporary operations in Daytona Beach, Florida, for a week in March, broadcasting live eight hours per day. &quot;Spring break is a youth culture event&quot;, MTV&#x27;s vice president Doug Herzog said at the time. &quot;We wanted to be part of it for that reason. It makes good sense for us to come down and go live from the center of it, because obviously the people there are the kinds of people who watch MTV.&quot;

The channel later expanded its beach-themed events to the summer, dedicating most of each summer season to broadcasting live from a beach house at different locations away from New York City, eventually leading to channel-wide branding throughout the summer in the 1990s and early 2000s such as &quot;Motel California&quot;, &quot;Summer Share&quot;, &quot;Isle of MTV&quot;, &quot;SoCal Summer&quot;, &quot;Summer in the Keys&quot;, and &quot;Shore Thing&quot;. MTV VJs would host blocks of music videos, interview artists and bands, and introduce live performances and other programs from the beach house location each summer.

MTV also held week-long music events that took over the presentation of the channel. Examples from the 1990s and 2000s include &quot;All Access Week&quot;, a week in the summer dedicated to live concerts and festivals; &quot;Spankin&#x27; New Music Week&quot;, a week in the fall dedicated to brand new music videos; and week-long specials that culminated in a particular live event, such as &quot;Wanna be a VJ&quot; and the &quot;Video Music Awards&quot;.

At the end of each year, MTV takes advantage of its home location in New York City to broadcast live coverage on New Year&#x27;s Eve in Times Square. Several live music performances are featured alongside interviews with artists and bands that were influential throughout the year. For many years from the 1980s to the 2000s, the channel upheld a tradition of having a band perform a cover song at midnight immediately following the beginning of the new year.

=== Live concert broadcasts ===
Throughout its history, MTV has covered global benefit concert series live. For most of July 13, 1985, MTV showed the Live Aid concerts, held in London and Philadelphia and organized by Bob Geldof and Midge Ure to raise funds for famine relief in Ethiopia. While the ABC network showed only selected highlights during primetime, MTV broadcast 16 hours of coverage.

Along with VH1, MTV broadcast the Live 8 concerts, a series of concerts set in the G8 states and South Africa, on July 2, 2005. Live 8 preceded the 31st G8 summit and the 20th anniversary of Live Aid. MTV drew heavy criticism for its coverage of Live 8. The network cut to commercials, VJ commentary, or other performances during performances. Complaints surfaced on the Internet over MTV interrupting the reunion of Pink Floyd. In response, MTV president Van Toffler stated that he wanted to broadcast highlights from every venue of Live 8 on MTV and VH1, and clarified that network hosts talked over performances only in transition to commercials, informative segments or other musical performances. Toffler acknowledged that &quot;MTV should not have placed such a high priority on showing so many acts, at the expense of airing complete sets by key artists.&quot; He also blamed the Pink Floyd interruption on a mandatory cable affiliate break. MTV averaged 1.4 million viewers for its original July 2 broadcast of Live 8. Consequently, MTV and VH1 aired five hours of uninterrupted Live 8 coverage on July 9, with each channel airing other blocks of artists.

== Logo and branding ==

MTV&#x27;s logo was designed in 1981 by Manhattan Design (a collective formed by Frank Olinsky, Pat Gorman and Patty Rogoff) under the guidance of original creative director Fred Seibert. The block letter &quot;M&quot; was sketched by Rogoff, with the scribbled word &quot;TV&quot; spraypainted by Olinksky. The primary variant of MTV&#x27;s logo at the time had the &quot;M&quot; in yellow and the &quot;TV&quot; in red. However, unlike most television networks&#x27; logos at the time, the logo was constantly branded with different colors, patterns and images on a variety of station IDs. Examples include 1988&#x27;s ID &quot;Adam And Eve&quot;, where the &quot;M&quot; is an apple and the snake is the &quot;TV&quot;. And for 1984&#x27;s ID &quot;Art History&quot;, the logo is shown in different art styles. The only constant aspects of MTV&#x27;s logo at the time were its general shape and proportions, with everything else being dynamic.

MTV launched on August 1, 1981, with an extended network ID featuring the first landing on the Moon (with still images acquired directly from NASA), which was a concept of Seibert&#x27;s executed by Buzz Potamkin and Perpetual Motion Pictures. The ID then cut to the American flag planted on the Moon&#x27;s surface changed to show the MTV logo on it, which rapidly changed into different colors and patterns several times per second as the network&#x27;s original guitar-driven jingle was played for the first time. After MTV&#x27;s launch, the &quot;Moon landing&quot; ID was edited to show only its ending, and was shown at the top of every hour until early 1986, when the ID was scrapped in light of the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster. (since then the space theme and the Moonman became a fixture of MTV’s branding most notably in its award show statue) The ID ran &quot;more than 75,000 times each year (48 times each day), at the top and bottom of every hour every day&quot; according to Seibert.

From the late 1990s to the early 2000s, MTV updated its on-air appearance at the beginning of every year and each summer, creating a consistent brand across all of its music-related shows. This style of channel-wide branding came to an end as MTV drastically reduced its number of music-related shows in the early to mid 2000s. Around this time, MTV introduced a static and single color digital on-screen graphic mainly grey during on-air and some color to be shown during all of its programming.

Starting with the premiere of the short-lived program &quot;FNMTV: Friday Night MTV&quot; in 2008, MTV started using a updated and cropped version of its original logo for the 30 years during most of its on-air programming. It became MTV&#x27;s official logo on February 8, 2010, and officially debuted on its website. The channel&#x27;s full text &quot;MUSIC TELEVISION&quot; was eliminated, with the revised and chopped down on the logo largely the same as the original logo, but without the initialism, the bottom of the &quot;M&quot; being cropped and the &quot;V&quot; in &quot;TV&quot; no longer branching off. This change was most likely made to reflect MTV&#x27;s more prominent focus on reality and comedy programming and less on music-related programming. However, much like the original logo, the new logo was designed to be filled in with a seemingly unlimited variety of images. It is used worldwide, but not everywhere existentially. The new logo was first used on MTV Films logo with the 2010 film &quot;Jackass 3D&quot;. MTV&#x27;s rebranding was overseen by Popkern.

On June 25, 2015, MTV International rebranded its on-air look with a new vaporwave and seapunk-inspired graphics package. It included a series of new station IDs featuring 3D renderings of objects and people, much akin to vaporwave and seapunk &quot;aesthetics&quot;. Many have derided MTV&#x27;s choice of rebranding, insisting that the artistic style was centered on denouncing corporate capitalism (many aesthetic pieces heavily incorporate corporate logos of the 1970s, 80s and 90s, which coincidentally include MTV&#x27;s original logo) rather than being embraced by major corporations like MTV. Many have also suggested that MTV made an attempt to be relevant in the modern entertainment world with the rebrand. In addition to this, the rebrand was made on exactly the same day that the social media site Tumblr introduced Tumblr TV, an animated GIF viewer which featured branding inspired by MTV&#x27;s original 1980s on-air look. Tumblr has been cited as a prominent location of aesthetic art, and thus many have suggested MTV and Tumblr &quot;switched identities&quot;. The rebrand also incorporated a modified version of MTV&#x27;s classic &quot;I Want My MTV!&quot; slogan, changed to read &quot;I Am My MTV&quot;. &quot;Vice&quot; has suggested that the slogan change represents &quot;the current generation&#x27;s movement towards self-examination, identity politics and apparent narcissism.&quot; MTV also introduced MTV Bump, a website that allows Instagram and Vine users to submit videos to be aired during commercial breaks, as well as MTV Canvas, an online program where users submit custom IDs to also be aired during commercial breaks.

On February 5, 2021, MTV began to use a revised logo in tandem with the 2010 version, doing away with the 3D effect inherited from its predecessors (much akin to the current MTV Video Music Awards variant). That logo is revealed to be an alternate variant of the current logo designed by the design agency Loyalkaspar, which pays homage to MTV of the past with the red-yellow-blue color combination and the 3D effect mainly inherited from its predecessor logo. The new logo&#x27;s rollout was completed in time for the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards.

=== &quot;I Want My MTV!&quot; ===
The channel&#x27;s iconic &quot;I Want My MTV!&quot; advertising campaign was launched in 1982. It was first developed by George Lois and was based on a cereal commercial from the 1950s with the slogan &quot;I Want My Maypo!&quot; that Lois adapted unsuccessfully from the original created by animator John Hubley.

Lois&#x27;s first pitch to the network was roundly rejected when Lois insisted that rock stars like Mick Jagger should be crying when they said the tag line, not unlike his failed &#x27;Maypo&#x27; revamp. His associate, and Seibert mentor Dale Pon, took over the campaign, both strategically and creatively. Pon was able to get the campaign greenlit when he laughed the tears out of the spots. From then on–with the exception of the closely logos on the first round of commercials–Pon was the primary creative force.

All the commercials were produced by Buzz Potamkin and his new company Buzzco Productions, directed first by Thomas Schlamme and Alan Goodman and eventually by Candy Kugel.

The campaign featured popular artists and celebrities, including Pete Townshend, Pat Benatar, Adam Ant, David Bowie, the Police, Kiss, Culture Club, Billy Idol, Hall &amp; Oates, Cyndi Lauper, Madonna, Lionel Richie, Ric Ocasek, John Mellencamp, Peter Wolf, Joe Elliott, Stevie Nicks, Rick Springfield, and Mick Jagger, interacting with the MTV logo on-air and encouraging viewers to call their pay television providers and request that MTV be added to their local channel lineups. Eventually, the slogan became so ubiquitous that it made an appearance as a lyric sung by Sting on the Dire Straits song &quot;Money for Nothing&quot;, whose music video aired in regular rotation on MTV when it was first released in 1985 and also served as the first video played on its European arm, and became the basis of the music used in the MTV Entertainment Studios production logo.

== Influence and controversies ==
The channel has been a target of criticism by different groups about programming choices, social issues, political correctness, sensitivity, censorship, and a perceived negative social influence on young people. Portions of the content of MTV&#x27;s programs and productions have come under controversy in the general news media and among social groups that have taken offense. Some within the music industry criticized what they saw as MTV&#x27;s homogenization of rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll, including the punk band the Dead Kennedys, whose song &quot;M.T.V.Get Off the Air&quot; was released on their 1985 album &quot;Frankenchrist&quot;, just as MTV&#x27;s influence over the music industry was being solidified. MTV was also the major influence on the growth of music videos during the 1980s.

=== Breaking the &quot;color barrier&quot; ===
During MTV&#x27;s first few years, very few black artists were featured. The select few in MTV&#x27;s rotation between 1981 and 1984 were Michael Jackson, Prince, Eddy Grant, Tina Turner, Donna Summer, Joan Armatrading, Musical Youth, The Specials, The Selecter, Grace Jones, John Butcher and Herbie Hancock. Mikey Craig of Culture Club, Joe Leeway of Thompson Twins and Tracy Wormworth of The Waitresses were also black. The Specials, which included black and white vocalists and musicians, were also the first act with people of color to perform on MTV; their song &quot;Rat Race&quot; was the 58th video on the station&#x27;s first broadcast day.

MTV refused other black artists&#x27; videos, such as Rick James&#x27; &quot;Super Freak&quot;, because they did not fit the channel&#x27;s carefully selected album-oriented rock format at the time. The exclusion enraged James, who publicly advocated the addition of more black artists to the channel. David Bowie also questioned MTV&#x27;s lack of black artists during an on-air interview with VJ Mark Goodman in 1983. MTV&#x27;s original head of talent and acquisition, Carolyn B. Baker, who was black, questioned why the definition of music had to be so narrow, as did a few others outside the network. Years later, Baker said, &quot;The party line at MTV was that we weren&#x27;t playing black music because of the research – but the research was based on ignorance… We were young, we were cutting-edge. We didn&#x27;t have to be on the cutting edge of racism.&quot; Nevertheless, it was Baker who rejected Rick James&#x27; &quot;Super Freak&quot; video &quot;because there were half-naked women in it, and it was a piece of crap. As a black woman, I did not want that representing my people as the first black video on MTV.&quot;

The network&#x27;s director of music programming, Buzz Brindle, told an interviewer in 2006: &quot;MTV was originally designed to be a rock music channel. It was difficult for MTV to find African American artists whose music fit the channel&#x27;s format that leaned toward rock at the outset.&quot; Writers Craig Marks and Rob Tannenbaum noted that the channel &quot;aired videos by plenty of white artists who didn&#x27;t play rock.&quot; Andrew Goodwin later wrote: &quot;[MTV] denied racism, on the grounds that it merely followed the rules of the rock business.&quot; MTV senior executive vice president Les Garland complained decades later, &quot;The worst thing was that &#x27;racism&#x27; bullshit... there were hardly any videos being made by black artists. Record companies weren&#x27;t funding them. &quot;They&quot; never got charged with racism.&quot; However, critics of that defence pointed out that record companies were not funding videos for black artists because they knew they would have difficulty persuading MTV to play them.

In celebrating the 40th anniversary of the network&#x27;s launch in 2021, current MTV Entertainment Group president Chris McCarthy acknowledged that &quot;(o)ne of the bigger mistakes in the early years was not playing enough diverse music... but the nice thing that I&#x27;ve always learned at MTV is we have no problem owning our mistakes, quickly correcting them and trying to do the right thing and always follow where the audience is going.&quot;

Before 1983, Michael Jackson also struggled for MTV airtime. To resolve the struggle and finally &quot;break the color barrier&quot;, the president of CBS Records, Walter Yetnikoff, denounced MTV in a strong, profane statement, threatening to take away its right to play any of the label&#x27;s music. However, Les Garland, then acquisitions head, said he decided to air Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Billie Jean&quot; video without pressure from CBS, a statement later contradicted by CBS head of Business Affairs David Benjamin in &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;.

According to &quot;The Austin Chronicle&quot;, Jackson&#x27;s video for the song &quot;Billie Jean&quot; was &quot;the video that broke the color barrier, even though the channel itself was responsible for erecting that barrier in the first place.&quot; But change was not immediate. &quot;Billie Jean&quot; was not added to MTV&#x27;s &quot;medium rotation&quot; playlist (two to three airings per day) until it reached No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart. In the final week of March, it was in &quot;heavy rotation&quot;, one week before the MTV debut of Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Beat It&quot; video. Prince&#x27;s &quot;Little Red Corvette&quot; joined both videos in heavy rotation at the end of April. At the beginning of June, &quot;Electric Avenue&quot; by Eddy Grant joined &quot;Billie Jean&quot;, which was still in heavy rotation until mid-June. At the end of August, &quot;She Works Hard for the Money&quot; by Donna Summer was in heavy rotation on the channel. Herbie Hancock&#x27;s &quot;Rockit&quot; and Lionel Richie&#x27;s &quot;All Night Long&quot; were placed in heavy rotation at the end of October and the beginning of November respectively. In the final week of November, Donna Summer&#x27;s &quot;Unconditional Love&quot; was in heavy rotation. When Jackson&#x27;s elaborate video for &quot;Thriller&quot; was released late that year, raising the bar for what a video could be, the network&#x27;s support for it was total; subsequently, more pop and R&amp;B videos were played on MTV.

Following Jackson&#x27;s and Prince&#x27;s breakthroughs on MTV, Rick James did several interviews where he brushed off the accomplishment as tokenism, saying in a 1983 interview, in an episode of &quot;Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus&quot; on James, that &quot;any black artist that [had] their video played on MTV should pull their [videos] off MTV.&quot;

=== Subsequent concepts ===
HBO also had a 30-minute program of music videos called &quot;Video Jukebox&quot;, that first aired around the time of MTV&#x27;s launch and lasted until late 1986. Also around this time, HBO, as well as other premium channels such as Cinemax, Showtime and The Movie Channel, occasionally played one or a few music videos between movies.

SuperStation WTBS launched &quot;Night Tracks&quot; on June 3, 1983, with up to 14 hours of music video airplay each late night weekend by 1985. Its most noticeable difference was that black artists that MTV initially ignored received airplay. The program ran until the end of May 1992.

Playboy TV launched their own music video program called &quot;Playboy&#x27;s Hot Rocks&quot; that premiered on July 15, 1983 featuring uncensored versions of music videos that were shown in nightclubs by artists from Duran Duran and Mötley Crüe to Nine Inch Nails and 2Pac. At times, they would do a certain theme like the all Prince theme on the channel back in the 90s.

A few markets also launched music-only channels including Las Vegas&#x27; KRLR-TV (now KSNV), which debuted in the summer of 1984 and branded as &quot;Vusic 21&quot;. The first video played on that channel was &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;, following in the footsteps of MTV.

Shortly after TBS began &quot;Night Tracks&quot;, NBC launched a music video program called &quot;Friday Night Videos&quot;, which was considered network television&#x27;s answer to MTV. Later renamed simply &quot;Friday Night&quot;, the program ran from 1983 to 2002. ABC&#x27;s contribution to the music video program genre in 1984, &quot;ABC Rocks&quot;, was far less successful, lasting only a year.

TBS founder Ted Turner started the Cable Music Channel in 1984, designed to play a broader mix of music videos than MTV&#x27;s rock format allowed. But after one month as a money-losing venture, Turner sold it to MTV, who redeveloped the channel into VH1.

The founders of Financial News Network, Glenn Taylor and Karen Tyler tried to capitalize on the concept by launching Discovery Music Network, which was set to be a cable network, and has plans to set up the Discovery Broadcasting System, which consists of the aforementioned network, along with computer and business networks, but it never got off the ground.

Shortly after its launch, the Disney Channel aired a program called &quot;DTV&quot;, a play on the MTV acronym. The program used music cuts, both from past and upcoming artists. Instead of music videos, the program used clips of various vintage Disney cartoons and animated films (from &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot; to &quot;The Fox and the Hound&quot;) to go with the songs. The program aired in multiple formats, sometimes between shows, sometimes as its own program, and other times as one-off specials. The specials tended to air both on the Disney Channel and NBC. The program aired at several times between 1984 and 1999. In 2009, Disney Channel revived the &quot;DTV&quot; concept with a new series of short-form segments called &quot;Re-Micks&quot;.

Hanna-Barbera created &quot;HBTV&quot;, similar to &quot;DTV&quot; in 1985 and in 1986.

=== Censorship ===

MTV has edited a number of music videos to remove nudity, references to drugs, sex, violence, weapons, racism, homophobia, and/or advertising. Many music videos aired on the channel were either censored, moved to late-night rotation, or banned entirely from the channel.

In the 1980s, parent media watchdog groups such as the Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC) criticized MTV over certain music videos that were claimed to have explicit imagery of satanism. As a result, MTV developed a strict policy on refusal to air videos that may depict Satanism or anti-religious themes. This policy led MTV to ban music videos such as &quot;Jesus Christ Pose&quot; by Soundgarden in 1991 and &quot;Megalomaniac&quot; by Incubus in 2004; however, the controversial band Marilyn Manson was among the most popular rock bands on MTV during the late 1990s and early 2000s.

On September 28, 2016, on an AfterBuzz TV live stream, Scout Durwood said that MTV had a &quot;no appropriation policy&quot; that forbid her from wearing her hair in cornrows in an episode of &quot;Mary + Jane&quot;. She said, &quot;I wanted to cornrow my hair, and they were like, &#x27;That&#x27;s racist.&#x27;&quot;

=== Trademark suit ===
Magyar Televízió, Hungary&#x27;s public broadcaster who has a trademark on the initials MTV, registered with the Hungarian copyright office, sued the American MTV (Music Television) network for trademark infringement when the Hungarian version of the music channel was launched in 2007. The suit is still ongoing.

=== Andrew Dice Clay ===
During the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards ceremony, comedian Andrew Dice Clay did his usual &quot;adult nursery rhymes&quot; routine (which he had done in his stand-up acts), after which the network executives imposed a lifetime ban. Billy Idol&#x27;s music video for the song &quot;Cradle of Love&quot; originally had scenes from Clay&#x27;s film &quot;The Adventures of Ford Fairlane&quot; when it was originally aired; scenes from the film were later excised. During the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, Clay was in attendance where he confirmed that the channel lifted the ban.

=== &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head&quot; ===

In the wake of controversy that involved a child burning down his house after allegedly watching &quot;Beavis and Butt-head&quot;, MTV moved the show from its original 7 p.m. time slot to an 11p.m. time slot. Also, Beavis&#x27;s tendency to flick a lighter and yell &quot;fire&quot; was removed from new episodes, and controversial scenes were removed from existing episodes before their rebroadcast. Some extensive edits were noted by series creator Mike Judge after compiling his Collection DVDs, saying that &quot;some of those episodes may not even exist actually in their original form.&quot;

=== &quot;Dude, This Sucks&quot; ===
A pilot for a show called &quot;Dude, This Sucks&quot; was cancelled after teens attending a taping at the Snow Summit Ski Resort in January 2001 were sprayed with liquidized fecal matter by a group known as &quot;The Shower Rangers&quot;. The teens later sued, with MTV later apologizing and ordering the segment&#x27;s removal.

=== Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show ===

After Viacom&#x27;s purchase of CBS, MTV was selected to produce the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show in 2001, airing on CBS and featuring Britney Spears, NSYNC, and Aerosmith. Due to its success, MTV was invited back to produce another halftime show in 2004; this sparked a nationwide debate and controversy that drastically changed Super Bowl halftime shows, MTV&#x27;s programming, and radio censorship.

When CBS aired Super Bowl XXXVIII in 2004, MTV was again chosen to produce the halftime show, with performances by such artists as Nelly, P. Diddy, Janet Jackson, and Justin Timberlake. The show became controversial, however, after Timberlake tore off part of Jackson&#x27;s outfit while performing &quot;Rock Your Body&quot; with her, revealing her right breast. All involved parties apologized for the incident, and Timberlake referred to the incident as a &quot;wardrobe malfunction&quot;.

Michael Powell, then-chairman of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), ordered an investigation the day after the broadcast. In the weeks following the halftime show, MTV censored much of its programming. Several music videos, including &quot;This Love&quot; and &quot;I Miss You&quot;, were edited for sexual content. In September 2004, the FCC ruled that the halftime show was indecent and fined CBS $550,000. The FCC upheld it in 2006, but federal judges reversed the fine in 2008.

==== Nipplegate ====
Timberlake and Jackson&#x27;s controversial event gave way to a &quot;wave of self-censorship on American television unrivaled since the McCarthy era&quot;. After the sudden event, names surfaced such as nipplegate, Janet moment, and boobgate, and this spread politically, furthering the discussion into the 2004 presidential election surrounding &quot;moral values&quot; and &quot;media decency&quot;.

=== Moral criticism ===
In 2005, the Parents Television Council (PTC) released a study titled &quot;MTV Smut Peddlers&quot;, which sought to expose excessive sexual, profane, and violent content on the channel, based on MTV&#x27;s spring break programming from 2004. Jeanette Kedas, an MTV network executive, called the PTC report &quot;unfair and inaccurate&quot; and &quot;underestimating young people&#x27;s intellect and level of sophistication&quot;, while L. Brent Bozell III, then-president of the PTC, stated: &quot;the incessant sleaze on MTV presents the most compelling case yet for consumer cable choice&quot;, referring to the practice of pay television companies to allow consumers to pay for channels &quot;à la carte&quot;.

In April 2008, PTC released &quot;The Rap on Rap&quot;, a study covering hip-hop and R&amp;B music videos rotated on programs &quot;106 &amp; Park&quot; and &quot;Rap City&quot;, both shown on BET, and &quot;Sucker Free&quot; on MTV. PTC urged advertisers to withdraw sponsorship of those programs, whose videos PTC stated targeted children and teenagers containing adult content.

=== &quot;Jersey Shore&quot; ===

MTV received significant criticism from Italian American organizations for &quot;Jersey Shore&quot;, which premiered in 2009. The controversy was due in large part to the manner in which MTV marketed the show, as it liberally used the word &quot;guido&quot; to describe the cast members. The word &quot;guido&quot; is generally regarded as an ethnic slur when referring to Italians and Italian Americans. One promotion stated that the show was to follow, &quot;eight of the hottest, tannest, craziest Guidos,&quot; while yet another advertisement stated, &quot;&quot;Jersey Shore&quot; exposes one of the tri-state area&#x27;s most misunderstood species ... the GUIDO. Yes, they really do exist! Our Guidos and Guidettes will move into the ultimate beach house rental and indulge in everything the Seaside Heights, New Jersey scene has to offer.&quot;

Prior to the series debut, Unico National formally requested that MTV cancel the show. In a formal letter, the company called the show a &quot;direct, deliberate and disgraceful attack on Italian Americans.&quot; Unico National President Andre DiMino said, &quot;MTV has festooned the &#x27;bordello-like&#x27; house set with Italian flags and red, white and green maps of New Jersey while every other cutaway shot is of Italian signs and symbols. They are blatantly as well as subliminally bashing Italian Americans with every technique possible.&quot; Around this time, other Italian organizations joined the fight, including the NIAF and the Order Sons of Italy in America.

MTV responded by issuing a press release which stated in part, &quot;The Italian American cast takes pride in their ethnicity. We understand that this show is not intended for every audience and depicts just one aspect of youth culture.&quot; Following the calls for the show&#x27;s removal, several sponsors requested that their ads not be aired during the show. These sponsors included Dell, Domino&#x27;s Pizza, and American Family Insurance. Despite the loss of certain advertisers, MTV did not cancel the show. Moreover, the show saw its audience increase from its premiere in 2009, and continued to place as MTV&#x27;s top-rated programs during &quot;Jersey Shore&#x27;s&quot; six-season run, ending in 2012.

== Social activism ==
In addition to its regular programming, MTV has a long history of promoting social, political, and environmental activism in young people. The channel&#x27;s vehicles for this activism have been &quot;Choose or Lose&quot;, encompassing political causes and encouraging viewers to vote in elections; &quot;Fight For Your Rights&quot;, encompassing anti-violence and anti-discrimination causes; &quot;think MTV&quot;; and &quot;MTV Act&quot; and &quot;Power of 12&quot;, the newest umbrellas for MTV&#x27;s social activism.

=== &quot;Choose or Lose&quot; ===

In 1992, MTV started a pro-democracy campaign called &quot;Choose or Lose&quot;, to encourage over 20 million people to register to vote, and the channel hosted a town hall forum for then-candidate Bill Clinton.

In recent years, other politically diverse programs on MTV have included &quot;True Life&quot;, which documents people&#x27;s lives and problems, and MTV News specials, which center on very current events in both the music industry and the world. One special show covered the 2004 US presidential election, airing programs focused on the issues and opinions of young people, including a program where viewers could ask questions of Senator John Kerry. MTV worked with P. Diddy&#x27;s &quot;Citizen Change&quot; campaign, designed to encourage young people to vote.

Additionally, MTV aired a documentary covering a trip by the musical group Sum 41 to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, documenting the conflict there. The group ended up being caught in the midst of an attack outside of the hotel and were subsequently flown out of the country.

The channel also began showing presidential campaign commercials for the first time during the 2008 US presidential election. This has led to criticism, with Jonah Goldberg opining that &quot;MTV serves as the Democrats&#x27; main youth outreach program.&quot;

=== &quot;Rock the Vote&quot; ===
MTV is aligned with Rock the Vote, a campaign to motivate young adults to register and vote.

=== &quot;MTV Act&quot; and &quot;Power of 12&quot; ===
In 2012, MTV launched &quot;MTV Act&quot; and &quot;Power of 12&quot;, its current social activism campaigns. &quot;MTV Act&quot; focuses on a wide array of social issues, while &quot;Power of 12&quot; was a replacement for MTV&#x27;s &quot;Choose or Lose&quot; and focused on the 2012 US presidential election.

=== &quot;Elect This&quot; ===
In 2016, MTV continued its pro-democracy campaign with &quot;Elect This&quot;, an issue-oriented look at the 2016 election targeting Millennials. Original content under the &quot;Elect This&quot; umbrella includes &quot;Infographica,&quot; short animations summarizing MTV News polls; &quot;Robo-Roundtable,&quot; a digital series hosted by animatronic robots; &quot;The Racket,&quot; a multi-weekly digital series; and &quot;The Stakes,&quot; a weekly political podcast.

=== &quot;Vote Early Day&quot; ===
In 2020, MTV was the principal founder of Vote Early Day. Initially, the primary target audience was young voters. The MTV campaign launched with partners across media, consumer brands, and advocacy organizations, and its strength being that it isn&#x27;t ‘owned’ by any one entity.

== Beyond MTV ==
Since its launch in 1981, the brand &quot;MTV&quot; has expanded and includes many additional properties beyond the original MTV channel, including a variety of sister channels in the US, dozens of affiliated channels around the world, and an Internet presence through MTV.com and related websites.

=== Sister channels in the United States ===
MTV operates a group of channels under MTV Networksa name that continues to be used for the individual units of the Paramount Media Networks, a division of corporate parent Paramount Global. In 1985, MTV saw the introduction of its first regular sister channel, VH1, which was originally an acronym for &quot;Video Hits One&quot; and was designed to play adult contemporary music videos. VH1 is aimed at celebrity and popular culture programming which include many reality shows. Another sister channel, CMT, targets the southern culture market.

The advent of satellite television and digital cable brought MTV greater channel diversity, including its sister channels MTV2 and Spanish-speaking MTV Tr3́s (Tr3́s), which initially played music videos exclusively but later focused on other programming. MTV also formerly broadcast MTVU on campuses at various universities until 2018, when the MTV Networks on Campus division was sold, and the channel remained as a digital cable channel only. MTV formerly also had MTV Hits and MTVX channels until these were converted into NickMusic and MTV Jams, respectively. MTV Jams was later rebranded as BET Jams in 2015.

In January 2006, MTV launched MTV HD, a 1080i high-definition simulcast feed of MTV. Until Viacom&#x27;s main master control was upgraded in 2013, only the network&#x27;s original series after 2010 (with some pre-2010 content) are broadcast in high definition, while music videos, despite being among the first television works to convert to high definition presentation in the mid-2000s, were presented in 4:3 standard definition, forcing them into a windowboxing type of presentation; since that time, all music videos are presented in HD and are framed to their director&#x27;s preference. &quot;Jersey Shore&quot;, despite being shot with widescreen HD cameras, was also presented with SD windowboxing (though the 2018 &quot;Family Vacation&quot; revival is in full HD). The vast majority of providers carry MTV HD.

MTV Networks also operates MTV Live, a high-definition channel that features original HD music programming and HD versions of music related programs from MTV, VH1 and CMT. The channel was launched in January 2006 as MHD (Music: High Definition). The channel was officially rebranded as MTV Live on February 1, 2016.

In 2005 and 2006, MTV launched a list of channels for Asian Americans. The first channel was MTV Desi, launched in July 2005, dedicated towards Indian Americans. Next was MTV Chi, in December 2005, which catered to Chinese Americans. The third was MTV K, launched in June 2006 and targeted toward Korean Americans. Each of these channels featured music videos and shows from MTV&#x27;s international affiliates as well as original US programming, promos, and packaging. All three of these channels ceased broadcasting on April 30, 2007.

On August 1, 2016, the 35th anniversary of the original MTV&#x27;s launch, VH1 Classic was rebranded as MTV Classic. The channel&#x27;s programming focused on classic music videos and programming (including notable episodes of &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; and &quot;VH1 Storytellers&quot;), but skews more towards the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s. The network aired encores of former MTV series such as &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head&quot; and &quot;Laguna Beach: The Real Orange County&quot;. The network&#x27;s relaunch included a broadcast of MTV&#x27;s first hour on the air, which was also simulcast on MTV and online via Facebook live streaming. MTV Classic only retained three original VH1 Classic programs, which were &quot;That Metal Show&quot;, &quot;Metal Evolution,&quot; and &quot;Behind the Music Remastered&quot;, although repeats of current and former VH1 programs such as &quot;Pop-Up Video&quot; and &quot;VH1 Storytellers&quot; remained on the schedule. However, the rebranded MTV Classic had few viewers, and declined quickly to become the least-watched English-language subscription network rated by Nielsen at the end of 2016. At the start of 2017, it was reorganized into an all-video network.

=== Internet ===

In the late 1980s, before the Internet, MTV VJ Adam Curry began experimenting online. In the 90&#x27;s, he registered the then-unclaimed domain name &quot;MTV.com&quot; in 1993 with the idea of being MTV&#x27;s unofficial new voice on the Internet. Although this move was sanctioned by his supervisors at MTV Networks at the time, when Curry left to start his own web-portal design and hosting company, MTV subsequently sued him for the domain name, which led to an out-of-court settlement.

The service hosted at the domain name was originally branded &quot;MTV Online&quot; during MTV&#x27;s first few years of control over it in the mid-1990s. It served as a counterpart to the America Online portal for MTV content, which existed at AOL keyword MTV until approximately the end of the 1990s. After this time, the website became known as simply &quot;MTV.com&quot; and served as the Internet hub for all MTV and MTV News content.

MTV.com experimented with entirely video-based layouts between 2005 and 2007. The experiment began in April 2005 as &quot;MTV Overdrive&quot;, a streaming video service that supplemented the regular MTV.com website. Shortly after the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards, which were streamed on MTV.com and heavily used the &quot;MTV Overdrive&quot; features, MTV introduced a massive change for MTV.com, transforming the entire site into a Flash video-based entity. Much of users&#x27; feedback about the Flash-based site was negative, demonstrating a dissatisfaction with videos that played automatically, commercials that could not be skipped or stopped, and the slower speed of the entire website. The experiment ended in February 2007 as MTV.com reverted to a traditional HTML-based website design with embedded video clips, in the style of YouTube and some other video-based websites.

From 2006 to 2007, MTV operated an online channel, MTV International, targeted to the broad international market. The purpose of the online channel was to air commercial-free music videos once the television channels started concentrating on shows unrelated to music videos or music-related programming.

The channel responded to the rise of the Internet as the new central place to watch music videos in October 2008 by launching MTV Music (later called MTV Hive), a website that featured thousands of music videos from MTV and VH1&#x27;s video libraries, dating back to the earliest videos from 1981.

A newly created division of the company, MTV New Media, announced in 2008 that it would produce its own original web series, in an attempt to create a bridge between old and new media. The programming is available to viewers via personal computers, cell phones, iPods, and other digital devices.

In the summer of 2012, MTV launched a music discovery website called the MTV Artists Platform (also known as Artists.MTV). MTV explained, &quot;While technology has made it way easier for artists to produce and distribute their own music on their own terms, it hasn&#x27;t made it any simpler to find a way to cut through all the Internet noise and speak directly to all of their potential fans. The summer launch of the platform is an attempt to help music junkies and musicians close the gap by providing a one-stop place where fans can listen to and buy music and purchase concert tickets and merchandise.&quot;

MTV.com remains the official website of MTV, and it expands on the channel&#x27;s broadcasts by bringing additional content to its viewers. In 2022, it was revised to mostly focus on directing consumers to content on Paramount+ and Pluto TV. The site featured an online version of MTV News and podcasts. It has TV Everywhere authenticated streaming. The news site is defunct but still can be accessed with prior movie features, profiles and interviews with recording artists and from MTV&#x27;s television programs. A related MTV app was available on mobile platforms and connected TV devices.

== See also ==

* History of MTV
* List of MTV award shows
* List of MTV channels
** MTV Canada
** MTV Australia and New Zealand
** MTV Latin America
** MTV Europe
* Music industry

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===

* Blackwood, Nina; Goodman, Mark; Hunter, Alan; Quinn, Martha; Edwards, Gavin (2013). &quot;VJ: The Unplugged Adventures of MTV&#x27;s First Wave&quot;. Atria. .
* Denisoff, R. Serge (1988). &quot;Inside MTV&quot;. Transaction. .
* McGrath, Tom (1996). &quot;MTV: The Making of a Revolution&quot;. Running Pr. .
* &quot;MTV Uncensored&quot;. MTV, 2001. .
* Prato, Greg (2011). &quot;MTV Ruled the World: The Early Years of Music Video&quot;. Createspace. .
* Tannenbaum, Rob/Marks, Craig (2012). &quot;I Want My MTV: The Uncensored Story of the Music Video Revolution&quot;. Plume. .
== External links ==
* Mark Goodman, Nina Blackwood, Alan Hunter interviewed on Stuck in the &#x27;80s podcast</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="0" end="3" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5" end="15" title="Acronym#Pseudo-acronyms and orphan initialisms" label="originally"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="19" end="29" title="initialism" label="initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="33" end="49" title="MTV" label="Music Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="66" end="82" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156334" start="134" end="157" title="MTV Entertainment Group" label="MTV Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156334" start="176" end="200" title="Paramount Media Networks" label="Paramount Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="216" end="232" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="295" end="306" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399436" start="379" end="392" title="video jockey" label="video jockeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="503" end="517" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="1077" end="1083" title="Time Warner" label="Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="1084" end="1088" title="American Express" label="Amex"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="1163" end="1174" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156334" start="1217" end="1229" title="Paramount Media Networks" label="MTV Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="1406" end="1412" title="Viacom (1952–2005)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="1629" end="1640" title="adolescence" label="adolescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156455" start="1645" end="1656" title="young adult (psychology)" label="young adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="2072" end="2115" title="GLAAD" label="Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117684575" start="2495" end="2520" title="MTV Entertainment Studios" label="MTV Entertainment Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="2589" end="2610" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q542497" start="2715" end="2728" title="Like a Virgin (song)" label="Like a Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153162" start="3016" end="3028" title="Spring Break" label="Spring Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q490595" start="3088" end="3110" title="Daytona Beach, Florida" label="Daytona Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300559" start="3249" end="3260" title="Doug Herzog" label="Doug Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="4710" end="4722" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="4958" end="4968" title="cover song" label="cover song"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="5185" end="5193" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q216608" start="5253" end="5263" title="Bob Geldof" label="Bob Geldof"/>
<link wikidata="Q355382" start="5268" end="5277" title="Midge Ure" label="Midge Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="5334" end="5337" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="5444" end="5447" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q193892" start="5467" end="5473" title="Live 8" label="Live 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q37143" start="5516" end="5518" title="G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="Q202109" start="5581" end="5595" title="31st G8 summit" label="31st G8 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="5850" end="5860" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749255" start="6663" end="6679" title="Manhattan Design" label="Manhattan Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086955" start="6797" end="6809" title="Fred Seibert" label="Fred Seibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261015" start="6815" end="6827" title="Block letters" label="block letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671825" start="7620" end="7630" title="station identification" label="network ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7713" end="7717" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003545" start="7770" end="7783" title="Buzz Potamkin" label="Buzz Potamkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003579" start="7788" end="7813" title="Buzzco Associates" label="Perpetual Motion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="8279" end="8324" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134090" start="8977" end="9002" title="digital on-screen graphic" label="digital on-screen graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290088" start="9148" end="9171" title="FNMTV" label="FNMTV: Friday Night MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066098" start="10107" end="10117" title="Jackass 3D" label="Jackass 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733887" start="10246" end="10255" title="vaporwave" label="vaporwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476798" start="10260" end="10267" title="seapunk" label="seapunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q600287" start="10553" end="10573" title="corporate capitalism" label="corporate capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="10984" end="10990" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="11025" end="11028" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="11405" end="11409" title="Vice (magazine)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="11636" end="11645" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700238" start="11650" end="11654" title="Vine (service)" label="Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="12005" end="12027" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541814" start="12537" end="12548" title="George Lois" label="George Lois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979457" start="12623" end="12638" title="I Want My Maypo" label="I Want My Maypo"/>
<link wikidata="Q329972" start="12717" end="12728" title="John Hubley" label="John Hubley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003545" start="13287" end="13300" title="Buzz Potamkin" label="Buzz Potamkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099573" start="13359" end="13374" title="Thomas Schlamme" label="Thomas Schlamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706736" start="13379" end="13391" title="Alan Goodman" label="Alan Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="13489" end="13503" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q235252" start="13505" end="13516" title="Pat Benatar" label="Pat Benatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q348658" start="13518" end="13526" title="Adam Ant" label="Adam Ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="13528" end="13539" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="13541" end="13551" title="the Police" label="the Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="13553" end="13557" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q50037" start="13559" end="13571" title="Culture Club" label="Culture Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q73437" start="13573" end="13583" title="Billy Idol" label="Billy Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="13585" end="13601" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="13603" end="13615" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="13617" end="13624" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="13626" end="13639" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q526406" start="13641" end="13651" title="Ric Ocasek" label="Ric Ocasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q345431" start="13653" end="13668" title="John Mellencamp" label="John Mellencamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549911" start="13670" end="13680" title="Peter Wolf" label="Peter Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q541573" start="13682" end="13693" title="Joe Elliott" label="Joe Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q234691" start="13695" end="13707" title="Stevie Nicks" label="Stevie Nicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q707446" start="13709" end="13725" title="Rick Springfield" label="Rick Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="13731" end="13742" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="13996" end="14001" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="14009" end="14021" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165404" start="14033" end="14050" title="Money for Nothing (song)" label="Money for Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297082" start="14189" end="14205" title="MTV Global" label="its European arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q117684575" start="14253" end="14278" title="MTV Entertainment Studios" label="MTV Entertainment Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247830" start="14279" end="14294" title="production logo" label="production logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="14436" end="14457" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307337" start="14509" end="14525" title="social influence" label="social influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q874405" start="14670" end="14683" title="social groups" label="social groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="14850" end="14863" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q279843" start="14949" end="14962" title="Frankenchrist" label="Frankenchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="15312" end="15327" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="15329" end="15335" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q399890" start="15337" end="15347" title="Eddy Grant" label="Eddy Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="15349" end="15360" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q908933" start="15362" end="15374" title="Donna Summer" label="Donna Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263194" start="15376" end="15392" title="Joan Armatrading" label="Joan Armatrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q744781" start="15394" end="15407" title="Musical Youth" label="Musical Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19057" start="15409" end="15421" title="The Specials" label="The Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546385" start="15423" end="15435" title="The Selecter" label="The Selecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q450429" start="15437" end="15448" title="Grace Jones" label="Grace Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270462" start="15450" end="15462" title="Jon Butcher" label="John Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="15467" end="15481" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612943" start="15483" end="15494" title="Mikey Craig" label="Mikey Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q50037" start="15498" end="15510" title="Culture Club" label="Culture Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210897" start="15512" end="15522" title="Joe Leeway" label="Joe Leeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500069" start="15526" end="15540" title="Thompson Twins" label="Thompson Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831878" start="15545" end="15560" title="Tracy Wormworth" label="Tracy Wormworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481279" start="15564" end="15578" title="The Waitresses" label="The Waitresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q248207" start="15879" end="15889" title="Rick James" label="Rick James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454593" start="15902" end="15913" title="Super Freak" label="Super Freak"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="15984" end="16010" title="Album-oriented rock" label="album-oriented rock format"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="16127" end="16138" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767773" start="16223" end="16235" title="Mark Goodman" label="Mark Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529520" start="17570" end="17581" title="Les Garland" label="Les Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="18614" end="18625" title="Columbia Records" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583305" start="18627" end="18643" title="Walter Yetnikoff" label="Walter Yetnikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q193319" start="18855" end="18866" title="Billie Jean" label="Billie Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="18987" end="19010" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Vanity Fair&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="19032" end="19052" title="The Austin Chronicle" label="The Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="19447" end="19476" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q210218" start="19604" end="19611" title="Beat It" label="Beat It"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342791" start="19645" end="19664" title="Little Red Corvette" label="Little Red Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688110" start="19761" end="19776" title="Electric Avenue (song)" label="Electric Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277639" start="19907" end="19935" title="She Works Hard for the Money" label="She Works Hard for the Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q676426" start="20024" end="20030" title="Rockit (song)" label="Rockit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="20041" end="20054" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q687924" start="20068" end="20082" title="All Night Long (All Night)" label="All Night Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882897" start="20242" end="20260" title="Unconditional Love (Donna Summer song)" label="Unconditional Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855666" start="20310" end="20325" title="Michael Jackson&amp;#x27;s Thriller (music video)" label="elaborate video"/>
<link wikidata="Q380825" start="20336" end="20344" title="Thriller (song)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q492145" start="20673" end="20681" title="tokenism" label="tokenism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20734" end="20778" title="Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus" label="Mike Judge Presents: Tales from the Tour Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="20931" end="20934" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927846" start="20993" end="21006" title="Video Jukebox (TV series)" label="Video Jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="21166" end="21173" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="21175" end="21183" title="Showtime (TV channel)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264751" start="21188" end="21205" title="The Movie Channel" label="The Movie Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="21270" end="21287" title="TBS (American TV channel)" label="SuperStation WTBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254478" start="21303" end="21315" title="Night Tracks" label="Night Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479456" start="21558" end="21568" title="Playboy TV" label="Playboy TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="21886" end="21892" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705168" start="22019" end="22023" title="KSNV" label="KSNV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="22269" end="22272" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503538" start="22317" end="22336" title="Friday Night Videos" label="Friday Night Videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650224" start="22560" end="22569" title="ABC Rocks" label="ABC Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="22636" end="22646" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015644" start="22659" end="22678" title="Cable Music Channel" label="Cable Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449628" start="22897" end="22919" title="Financial News Network" label="Financial News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="23272" end="23286" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203290" start="23316" end="23319" title="D-TV" label="DTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="23487" end="23493" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="23534" end="23565" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40302" start="23581" end="23602" title="The Fox and the Hound" label="The Fox and the Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="23821" end="23824" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="24015" end="24028" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674113" start="24043" end="24047" title="HBTV" label="HBTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="24235" end="24245" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591480" start="24451" end="24480" title="Parents Music Resource Center" label="Parents Music Resource Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="24575" end="24583" title="satanism" label="satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q565005" start="24681" end="24695" title="Antireligion" label="anti-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q422079" start="24758" end="24775" title="Jesus Christ Pose" label="Jesus Christ Pose"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="24785" end="24796" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329253" start="24815" end="24827" title="Megalomaniac (Incubus song)" label="Megalomaniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661036" start="24837" end="24844" title="Incubus (band)" label="Incubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q485893" start="24886" end="24900" title="Marilyn Manson (band)" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q86560003" start="25041" end="25054" title="Scout Durwood" label="Scout Durwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193258" start="25081" end="25104" title="Cultural appropriation" label="no appropriation policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134267" start="25152" end="25160" title="cornrows" label="cornrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963068" start="25184" end="25195" title="Mary + Jane" label="Mary + Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q367300" start="25330" end="25346" title="Magyar Televízió" label="Magyar Televízió"/>
<link wikidata="Q925173" start="25681" end="25708" title="1989 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1989 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q504455" start="25728" end="25744" title="Andrew Dice Clay" label="Andrew Dice Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q73437" start="25901" end="25911" title="Billy Idol" label="Billy Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180493" start="25950" end="25964" title="Cradle of Love (Billy Idol song)" label="Cradle of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q977196" start="26021" end="26052" title="The Adventures of Ford Fairlane" label="The Adventures of Ford Fairlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q572513" start="26141" end="26168" title="2011 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2011 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q622604" start="26549" end="26570" title="Pyromania" label="yell &amp;quot;fire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q434585" start="26739" end="26749" title="Mike Judge" label="Mike Judge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26770" end="26785" title="Beavis and Butt-Head: The Mike Judge Collection" label="Collection DVDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548314" start="27031" end="27053" title="Snow Summit" label="Snow Summit Ski Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="27303" end="27309" title="Viacom (1952–2006)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="27329" end="27332" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q625210" start="27366" end="27381" title="Super Bowl XXXV" label="Super Bowl XXXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11161626" start="27382" end="27395" title="List of Super Bowl halftime shows" label="halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953770" start="27415" end="27418" title="NFL on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="27433" end="27447" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="27449" end="27454" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="27460" end="27469" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="27717" end="27735" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="Super Bowl XXXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q218992" start="27833" end="27838" title="Nelly" label="Nelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="27840" end="27848" title="Sean Combs" label="P. Diddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="27850" end="27863" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="27869" end="27886" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050839" start="28007" end="28021" title="Rock Your Body" label="Rock Your Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825093" start="28167" end="28187" title="wardrobe malfunction" label="wardrobe malfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562548" start="28196" end="28210" title="Michael Powell (attorney)" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="28233" end="28266" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982114" start="28446" end="28455" title="This Love (Maroon 5 song)" label="This Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739062" start="28472" end="28482" title="I Miss You (Blink-182 song)" label="I Miss You"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="28914" end="28924" title="nipplegate" label="nipplegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825093" start="28944" end="28952" title="boobgate" label="boobgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="29063" end="29075" title="Morality" label="moral values"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016165" start="29151" end="29177" title="Parents Television Council" label="Parents Television Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456367" start="29576" end="29595" title="L. Brent Bozell III" label="L. Brent Bozell III"/>
<link wikidata="Q249401" start="29836" end="29846" title="à la carte" label="à la carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284141" start="29987" end="30001" title="106 &amp;amp; Park" label="106 &amp;amp; Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930183" start="30018" end="30026" title="Rap City" label="Rap City"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="30048" end="30051" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633084" start="30063" end="30074" title="Sucker Free" label="Sucker Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165712" start="30352" end="30364" title="Jersey Shore (TV series)" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987378" start="30517" end="30522" title="Guido (slang)" label="guido"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="30614" end="30625" title="List of ethnic slurs" label="ethnic slur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086913" start="31069" end="31084" title="Seaside Heights, New Jersey" label="Seaside Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884735" start="31151" end="31165" title="Unico National" label="Unico National"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885149" start="31769" end="31799" title="Order Sons of Italy in America" label="Order Sons of Italy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="32190" end="32194" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q839466" start="32196" end="32215" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743730" start="32221" end="32246" title="American Family Insurance" label="American Family Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="33297" end="33309" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28725" start="33391" end="33400" title="True Life" label="True Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976494" start="33462" end="33470" title="MTV News" label="MTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="33588" end="33617" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="33752" end="33762" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="33780" end="33788" title="Sean Combs" label="P. Diddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122544" start="33802" end="33816" title="Citizen Change" label="Citizen Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q483558" start="33953" end="33959" title="Sum 41" label="Sum 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="33967" end="33999" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="34256" end="34285" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686927" start="34319" end="34333" title="Jonah Goldberg" label="Jonah Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="34371" end="34386" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160532" start="34477" end="34490" title="Rock the Vote" label="Rock the Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="34888" end="34917" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="35060" end="35073" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460357" start="35501" end="35515" title="Vote Early Day" label="Vote Early Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156334" start="36221" end="36245" title="Paramount Media Networks" label="Paramount Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="36278" end="36294" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="36367" end="36370" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="36460" end="36478" title="adult contemporary" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q179636" start="36609" end="36612" title="Country Music Television" label="CMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193678" start="36626" end="36642" title="Culture of the Southern United States" label="southern culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="36691" end="36704" title="digital cable" label="digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241928" start="36774" end="36778" title="MTV2" label="MTV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18629" start="36811" end="36816" title="Tr3s" label="Tr3́s"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742605" start="36935" end="36939" title="MTVU" label="MTVU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718588" start="37132" end="37136" title="MTVX" label="MTVX"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="37178" end="37187" title="NickMusic" label="NickMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="37248" end="37256" title="BET Jams" label="BET Jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q168614" start="37307" end="37312" title="1080i" label="1080i"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="37313" end="37328" title="High-definition television" label="high-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279569" start="37377" end="37391" title="master control" label="master control"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="37678" end="37697" title="standard-definition television" label="standard definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024384" start="37719" end="37731" title="Windowbox (filmmaking)" label="windowboxing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37996" end="38011" title="Jersey Shore: Family Vacation" label="Family Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127702" start="38115" end="38123" title="MTV Live (TV network)" label="MTV Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="38127" end="38142" title="High-definition television" label="high-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026385" start="38498" end="38506" title="MTV Desi" label="MTV Desi"/>
<link wikidata="Q866846" start="38576" end="38583" title="MTV Chi" label="MTV Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718728" start="38653" end="38658" title="MTV K" label="MTV K"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060087" start="39047" end="39058" title="MTV Classic (U.S. TV network)" label="MTV Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351574" start="39206" end="39222" title="VH1 Storytellers" label="VH1 Storytellers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39380" end="39416" title="Laguna Beach: The Real Orange County" label="Laguna Beach: The Real Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285279" start="39662" end="39677" title="That Metal Show" label="That Metal Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763472" start="39691" end="39706" title="Metal Evolution" label="Metal Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234176" start="39724" end="39751" title="Behind the Music" label="Behind the Music Remastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812317" start="39825" end="39837" title="Pop-Up Video" label="Pop-Up Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351574" start="39854" end="39870" title="VH1 Storytellers" label="VH1 Storytellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="40196" end="40204" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q349039" start="40213" end="40223" title="Adam Curry" label="Adam Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="40303" end="40314" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="40847" end="40861" title="AOL" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976494" start="41080" end="41088" title="MTV News" label="MTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q540380" start="41333" end="41360" title="2006 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2006 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="41531" end="41536" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="41867" end="41871" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718722" start="42033" end="42050" title="MTV International" label="MTV International"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712301" start="42437" end="42445" title="MTV Hive" label="MTV Hive"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="42511" end="42514" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="42848" end="42852" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16162472" start="42956" end="42976" title="MTV Artists Platform" label="MTV Artists Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="43716" end="43726" title="Paramount+" label="Paramount+"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022235" start="43731" end="43739" title="Pluto TV" label="Pluto TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976494" start="43780" end="43788" title="MTV News" label="MTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672323" start="43810" end="43823" title="TV Everywhere" label="TV Everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q129254788" start="44112" end="44126" title="History of MTV" label="History of MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577439" start="44129" end="44152" title="List of MTV award shows" label="List of MTV award shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969410" start="44155" end="44175" title="List of MTV channels" label="List of MTV channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273260" start="44179" end="44189" title="MTV (Canadian TV channel)" label="MTV Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841571" start="44193" end="44222" title="MTV (Australian and New Zealand TV channel)" label="MTV Australia and New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268076" start="44226" end="44243" title="MTV (Latin American TV channel)" label="MTV Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297082" start="44247" end="44257" title="MTV Europe" label="MTV Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="44260" end="44274" title="Music industry" label="Music industry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18857" wikidata="Q25437" url="?curid=18857" title="Mustelidae">
<text>The Mustelidae (; from Latin , weasel) are a diverse family of carnivoran mammals, including weasels, badgers, otters, polecats, martens, grisons, and wolverines. Otherwise known as mustelids (), they form the largest family in the suborder Caniformia of the order Carnivora with about 66 to 70 species in nine subfamilies.

== Variety ==
Mustelids vary greatly in size and behaviour. The smaller variants of the least weasel can be under in length, while the giant otter of Amazonian South America can measure up to and sea otters can exceed in weight. Wolverines can crush bones as thick as the femur of a moose to get at the marrow, and have been seen attempting to drive bears away from their kills. The sea otter uses rocks to break open shellfish to eat. Martens are largely arboreal, while European badgers dig extensive tunnel networks, called setts. Only one mustelid has been domesticated; the ferret. Tayra are also kept as pets (although they require a Dangerous Wild Animals licence in the UK), or as working animals for hunting or vermin control. Others have been important in the fur trade—the mink is often raised for its fur.

Being one of the most species-rich families in the order Carnivora, the family Mustelidae also is one of the oldest. Mustelid-like forms first appeared about 40 million years ago (Mya), roughly coinciding with the appearance of rodents. The common ancestor of modern mustelids appeared about 18 Mya.

== Characteristics ==

Within a large range of variation, the mustelids exhibit some common characteristics. They are typically small animals with elongated bodies, short legs, short skulls, short, round ears, and thick fur. Mustelids&#x27; long, slender body structure is adapted to three main lifestyles: terrestrial, arboreal, and aquatic/semi-aquatic. They exhibit digitigrade or plantigrade locomotion, with five toes on each foot, enabling them to move in different ways (i.e. digging, climbing, swimming). Most mustelids are solitary, nocturnal animals, and are active year-round. Their dense fur, often serving as natural camouflage, undergoes seasonal changes to help them adjust to varying environmental conditions.

With the exception of the sea otter they have anal scent glands that produce a strong-smelling secretion the animals use for sexual signalling and marking territory.
Mustelids exhibit sexual dimorphism, with males being larger than females, but degree varies between species as well as geographically within species. Male mustelids have a bifurcated penis and baculum. Most mustelid reproduction involves embryonic diapause. The embryo does not immediately implant in the uterus, but remains dormant for some time. No development takes place as long as the embryo remains unattached to the uterine lining. As a result, the normal gestation period is extended, sometimes up to a year. This allows the young to be born under favourable environmental conditions. Reproduction has a large energy cost, so it is to a female&#x27;s benefit to have available food and mild weather. The young are more likely to survive if birth occurs after previous offspring have been weaned.

Mustelids are predominantly carnivorous, although some eat vegetable matter at times. While not all mustelids share an identical dentition, they all possess teeth adapted for eating flesh, including the presence of shearing carnassials. One characteristic trait is a meat-shearing upper-back molar that is rotated 90°, towards the inside of the mouth. With variation between species, the most common dental formula is .

== Ecology ==

The fisher, tayra, and martens are partially arboreal, while badgers are fossorial. A number of mustelids have aquatic lifestyles, ranging from semiaquatic minks and river otters to the fully aquatic sea otter, which is one of the few nonprimate mammals known to use tools while foraging. It uses &quot;anvil&quot; stones to crack open the shellfish that form a significant part of its diet. It is a &quot;keystone species&quot;, keeping its prey populations in balance so some do not outcompete the others and destroy the kelp in which they live.

The black-footed ferret is entirely dependent on another keystone species, the prairie dog. A family of four ferrets eats 250 prairie dogs in a year; this requires a stable population of prairie dogs from an area of some .

== Animals of similar appearance ==
Skunks were previously included as a subfamily of the mustelids, but DNA research placed them in their own separate family (Mephitidae). Mongooses bear a striking resemblance to many mustelids, but belong to a distinctly different suborder—the Feliformia (all those carnivores sharing more recent origins with the cats) and not the Caniformia (those sharing more recent origins with the dogs). Because mongooses and mustelids occupy similar ecological niches, convergent evolution has led to similarity in form and behavior.

== Human uses ==
Several mustelids, including the mink, the sable (a type of marten), and the stoat (ermine), possess furs that are considered beautiful and valuable, so have been hunted since prehistoric times. From the early Middle Ages, the trade in furs was of great economic importance for northern and eastern European nations with large native populations of fur-bearing mustelids, and was a major economic impetus behind Russian expansion into Siberia and French and English expansion in North America. In recent centuries fur farming, notably of mink, has also become widespread and provides the majority of the fur brought to market.

One species, the sea mink (&quot;Neogale macrodon&quot;) of New England and Canada, was driven to extinction by fur trappers. Its appearance and habits are almost unknown today because no complete specimens can be found and no systematic contemporary studies were conducted.

The sea otter, which has the densest fur of any animal, narrowly escaped the fate of the sea mink. The discovery of large populations in the North Pacific was the major economic driving force behind Russian expansion into Kamchatka, the Aleutian Islands, and Alaska, as well as a cause for conflict with Japan and foreign hunters in the Kuril Islands. Together with widespread hunting in California and British Columbia, the species was brought to the brink of extinction until an international moratorium came into effect in 1911.

Today, some mustelids are threatened for other reasons. Sea otters are vulnerable to oil spills and the indirect effects of overfishing; the black-footed ferret, a relative of the European polecat, suffers from the loss of American prairie; and wolverine populations are slowly declining because of habitat destruction and persecution. The rare European mink (&quot;Mustela lutreola&quot;) is one of the most endangered mustelid species.

The ferret, a domesticated European polecat, is a fairly common pet.

== Evolution and systematics ==
Mustelidae is a subfamily in Musteloidia, a superfamily of mammals that is united by shared skull and teeth characteristics. Mustelids are believed to have separated from their next closest related family, Procyonidae, around 29 million years ago. The oldest known mustelid from North America is &quot;Corumictis wolsani&quot; from the early and late Oligocene (early and late Arikareean, Ar1–Ar3) of Oregon. Middle Oligocene &quot;Mustelictis&quot; from Europe might be a mustelid, as well. Other early fossils of the mustelids were dated at the end of the Oligocene to the beginning of the Miocene. Which of these forms are Mustelidae ancestors and which should be considered the first mustelids is unclear.

The fossil record indicates that mustelids appeared in the late Oligocene period (33 Mya) in Eurasia and migrated to every continent except Antarctica and Australia (all the continents that were connected during or since the early Miocene). They reached the Americas via the Bering land bridge.

The 68 recent mustelids (66 extant species) are classified into eight subfamilies in 22 genera:
Subfamily Taxidiinae
* Genus &quot;Taxidea&quot;
** American badger, &quot;T. taxus&quot;

Subfamily Mellivorinae
* Genus &quot;Mellivora&quot;
** Honey badger, &quot;M. capensis&quot;

Subfamily Melinae
* Genus &quot;Arctonyx&quot;
** Northern hog badger, &quot;A. albogularis&quot;
** Greater hog badger, &quot;A. collaris&quot;
** Sumatran hog badger, &quot;A. hoevenii&quot;
* Genus &quot;Meles&quot;
** Japanese badger, &quot;M. anakuma&quot;
** Asian badger, &quot;M. leucurus&quot;
** European badger, &quot;M. meles&quot;
** Caucasian badger, &quot;M. canescens&quot;

Subfamily Helictidinae
* Genus &quot;Melogale&quot;
** Vietnam ferret-badger, &quot;M. cucphuongensis&quot;
** Bornean ferret-badger, &quot;M. everetti&quot;
** Chinese ferret-badger, &quot;M. moschata&quot;
** Javan ferret-badger, &quot;M. orientalis&quot;
** Burmese ferret-badger, &quot;M. personata&quot;
** Formosan ferret-badger, &quot;M. subaurantiaca&quot;

Subfamily Guloninae
* Genus &quot;Eira&quot;
** Tayra, &quot;E. barbara&quot;
* Genus &quot;Gulo&quot;
** Wolverine, &quot;G. gulo&quot;
* Genus &quot;Martes&quot;
** American marten, &quot;M. americana&quot;
** Pacific marten, &quot;M. caurina&quot;
** Yellow-throated marten, &quot;M. flavigula&quot;
** Beech marten, &quot;M. foina&quot;
** Nilgiri marten, &quot;M. gwatkinsii&quot;
** European pine marten, &quot;M. martes&quot;
** Japanese marten, &quot;M. melampus&quot;
** Sable, &quot;M. zibellina&quot;
* Genus &quot;Pekania&quot;
** Fisher, &quot;P. pennanti&quot;

Subfamily Ictonychinae
* Genus &quot;Galictis&quot;
** Lesser grison, &quot;G. cuja&quot;
** Greater grison, &quot;G. vittata&quot;
* Genus &quot;Ictonyx&quot;
** Saharan striped polecat, &quot;I. libycus&quot;
** Striped polecat, &quot;I. striatus&quot;
* Genus &quot;Lyncodon&quot;
** Patagonian weasel, &quot;L. patagonicus&quot;
* Genus &quot;Poecilogale&quot;
** African striped weasel, &quot;P. albinucha&quot;
* Genus &quot;Vormela&quot;
** Marbled polecat, &quot;V. peregusna&quot;

Subfamily Lutrinae (otters)
* Genus &quot;Aonyx&quot;
** African clawless otter, &quot;A. capensis&quot;
** Asian small-clawed otter, &quot;A. cinerea&quot;
** Congo clawless otter, &quot;A. congicus&quot;
* Genus &quot;Enhydra&quot;
** Sea otter, &quot;E. lutris&quot;
* Genus &quot;Lontra&quot;
** North American river otter, &quot;L. canadensis&quot;
** Marine otter, &quot;L. felina&quot;
** Neotropical otter, &quot;L. longicaudis&quot;
** Southern river otter, &quot;L. provocax&quot;
* Genus &quot;Lutra&quot;
** Eurasian otter, &quot;L. lutra&quot;
** Hairy-nosed otter, &quot;L. sumatrana&quot;
** Japanese otter. &quot;L. nippon&quot;
* Genus &quot;Hydrictis&quot;
** Spotted-necked otter, &quot;H. maculicollis&quot;
* Genus &quot;Lutrogale&quot;
** Smooth-coated otter, &quot;L. perspicillata&quot;
* Genus &quot;Pteronura&quot;
** Giant otter, &quot;P. brasiliensis&quot;

Subfamily Mustelinae (weasels, ferrets, and mink)
* Genus &quot;Mustela&quot;
** Mountain weasel, &quot;M. altaica&quot;
** Stoat (Beringian ermine), &quot;M. erminea&quot;
** Steppe polecat, &quot;M. eversmannii&quot;
** Domestic ferret, &quot;M. furo&quot;
** Haida ermine, &quot;M. haidarum&quot;
** Japanese weasel, &quot;M. itatsi&quot;
** Yellow-bellied weasel, &quot;M. kathiah&quot;
** European mink, &quot;M. lutreola&quot;
** Indonesian mountain weasel, &quot;M. lutreolina&quot;
** Black-footed ferret, &quot;M. nigripes&quot;
** Least weasel, &quot;M. nivalis&quot;
** Malayan weasel, &quot;M. nudipes&quot;
** European polecat, &quot;M. putorius&quot;
** American ermine, &quot;M. richardsonii&quot;
** Siberian weasel, &quot;M. sibirica&quot;
** Back-striped weasel, &quot;M. strigidorsa&quot;
* Genus &quot;Neogale&quot;
** Amazon weasel, &quot;N. africana&quot;
** Colombian weasel, &quot;N. felipei&quot;
** Long-tailed weasel, &quot;N. frenata&quot;
** American mink, &quot;N. vison&quot;
** Sea mink, &quot;N. macrodon&quot;

Fossil mustelids
Extinct genera of the family Mustelidae include:

* &quot;Brachypsalis&quot;
* &quot;Chamitataxus&quot;
* &quot;Corumictis&quot;
* &quot;Cyrnaonyx&quot;
* &quot;Ekorus&quot;
* &quot;Enhydriodon&quot;
* &quot;Eomellivora&quot;
* &quot;Hoplictis&quot;
* &quot;Megalictis&quot;
* &quot;Oligobunis&quot;
* &quot;Plesictis&quot;
* &quot;Sthenictis&quot;
* &quot;Teruelictis&quot;
* &quot;Trochictis&quot;

===Phylogeny===
Multigene phylogenies constructed by Koepfli et al. (2008) and Law et al. (2018) found that Mustelidae comprises eight living subfamilies. The early mustelids appear to have undergone two rapid bursts of diversification in Eurasia, with the resulting species spreading to other continents only later.

Mustelid species diversity is often attributed to an adaptive radiation coinciding with the mid-Miocene climate transition. Contrary to expectations, Law et al. (2018) found no evidence for rapid bursts of lineage diversification at the origin of the Mustelidae, and further analyses of lineage diversification rates using molecular and fossil-based methods did not find associations between rates of lineage diversification and mid-Miocene climate transition as previously hypothesized.

==See also==
* List of heaviest extant mustelids

==References==
== Further reading ==


==External links==
*&quot;The Mighty Weasel&quot; (February 19, 2020) – &quot;Nature&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="4" end="14" title="Mustelidae" label="Mustelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="63" end="73" title="carnivora" label="carnivoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="93" end="99" title="weasel" label="weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="102" end="108" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="111" end="116" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46600415" start="119" end="126" title="polecat" label="polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="129" end="135" title="marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q756008" start="138" end="144" title="grison" label="grison"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="151" end="160" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="182" end="191" title="Mustelidae" label="mustelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q27414" start="241" end="251" title="Caniformia" label="Caniformia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="259" end="264" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="265" end="274" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q25311" start="413" end="425" title="least weasel" label="least weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83774" start="460" end="471" title="giant otter" label="giant otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="475" end="484" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="521" end="530" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="554" end="563" title="Wolverine" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="608" end="613" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="628" end="634" title="Bone marrow" label="marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="675" end="679" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="761" end="767" title="Marten" label="Marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="781" end="789" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="797" end="812" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q968149" start="852" end="856" title="sett" label="sett"/>
<link wikidata="Q178973" start="904" end="910" title="ferret" label="ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q247774" start="912" end="917" title="Tayra" label="Tayra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216146" start="965" end="987" title="Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976" label="Dangerous Wild Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="1095" end="1104" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17700" start="1109" end="1113" title="mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q375560" start="1123" end="1141" title="Fur farming" label="raised for its fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="1372" end="1378" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q484645" start="2218" end="2234" title="anal scent gland" label="anal scent gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="2297" end="2314" title="sexual signalling" label="sexual signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="2319" end="2336" title="marking territory" label="marking territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456044" start="2577" end="2595" title="embryonic diapause" label="embryonic diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="2601" end="2607" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="2644" end="2650" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333203" start="3135" end="3139" title="wean" label="wean"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="3273" end="3282" title="dentition" label="dentition"/>
<link wikidata="Q280781" start="3368" end="3378" title="carnassial" label="carnassial"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="3544" end="3558" title="dental formula" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="3584" end="3590" title="Fisher (animal)" label="fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="3653" end="3662" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="3724" end="3735" title="semiaquatic" label="semiaquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338038" start="3746" end="3757" title="River otter (disambiguation)" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039055" start="3766" end="3779" title="aquatic mammal" label="fully aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190928" start="3843" end="3852" title="Tool use by sea otters" label="use tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="3986" end="4002" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="4103" end="4107" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="4133" end="4152" title="black-footed ferret" label="black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359" start="4208" end="4219" title="prairie dog" label="prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="4389" end="4394" title="Skunk" label="Skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80479" start="4526" end="4534" title="Mongoose" label="Mongoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="4620" end="4628" title="Order (biology)" label="suborder"/>
<link wikidata="Q27070" start="4633" end="4643" title="Feliformia" label="Feliformia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="4703" end="4707" title="Felidae" label="cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q27414" start="4721" end="4731" title="Caniformia" label="Caniformia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="4776" end="4780" title="Canidae" label="dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="4830" end="4846" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="4849" end="4869" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423" start="4975" end="4980" title="sable" label="sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="5009" end="5014" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="5033" end="5037" title="furs" label="furs"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="5159" end="5172" title="fur trade" label="trade in furs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="5367" end="5374" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375560" start="5446" end="5457" title="fur farming" label="fur farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q583627" start="5577" end="5585" title="sea mink" label="sea mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="5658" end="5668" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="5840" end="5849" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="6058" end="6067" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="6073" end="6089" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="6095" end="6101" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6140" end="6145" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="6173" end="6186" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="6454" end="6463" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="6510" end="6529" title="black-footed ferret" label="black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q26582" start="6549" end="6565" title="European polecat" label="European polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="6601" end="6608" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="6614" end="6623" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="6668" end="6687" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q26559" start="6714" end="6727" title="European mink" label="European mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="6778" end="6788" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q178973" start="6812" end="6818" title="ferret" label="ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="6872" end="6875" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670845" start="6939" end="6950" title="Musteloidea" label="Musteloidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146761" start="7212" end="7222" title="Corumictis" label="Corumictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q636276" start="7287" end="7297" title="Arikareean" label="Arikareean"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="7311" end="7317" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="7896" end="7914" title="Bering land bridge" label="Bering land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="8023" end="8033" title="Taxidiinae" label="Taxidiinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="8048" end="8055" title="Taxidea" label="Taxidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="8065" end="8080" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564654" start="8114" end="8126" title="Mellivorinae" label="Mellivorinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564654" start="8141" end="8150" title="Mellivora" label="Mellivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q173128" start="8160" end="8172" title="Honey badger" label="Honey badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="8209" end="8216" title="Melinae" label="Melinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906411" start="8231" end="8239" title="Arctonyx" label="Arctonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q19717139" start="8249" end="8268" title="Northern hog badger" label="Northern hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q744382" start="8300" end="8318" title="Greater hog badger" label="Greater hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19717143" start="8347" end="8366" title="Sumatran hog badger" label="Sumatran hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345042" start="8406" end="8411" title="Meles (genus)" label="Meles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576038" start="8421" end="8436" title="Japanese badger" label="Japanese badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q728454" start="8464" end="8476" title="Asian badger" label="Asian badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q27066" start="8505" end="8520" title="European badger" label="European badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473331" start="8546" end="8562" title="Caucasian badger" label="Caucasian badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366503" start="8600" end="8612" title="Helictidinae" label="Helictidinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366503" start="8627" end="8635" title="Melogale" label="Melogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748756" start="8645" end="8666" title="Vietnam ferret-badger" label="Vietnam ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q690765" start="8701" end="8722" title="Bornean ferret-badger" label="Bornean ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332414" start="8751" end="8772" title="Chinese ferret-badger" label="Chinese ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q912020" start="8801" end="8820" title="Javan ferret-badger" label="Javan ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q844662" start="8851" end="8872" title="Burmese ferret-badger" label="Burmese ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473188" start="8902" end="8924" title="Formosan ferret-badger" label="Formosan ferret-badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140849" start="8966" end="8975" title="Guloninae" label="Guloninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q247774" start="8990" end="8994" title="Tayra" label="Eira"/>
<link wikidata="Q247774" start="9004" end="9009" title="Tayra" label="Tayra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894566" start="9048" end="9052" title="Gulo" label="Gulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="9062" end="9071" title="Wolverine" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="9107" end="9113" title="Martes" label="Martes"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="9123" end="9138" title="American marten" label="American marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25427460" start="9168" end="9182" title="Pacific marten" label="Pacific marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q220248" start="9210" end="9232" title="Yellow-throated marten" label="Yellow-throated marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q27366" start="9262" end="9274" title="Beech marten" label="Beech marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q602823" start="9300" end="9314" title="Nilgiri marten" label="Nilgiri marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046" start="9345" end="9365" title="European pine marten" label="European pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052830" start="9392" end="9407" title="Japanese marten" label="Japanese marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423" start="9436" end="9441" title="Sable" label="Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q27203130" start="9482" end="9489" title="Pekania" label="Pekania"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="9499" end="9505" title="Fisher (animal)" label="Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q55333185" start="9542" end="9554" title="Ictonychinae" label="Ictonychinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q756008" start="9569" end="9577" title="Galictis" label="Galictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q238561" start="9587" end="9600" title="Lesser grison" label="Lesser grison"/>
<link wikidata="Q283426" start="9625" end="9639" title="Greater grison" label="Greater grison"/>
<link wikidata="Q921373" start="9678" end="9685" title="Ictonyx" label="Ictonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q30772" start="9695" end="9718" title="Saharan striped polecat" label="Saharan striped polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q226735" start="9746" end="9761" title="Striped polecat" label="Striped polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q853294" start="9801" end="9809" title="Lyncodon" label="Lyncodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q853294" start="9819" end="9836" title="Patagonian weasel" label="Patagonian weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q852756" start="9879" end="9890" title="Poecilogale" label="Poecilogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q852756" start="9900" end="9922" title="African striped weasel" label="African striped weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139554" start="9963" end="9970" title="Vormela" label="Vormela"/>
<link wikidata="Q70529" start="9980" end="9995" title="Marbled polecat" label="Marbled polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="10033" end="10041" title="Lutrinae" label="Lutrinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="10043" end="10048" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291566" start="10065" end="10070" title="Aonyx" label="Aonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q46148" start="10080" end="10102" title="African clawless otter" label="African clawless otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q244277" start="10131" end="10155" title="Asian small-clawed otter" label="Asian small-clawed otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46605397" start="10183" end="10203" title="Congo clawless otter" label="Congo clawless otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5832825" start="10243" end="10250" title="Enhydra" label="Enhydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="10260" end="10269" title="Sea otter" label="Sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777275" start="10307" end="10313" title="Lontra" label="Lontra"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="10323" end="10349" title="North American river otter" label="North American river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q644224" start="10380" end="10392" title="Marine otter" label="Marine otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q839828" start="10419" end="10436" title="Neotropical otter" label="Neotropical otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q840714" start="10468" end="10488" title="Southern river otter" label="Southern river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q446882" start="10528" end="10533" title="Lutra" label="Lutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="10543" end="10557" title="Eurasian otter" label="Eurasian otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q751763" start="10583" end="10600" title="Hairy-nosed otter" label="Hairy-nosed otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122042" start="10630" end="10644" title="Japanese otter" label="Japanese otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q577677" start="10682" end="10691" title="Hydrictis" label="Hydrictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q577677" start="10701" end="10721" title="Spotted-necked otter" label="Spotted-necked otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899249" start="10765" end="10774" title="Lutrogale" label="Lutrogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q754737" start="10784" end="10803" title="Smooth-coated otter" label="Smooth-coated otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83774" start="10848" end="10857" title="Pteronura" label="Pteronura"/>
<link wikidata="Q83774" start="10867" end="10878" title="Giant otter" label="Giant otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27888" start="10919" end="10929" title="Mustelinae" label="Mustelinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="10973" end="10980" title="Mustela" label="Mustela"/>
<link wikidata="Q434197" start="10990" end="11005" title="Mountain weasel" label="Mountain weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="11033" end="11038" title="Stoat" label="Stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q732127" start="11085" end="11099" title="Steppe polecat" label="Steppe polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178973" start="11131" end="11146" title="Domestic ferret" label="Domestic ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657638" start="11171" end="11183" title="Haida ermine" label="Haida ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q628006" start="11212" end="11227" title="Japanese weasel" label="Japanese weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46144" start="11254" end="11275" title="Yellow-bellied weasel" label="Yellow-bellied weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26559" start="11303" end="11316" title="European mink" label="European mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q240167" start="11345" end="11371" title="Indonesian mountain weasel" label="Indonesian mountain weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="11402" end="11421" title="Black-footed ferret" label="Black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q25311" start="11450" end="11462" title="Least weasel" label="Least weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q909694" start="11490" end="11504" title="Malayan weasel" label="Malayan weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26582" start="11532" end="11548" title="European polecat" label="European polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41085321" start="11577" end="11592" title="American ermine" label="American ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q271459" start="11625" end="11640" title="Siberian weasel" label="Siberian weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142024" start="11669" end="11688" title="Back-striped weasel" label="Back-striped weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548263" start="11731" end="11738" title="Neogale" label="Neogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q116894337" start="11748" end="11761" title="Amazon weasel" label="Amazon weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116894434" start="11790" end="11806" title="Colombian weasel" label="Colombian weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q125749307" start="11834" end="11852" title="Long-tailed weasel" label="Long-tailed weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="11880" end="11893" title="American mink" label="American mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q583627" start="11919" end="11927" title="Sea mink" label="Sea mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953543" start="12029" end="12041" title="Brachypsalis" label="Brachypsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745574" start="12056" end="12068" title="Chamitataxus" label="Chamitataxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146761" start="12083" end="12093" title="Corumictis" label="Corumictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955091" start="12108" end="12117" title="Cyrnaonyx" label="Cyrnaonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258308" start="12132" end="12138" title="Ekorus" label="Ekorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962593" start="12153" end="12164" title="Enhydriodon" label="Enhydriodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592526" start="12179" end="12190" title="Eomellivora" label="Eomellivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808432" start="12229" end="12239" title="Megalictis" label="Megalictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086806" start="12254" end="12264" title="Oligobunis" label="Oligobunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177148" start="12279" end="12288" title="Plesictis" label="Plesictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973471" start="12303" end="12313" title="Sthenictis" label="Sthenictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993011" start="12328" end="12339" title="Teruelictis" label="Teruelictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841504" start="12782" end="12812" title="Middle Miocene disruption" label="mid-Miocene climate transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846431" start="13194" end="13227" title="List of heaviest extant mustelids" label="List of heaviest extant mustelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518720" start="13346" end="13352" title="List of Nature episodes" label="Nature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18858" wikidata="Q1391" url="?curid=18858" title="Maryland">
<text>Maryland ( ) is a state in the Mid-Atlantic and South Atlantic regions of the United States, per the nation&#x27;s Labor and Commerce departments. It borders the states of Virginia to its south, West Virginia to its west, Pennsylvania to its north, Delaware and the Atlantic Ocean to its east, and the national capital and federal district of Washington, D.C. to the southwest. With a total area of , Maryland is the ninth-smallest state by land area, and its population of 6,177,224 ranks it the 18th-most populous state and the fifth-most densely populated. Maryland&#x27;s capital city is Annapolis, and the most populous city is Baltimore.

Maryland&#x27;s coastline was first explored by Europeans in the 16th century. Prior to that, it was inhabited by several Native American tribes, mostly the Algonquian peoples. As one of the original Thirteen Colonies, Maryland was founded by George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore, a Catholic convert who sought to provide a religious haven for Catholics persecuted in England. In 1632, Charles I of England granted Lord Baltimore a colonial charter, naming the colony after his wife, Henrietta Maria. In 1649, the Maryland General Assembly passed an Act Concerning Religion, which enshrined the principle of toleration. Religious strife was common in Maryland&#x27;s early years, and Catholics remained a minority, albeit in greater numbers than in any other English colony. Maryland&#x27;s early settlements and population centers clustered around waterways that empty into the Chesapeake Bay. Its economy was heavily plantation-based and centered mostly on the cultivation of tobacco. Demand for cheap labor from Maryland colonists led to the importation of numerous indentured servants and enslaved Africans. In 1760, Maryland&#x27;s current boundaries took form following the settlement of a long-running border dispute with Pennsylvania. Many of its citizens played key political and military roles in the American Revolutionary War. Although it was a slave state, Maryland remained in the Union during the American Civil War, and its proximity to Washington D.C. and Virginia made it a significant strategic location. After the Civil War ended, Maryland took part in the Industrial Revolution, driven by its seaports, railroad networks, and mass immigration from Europe.

Since the 1940s, the state&#x27;s population has grown rapidly, to approximately six million residents, and it is among the most densely populated U.S. states. , Maryland had the highest median household income of any state, owing in large part to its proximity to Washington, D.C., and a highly diversified economy spanning manufacturing, retail services, public administration, real estate, higher education, information technology, defense contracting, health care, and biotechnology. Maryland is one of the most multicultural states in the country; it is one of the six states where non-Whites compose a majority of the population, with the fifth-highest percentage of African Americans, and high numbers of residents born in Africa, Asia, Central America, and the Caribbean. The state&#x27;s central role in U.S. history is reflected by its hosting of some of the highest numbers of historic landmarks per capita.

The western portion of the state contains stretches of the Appalachian Mountains, the central portion is primarily composed of the Piedmont, and the eastern side of the state makes up a significant portion of the Chesapeake Bay. Sixteen of Maryland&#x27;s twenty-three counties, and the city of Baltimore, border the tidal waters of the Chesapeake Bay estuary and its many tributaries, which combined total more than 4,000 miles of shoreline. Although one of the smallest states in the U.S., it features a variety of climates and topographical features that have earned it the moniker of &quot;America in Miniature&quot;. In a similar vein, Maryland&#x27;s geography, culture, and history combine elements of the Mid-Atlantic, Northeastern, and Southern regions of the country.

==History==

===17th century===
====Maryland&#x27;s first colonial settlement====

What is now Maryland was originally inhabited by tribes such as the Piscataway (including the Patuxent), the Nanticoke (including the Tocwogh, the Ozinie and other subdivisions), the Powhatan, the Lenape, the Susquehannock, the Shawnee, the Tutelo, the Saponi, the Pocomoke and the Massawomeck. George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore (1579–1632), sought a charter from King Charles I for the territory between Massachusetts to the north and Virginia to the immediate south.
After Baltimore died in April 1632, the charter was granted to his son, Cecilius Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore (1605–1675), on June 20, 1632. Officially, the new &quot;Maryland Colony&quot; was named in honor of Henrietta Maria of France, wife of Charles I. Lord Baltimore initially proposed the name &quot;Crescentia&quot;, the land of growth or increase, but &quot;the King proposed Terra Mariae [Mary Land], which was concluded on and inserted in the bill.&quot;

The original capital of Maryland was St. Mary&#x27;s City, on the north shore of the Potomac River, and the county surrounding it, the first erected/created in the province, was first called Augusta Carolina, after the King, and later named St. Mary&#x27;s County.

Lord Baltimore&#x27;s first settlers arrived in the new colony in March 1634, with his younger brother the Honorable Leonard Calvert (1606–1647), as first provincial Governor of Maryland. They made their first permanent settlement at St. Mary&#x27;s City in what is now St. Mary&#x27;s County. They purchased the site from the paramount chief of the region, who was eager to establish trade. St. Mary&#x27;s became the first capital of Maryland, and remained so for 60 years until 1695. More settlers soon followed. Their tobacco crops were successful and quickly made the new colony profitable. However, given the incidence of malaria, yellow fever, and typhoid, life expectancy in Maryland was about 10 years less than in New England.

====Persecution of Catholics====

Maryland was founded to provide a haven for England&#x27;s Roman Catholic minority.
Although Maryland was the most heavily Catholic of the English mainland colonies, the religion was still in the minority, consisting of less than 10% of the total population.

In 1642, a number of Puritans left Virginia for Maryland and founded the city of Providence, now called Annapolis, on the western shore of the upper Chesapeake Bay. A dispute with traders from Virginia over Kent Island in the Chesapeake led to armed conflict. In 1644, William Claiborne, a Puritan, seized Kent Island while his associate, the pro-Parliament Puritan Richard Ingle, took over St. Mary&#x27;s. Both used religion as a tool to gain popular support. The two years from 1644 to 1646 when Claiborne and his Puritan associates held sway were known as &quot;The Plundering Time&quot;. They captured Jesuit priests, imprisoned them, then sent them back to England.

In 1646, Leonard Calvert returned with troops, recaptured St. Mary&#x27;s City, and restored order. The House of Delegates passed the &quot;Act concerning Religion&quot; in 1649 granting religious liberty to all Trinitarian Christians.

In 1650, the Puritans revolted against the proprietary government. &quot;Protestants swept the Catholics out of the legislature... and religious strife returned.&quot; The Puritans set up a new government prohibiting both Roman Catholicism and Anglicanism. The Puritan revolutionary government persecuted Maryland Catholics during its reign, known as the &quot;plundering time&quot;. Mobs burned down all the original Catholic churches of southern Maryland. The Puritan rule lasted until 1658 when the Calvert family and Lord Baltimore regained proprietary control and re-enacted the Toleration Act.

After England&#x27;s Glorious Revolution in 1688, Maryland outlawed Catholicism. In 1704, the Maryland General Assembly prohibited Catholics from operating schools, limited the corporate ownership of property to hamper religious orders from expanding or supporting themselves, and encouraged the conversion of Catholic children. The celebration of the Catholic sacraments was also officially restricted. This state of affairs lasted until after the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783). Wealthy Catholic planters built chapels on their land to practice their religion in relative secrecy.

Into the 18th century, individual priests and lay leaders claimed Maryland farms belonging to the Jesuits as personal property and bequeathed them in order to evade the legal restrictions on religious organizations&#x27; owning property.

===Border disputes (1681–1760)===
The royal charter granted Maryland the land north of the Potomac River up to the 40th parallel. A problem arose when Charles II granted a charter for Pennsylvania. The grant defined Pennsylvania&#x27;s southern border as identical to Maryland&#x27;s northern border, the 40th parallel. But the grant indicated that Charles II and William Penn assumed the 40th parallel would pass close to New Castle, Delaware when it falls north of Philadelphia, the site of which Penn had already selected for his colony&#x27;s capital city. Negotiations ensued after the problem was discovered in 1681.

A compromise proposed by Charles II in 1682 was undermined by Penn&#x27;s receiving the additional grant of what is now Delaware. Penn successfully argued that the Maryland charter entitled Lord Baltimore only to unsettled lands, and Dutch settlement in Delaware predated his charter. The dispute remained unresolved for nearly a century, carried on by the descendants of William Penn and Lord Baltimore—the Calvert family, which controlled Maryland, and the Penn family, which controlled Pennsylvania.

The border dispute with Pennsylvania led to Cresap&#x27;s War in the 1730s. Hostilities erupted in 1730 and escalated through the first half of the decade, culminating in the deployment of military forces by Maryland in 1736 and by Pennsylvania in 1737. The armed phase of the conflict ended in May 1738 with the intervention of King George II, who compelled the negotiation of a cease-fire. A provisional agreement had been established in 1732.

Negotiations continued until a final agreement was signed in 1760. The agreement defined the border between Maryland and Pennsylvania as the line of latitude now known as the Mason–Dixon line. Maryland&#x27;s border with Delaware was based on the Transpeninsular Line and the Twelve-Mile Circle around New Castle.

===18th century===

Most of the English colonists arrived in Maryland as indentured servants, and had to serve a several years&#x27; term as laborers to pay for their passage. In the early years, the line between indentured servants and African slaves or laborers was fluid, and white and black laborers commonly lived and worked together, and formed unions. Mixed-race children born to white mothers were considered free by the principle of &quot;partus sequitur ventrem&quot;, by which children took the social status of their mothers, a principle of slave law that was adopted throughout the colonies, following Virginia in 1662.

Many of the free black families migrated to Delaware, where land was cheaper. As the flow of indentured laborers to the colony decreased with improving economic conditions in England, planters in Maryland imported thousands more slaves and racial caste lines hardened.

Maryland was one of the thirteen colonies that revolted against British rule in the American Revolution. Near the end of the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783), on February 2, 1781, Maryland became the last and 13th state to approve the ratification of the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, first proposed in 1776 and adopted by the Second Continental Congress in 1778, which brought into being the United States as a united, sovereign and national state. It also became the seventh state admitted to the Union after ratifying the new federal Constitution in 1788. In December 1790, prior to the move of the national capital from Philadelphia in 1800, Maryland donated land selected by first President George Washington to the federal government for its creation. The land was provided along the north shore of the Potomac River from Montgomery and Prince George&#x27;s counties, as well as from Fairfax County and Alexandria on the south shore of the Potomac in Virginia; however, the land donated by the Commonwealth of Virginia was later returned to that state by the District of Columbia retrocession in 1846.

===19th century===

Influenced by a changing economy, revolutionary ideals, and preaching by ministers, numerous planters in Maryland freed their slaves in the 20 years after the Revolutionary War. Across the Upper South the free black population increased from less than 1% before the war to 14% by 1810. Abolitionists Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass were born slaves during this time in Dorchester County and Talbot County, respectively.

During the War of 1812, the British military attempted to capture Baltimore, which was protected by Fort McHenry. During its bombardment the song &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; was written by Francis Scott Key; it was later adopted as the national anthem.

National Road, later renamed U.S. Route 40, was authorized in 1817 as the federal highway, and ran from Baltimore to St. Louis. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&amp;O), the first chartered railroad in the United States, opened its first section of track for regular operation in 1830 between Baltimore and Ellicott City, and in 1852 it became the first rail line to reach the Ohio River from the eastern seaboard.

====Civil War====
The state remained in the Union during the American Civil War, due in significant part to demographics and Federal intervention. The 1860 census, held shortly before the outbreak of the civil war, showed that 49% of Maryland&#x27;s African Americans were free.

Governor Thomas Holliday Hicks suspended the state legislature, and to help ensure the election of a new pro-union governor and legislature, President Abraham Lincoln had a number of its pro-slavery politicians arrested, including the Mayor of Baltimore, George William Brown; suspended several civil liberties, including &quot;habeas corpus&quot;; and ordered artillery placed on Federal Hill overlooking Baltimore.

In April 1861, Federal units and state regiments were attacked as they marched through Baltimore, sparking the Baltimore riot of 1861, the first bloodshed in the Civil War. Of the 115,000 Marylanders who joined the military during the Civil War, around 85,000, or 77%, joined the Union army, while the remainder joined the Confederate Army. The largest and most significant battle in the state was the Battle of Antietam on September 17, 1862, near Sharpsburg. Although a tactical draw, the battle was considered a strategic Union victory and a turning point of the war.

====Post-Civil War====
A new state constitution in 1864 abolished slavery and Maryland was first recognized as a &quot;Free State&quot; in that context. Following passage of constitutional amendments that granted voting rights to freedmen, in 1867 the state extended suffrage to non-white males.

The Democratic Party rapidly regained power in the state from Republicans. Democrats replaced the Constitution of 1864 with the Constitution of 1867. Following the end of Reconstruction in 1877, Democrats devised means of disenfranchising blacks, initially by physical intimidation and voter fraud, later by constitutional amendments and laws. Blacks and immigrants, however, resisted Democratic Party disfranchisement efforts in the state. Maryland blacks were part of a biracial Republican coalition elected to state government in 1896–1904 and comprised 20% of the electorate.

Compared to some other states, blacks were better established both before and after the civil war. Nearly half the black population was free before the war, and some had accumulated property. Half the population lived in cities. Literacy was high among blacks and, as Democrats crafted means to exclude them, suffrage campaigns helped reach blacks and teach them how to resist. Whites did impose racial segregation in public facilities and Jim Crow laws, which effectively lasted until the passage of federal civil rights legislation in the mid-1960s.

Baltimore grew significantly during the Industrial Revolution, due in large part to its seaport and good railroad connections, attracting European immigrant labor. Many manufacturing businesses were established in the Baltimore area after the Civil War. Baltimore businessmen, including Johns Hopkins, Enoch Pratt, George Peabody, and Henry Walters, founded notable city institutions that bear their names, including respectively a university, library system, music and dance conservatory, and art museum.

Cumberland was Maryland&#x27;s second-largest city in the 19th century. Nearby supplies of natural resources along with railroads fostered its growth into a major manufacturing center.

===20th century===

The Progressive Era of the late 19th and early 20th centuries brought political reforms. In a series of laws passed between 1892 and 1908, reformers worked for standard state-issued ballots (rather than those distributed and marked by the parties); obtained closed voting booths to prevent party workers from &quot;assisting&quot; voters; initiated primary elections to keep party bosses from selecting candidates; and had candidates listed without party symbols, which discouraged the illiterate from participating. These measures worked against ill-educated whites and blacks. Blacks resisted such efforts, with suffrage groups conducting voter education.
Blacks defeated three efforts to disenfranchise them, making alliances with immigrants to resist various Democratic campaigns. Disenfranchisement bills in 1905, 1907, and 1911 were rebuffed, in large part because of black opposition. Blacks comprised 20% of the electorate and immigrants comprised 15%, and the legislature had difficulty devising requirements against blacks that did not also disadvantage immigrants.

The Progressive Era also brought reforms in working conditions for Maryland&#x27;s labor force. In 1902, the state regulated conditions in mines; outlawed child laborers under the age of 12; mandated compulsory school attendance; and enacted the nation&#x27;s first workers&#x27; compensation law. The workers&#x27; compensation law was overturned in the courts, but was redrafted and finally enacted in 1910.

The Great Baltimore Fire of 1904 burned for more than 30 hours, destroying 1,526 buildings and spanning 70 city blocks. More than 1,231 firefighters worked to bring the blaze under control.

With the nation&#x27;s entry into World War I in 1917, new military bases such as Camp Meade, the Aberdeen Proving Ground, and the Edgewood Arsenal were established. Existing facilities, including Fort McHenry, were greatly expanded.

After Georgia congressman William D. Upshaw criticized Maryland openly in 1923 for not passing Prohibition laws, &quot;Baltimore Sun&quot; editor Hamilton Owens coined the &quot;Free State&quot; nickname for Maryland in that context, which was popularized by H. L. Mencken in a series of newspaper editorials.

Maryland&#x27;s urban and rural communities had different experiences during the Great Depression. The &quot;Bonus Army&quot; marched through the state in 1932 on its way to Washington, D.C. Maryland instituted its first income tax in 1937 to generate revenue for schools and welfare.

Passenger and freight steamboat service, once important throughout Chesapeake Bay and its many tributary rivers, ended in 1962.

Baltimore was a major war production center during World War II. The biggest operations were Bethlehem Steel&#x27;s Fairfield Yard, which built Liberty ships; and Glenn Martin, an aircraft manufacturer.

Maryland experienced population growth following World War II. Beginning in the 1960s, as suburban growth took hold around Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, the state began to take on a more mid-Atlantic culture as opposed to the traditionally Southern and Tidewater culture that previously dominated most of the state. Agricultural tracts gave way to residential communities, some of them carefully planned such as Columbia, St. Charles, and Montgomery Village. Concurrently the Interstate Highway System was built throughout the state, most notably I-95, I-695, and the Capital Beltway, altering travel patterns. In 1952, the eastern and western halves of Maryland were linked for the first time by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge, which replaced a nearby ferry service.

Maryland&#x27;s regions experienced economic changes following WWII. Heavy manufacturing declined in Baltimore. In Maryland&#x27;s four westernmost counties, industrial, railroad, and coal mining jobs declined. On the lower Eastern Shore, family farms were bought up by major concerns and large-scale poultry farms and vegetable farming became prevalent. In Southern Maryland, tobacco farming nearly vanished due to suburban development and a state tobacco buy-out program in the 1990s.

In an effort to reverse depopulation due to the loss of working-class industries, Baltimore initiated urban renewal projects in the 1960s with Charles Center and the Baltimore World Trade Center. Some resulted in the break-up of intact residential neighborhoods, producing social volatility, and some older residential areas around the harbor have had units renovated and have become popular with new populations.

==Geography==
Maryland has an area of and is comparable in overall area with Belgium []. It is the 42nd-largest and 9th-smallest state and is closest in size to the state of Hawaii [], the next smallest state. The next largest state is Maryland&#x27;s neighbor, West Virginia, which is nearly twice the size of Maryland [].

===Description===

Maryland possesses a variety of topography within its borders, contributing to its nickname &quot;America in Miniature&quot;. It ranges from sandy dunes dotted with seagrass in the east, to low marshlands teeming with wildlife and large bald cypress near the Chesapeake Bay, to gently rolling hills of oak forests in the Piedmont Region, and pine groves in the Maryland mountains to the west.

Maryland is bounded on its north by Pennsylvania, on its north and east by Delaware, on its east by the Atlantic Ocean, and on its south and west, across the Potomac River, by West Virginia and Virginia. The mid-portion of its border with Virginia is interrupted by Washington, D.C., which sits on land that was originally part of Montgomery and Prince George&#x27;s counties and including Georgetown, Maryland, which was ceded to the United States federal government in 1790 to form the Washington, D.C. Chesapeake Bay nearly bisects the state, and the counties east of the bay are known collectively as the Eastern Shore.

Most of the state&#x27;s waterways are part of the Chesapeake Bay watershed, with the exceptions of a tiny portion of extreme western Garrett County (drained by the Youghiogheny River as part of the watershed of the Mississippi River), the eastern half of Worcester County (which drains into Maryland&#x27;s Atlantic coastal bays), and a small portion of the state&#x27;s northeast corner (which drains into the Delaware River watershed). So prominent is the Chesapeake in Maryland&#x27;s geography and economic life that there has been periodic agitation to change the state&#x27;s official nickname to the &quot;Bay State&quot;, a nickname that has been used by Massachusetts for decades.

The highest point in Maryland, with an elevation of , is Hoye Crest on Backbone Mountain, in the southwest corner of Garrett County, near the border with West Virginia, and near the headwaters of the North Branch of the Potomac River. Close to the small town of Hancock, in western Maryland, about two-thirds of the way across the state, less than separates its borders, the Mason–Dixon line to the north, and the northwards-arching Potomac River to the south.

Portions of Maryland are included in various official and unofficial geographic regions. For example, the Delmarva Peninsula is composed of the Eastern Shore counties of Maryland, the entire state of Delaware, and the two counties that make up the Eastern Shore of Virginia, whereas the westernmost counties of Maryland are considered part of Appalachia. Much of the Baltimore–Washington corridor lies just south of the Piedmont in the Coastal Plain, though it straddles the border between the two regions.

===Geology===
Earthquakes in Maryland are infrequent and small due to the state&#x27;s distance from seismic/earthquake zones. The M5.8 Virginia earthquake in 2011 was felt moderately throughout Maryland. Buildings in the state are not well-designed for earthquakes and can suffer damage easily. As well as this, notably a M4.8 earthquake from Tewksbury in central New Jersey was felt slightly throughout Maryland.

Maryland has no natural lakes, mostly due to the lack of glacial history in the area. All lakes in the state today were constructed, mostly via dams. Buckel&#x27;s Bog is believed by geologists to have been a remnant of a former natural lake.

Maryland has shale formations containing natural gas, where fracking is theoretically possible.

===Flora===

As is typical of states on the East Coast, Maryland&#x27;s plant life is abundant and healthy. An adequate volume of annual precipitation helps to support many types of plants, including seagrass and various reeds at the smaller end of the spectrum to the gigantic Wye Oak, a huge example of white oak, the state tree, which can grow over tall.

Middle Atlantic coastal forests, typical of the southeastern Atlantic coastal plain, grow around Chesapeake Bay and on the Delmarva Peninsula. Moving west, a mixture of Northeastern coastal forests and Southeastern mixed forests cover the central part of the state. The Appalachian Mountains of western Maryland are home to Appalachian-Blue Ridge forests. These give way to Appalachian mixed mesophytic forests near the West Virginia border.

Many foreign species are cultivated in the state, some as ornamentals, others as novelty species. Included among these are the crape myrtle, Italian cypress, southern magnolia, live oak in the warmer parts of the state, and even hardy palm trees in the warmer central and eastern parts of the state. USDA plant hardiness zones in the state range from Zones 5and6 in the extreme western part of the state to Zone7 in the central part, and Zone8 around the southern part of the coast, the bay area, and parts of metropolitan Baltimore. Invasive plant species, such as kudzu, tree of heaven, multiflora rose, and Japanese stiltgrass, stifle growth of endemic plant life. Maryland&#x27;s state flower, the black-eyed susan, grows in abundance in wild flower groups throughout the state.

===Fauna===

The state harbors a considerable number of white-tailed deer, especially in the woody and mountainous west of the state, and overpopulation can become a problem. Mammals can be found ranging from the mountains in the west to the central areas and include black bears, bobcats, foxes, coyotes, raccoons, and otters.

There is a population of rare wild (feral) horses found on Assateague Island. They are believed to be descended from horses who escaped from Spanish galleon shipwrecks. Every year during the last week of July, they are captured and swim across a shallow bay for sale at Chincoteague, Virginia, a conservation technique which ensures the tiny island is not overrun by the horses. The ponies and their sale were popularized by the children&#x27;s book, &quot;Misty of Chincoteague.&quot;

The purebred Chesapeake Bay Retriever dog was bred specifically for water sports, hunting and search and rescue in the Chesapeake area. In 1878, the Chesapeake Bay Retriever was the first individual retriever breed recognized by the American Kennel Club. and was later adopted by the University of Maryland, Baltimore County as their mascot.

Maryland&#x27;s reptile and amphibian population includes the diamondback terrapin turtle, which was adopted as the mascot of University of Maryland, College Park, as well as the threatened Eastern box turtle. The state is part of the territory of the Baltimore oriole, which is the official state bird and mascot of the MLB team the Baltimore Orioles. Aside from the oriole, 435 other species of birds have been reported from Maryland.

The state insect is the Baltimore checkerspot butterfly, although it is not as common in Maryland as it is in the southern edge of its range.

===Environment===

Maryland joined with neighboring states during the end of the 20th century to improve the health of the Chesapeake Bay. The bay&#x27;s aquatic life and seafood industry have been threatened by development and by fertilizer and livestock waste entering the bay.

In 2007, Forbes.com rated Maryland as the fifth &quot;Greenest&quot; state in the country, behind three of the Pacific States and Vermont. Maryland ranks 40th in total energy consumption nationwide, and it managed less toxic waste per capita than all but six states in 2005. In April 2007, Maryland joined the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) — a regional initiative, formed by all the Northeastern states, Washington, D.C., and three Canadian provinces, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In March 2017, Maryland became the first state with proven gas reserves to ban fracking by passing a law against it. Vermont has such a law, but no shale gas, and New York has such a ban, though it was made by executive order.

In 2023, AES Corporation announced its intent to retire the 23-year-old Warrior Run coal plant in June 2024. It was the state&#x27;s last coal-fired power plant that did not already have plans to shut down.

===Climate===

Maryland has a wide array of climates, due to local variances in elevation, proximity to water, and protection from colder weather due to downslope winds.
The eastern half of Maryland, which includes Ocean City, Salisbury, Annapolis, and the southern and eastern suburbs of Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, lies on the Atlantic Coastal Plain, with flat topography and sandy or muddy soil. This region has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen &quot;Cfa&quot;), with hot, humid summers and cool to cold winters; it falls under USDA Hardiness zone 8a.

The Piedmont region, which includes northern and western greater Baltimore, Westminster, Gaithersburg, Frederick, and Hagerstown, has average seasonal snowfall totals generally exceeding , and, as part of USDA Hardiness zones 7b and 7a, temperatures below are less rare. From the Cumberland Valley on westward, the climate begins to transition to a humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfa&quot;).

In western Maryland, the higher elevations of Allegany and Garrett counties, including the cities of Cumberland, Frostburg, and Oakland, display more characteristics of the humid continental zone, due in part to elevation. They fall under USDA Hardiness zones 6b and below.

Precipitation in the state is characteristic of the East Coast. Annual rainfall ranges from with more in higher elevations. Nearly every part of Maryland receives per month of rain. Average annual snowfall varies from in the coastal areas to over in the western mountains of the state.

Because of its location near the Atlantic Coast, Maryland is somewhat vulnerable to tropical cyclones, although the Delmarva Peninsula and the outer banks of North Carolina provide a large buffer, such that strikes from major hurricanes (category3 or above) occur infrequently. More often, Maryland gets the remnants of a tropical system that has already come ashore and released most of its energy. Maryland averages around 30–40 days of thunderstorms a year, and averages around six tornado strikes annually.

=== Cities and metro areas ===
Most of the population of Maryland lives in the central region of the state, in the Baltimore metropolitan area and Washington metropolitan area, both of which are part of the Baltimore–Washington metropolitan area. The majority of Maryland&#x27;s population is concentrated in the cities and suburbs surrounding Washington, D.C., and in and around Baltimore, Maryland&#x27;s most populous city. Historically, these and many other Maryland cities developed along the Fall Line, the line along which rivers, brooks, and streams are interrupted by rapids and waterfalls. Maryland&#x27;s capital city, Annapolis, is one exception to this pattern since it lies along the banks of the Severn River, close to where it empties into the Chesapeake Bay.

The Eastern Shore is less populous and more rural, as are the counties of western Maryland. The two westernmost counties of Maryland, Allegany and Garrett, are mountainous and sparsely populated, resembling West Virginia and Appalachia more than they do the rest of the state. Both eastern and western Maryland are, however, dotted with cities of regional importance, such as Ocean City, Princess Anne, and Salisbury on the Eastern Shore and Cumberland, Frostburg, and Hancock in Western Maryland. Southern Maryland is still somewhat rural, but suburbanization from Washington, D.C., has encroached significantly since the 1960s; important local population centers include Lexington Park, Prince Frederick, California, and Waldorf.

== Demographics ==


In the 2020 United States census, the United States Census Bureau found that population of Maryland was 6,185,278 people, a 7.1% increase from the 2010 United States census. The United States Census Bureau estimated that the population of Maryland was 6,045,680 on July 1, 2019, a 4.71% increase from the 2010 United States census and an increase of 2,962, from the prior year. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 269,166 (464,251 births minus 275,093 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 116,713 people into the state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 129,730 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 13,017 people. In 2018, The top countries of origin for Maryland&#x27;s immigrants were El Salvador (11%), India (6%), China (5%), Nigeria (5%), and the Philippines (4%). The center of population of Maryland is located on the county line between Anne Arundel County and Howard County, in the unincorporated community of Jessup.

Maryland&#x27;s history as a border state has led it to exhibit characteristics of both the Northern and the Southern regions of the United States. Generally, rural Western Maryland between the West Virginian Panhandle and Pennsylvania has an Appalachian culture; the Southern and Eastern Shore regions of Maryland embody a Southern culture, while densely populated Central Maryland – radiating outward from Baltimore and Washington, D.C. – has more in common with that of the Northeast. The U.S. Census Bureau designates Maryland as one of the South Atlantic States, but it is commonly associated with the Mid-Atlantic States and Northeastern United States by other federal agencies, the media, and some residents.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 5,349 homeless people in Maryland.

===Birth data===

As of 2011, 58.0 percent of Maryland&#x27;s population younger than age1 were minority background.

&quot;Note: Births in the table do not add up because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.&quot;
Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one &quot;Hispanic&quot; group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.

===Language and ancestry===

As of 2016, the most spoken languages in Maryland other than English were Spanish (9%), Chinese (1.2%), West African languages (mostly Yoruba and Igbo, 1%), French (1%), Korean (0.7%), Afro-Asiatic languages (mostly Amharic, 0.6% and Arabic, 0.4%), and Tagalog (0.6%). Other languages with a large number of speakers in Maryland include Vietnamese (0.4%), Russian (0.4%), Hindi (0.3%), Urdu (0.3%), Persian (0.3%), Nepali (0.3%), Haitian Creole (0.2%), and Telugu (0.2%).


In 1970, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Maryland&#x27;s population as 17.8 percent African-American and 80.4 percent non-Hispanic White.

In 2019, non-Hispanic white Americans were 49.8% of Maryland&#x27;s population (White Americans, including White Hispanics, were 57.3%), which made Maryland a majority minority state. 50.2% of Maryland&#x27;s population is non-white, or is Hispanic or Latino, the highest percentage of any state on the East Coast, and the highest percentage after the majority-minority states of Hawaii, New Mexico, Texas, California, Nevada, and Washington, D.C. By 2031, minorities are projected to become the majority of voting eligible residents of Maryland. Maryland&#x27;s multiculturalism and diversity can be explained by its historically large African American population, and immigration brought by the importance of the D.C. and Baltimore areas, especially from Central America, Africa, the Caribbean, and Asia.

African Americans form a sizable portion of the state&#x27;s population, 31.1% as of 2020. Most are descendants of people transported to the area as slaves from West Africa. Concentrations of African Americans live in Baltimore City, Prince George&#x27;s County, Charles County, western parts of Baltimore County, and the southern Eastern Shore. Charles County and Prince George&#x27;s County are the two counties where African Americans are the most successful monetarily in the country, with average household incomes much higher than in the rest of the country. As a former slave state, Maryland has had a large African-American population for much of its history; African American populations have increased over time with the Great Migration to the D.C. and Baltimore areas, and in more recent times with the New Great Migration and with movement out from Washington D.C. into Montgomery, Prince George&#x27;s, and Charles counties, as a result of gentrification and rising housing costs in D.C. causing many African Americans to leave. Prince George&#x27;s County in particular has been a magnet for African Americans from D.C. to move to for decades; it is often referred to as &quot;Ward 9&quot; of D.C.

Maryland has by far the highest percentage of residents born in Africa out of any state; residents of African descent include 20th-century and later immigrants from Nigeria, particularly of the Igbo and Yoruba tribes; Ethiopia, particularly Amharas with significant Oromo and Tigrayan populations; Cameroon, Ghana, Sierra Leone, and Kenya. Maryland also hosts populations from other African and Caribbean nations. Maryland&#x27;s African immigrant population is generally well-educated and is most concentrated in the inner suburbs of Baltimore and D.C. Nigerians are the fourth-largest immigrant group in Maryland, and are largely concentrated in the Baltimore area and surrounding suburbs, as well as Prince George&#x27;s county. Many immigrants from the Horn of Africa, especially Ethiopia, have settled in Maryland, with large communities in the suburbs of Washington, D.C., particularly in Montgomery and Prince George&#x27;s counties. The Washington metropolitan area has the world&#x27;s largest population of Ethiopians outside of Ethiopia. The Ethiopian community of Greater D.C. was historically based in the Adams Morgan and Shaw neighborhoods of Washington, D.C., but as the community has grown, many Ethiopians have settled in Silver Spring. The Ethiopian American population in Maryland and the rest of the D.C. area is largely Amharic-speaking, but there are significant numbers of speakers of Oromo and Tigrinya speakers as well. The Washington metropolitan area is also home to a large Eritrean community.

The top reported ancestries by Maryland residents are: German (15%), Irish (11%), English (8%), American (7%), Italian (6%), and Polish (3%).

Irish American populations can be found throughout the Baltimore area, and the Northern and Eastern suburbs of Washington, D.C., in Maryland, who were descendants of those who moved out to the suburbs of Washington, D.C.&#x27;s once predominantly Irish neighborhoods), as well as Western Maryland, where Irish immigrant laborers helped to build the B&amp;O Railroad. Smaller but much older Irish populations can be found in Southern Maryland, with some roots dating as far back as the early Maryland colony. This population, however, still remains culturally very active and yearly festivals are held.

A large percentage of the population of the Eastern Shore and Southern Maryland are descendants of British American ancestry. The Eastern Shore was settled by Protestants, chiefly Methodist and the southern counties were initially settled by English Catholics. Western and northern Maryland have large German-American populations.

More recent European immigrants of the late 19th and early 20th century settled first in Baltimore, attracted to its industrial jobs. These groups were largely of Jewish, Italian, Greek, Polish, Czech, Lithuanian, Russian and Ukrainian descent. The Greek community includes a number of Greek Jews. These Southern and Eastern European immigrants were largely concentrated in Southeast Baltimore and significantly influenced the unique culture of the city; although many have moved out into surrounding areas of Baltimore County due to gentrification, the city retains the culture and influence of these immigrants, and cultural events celebrating these communities are common in Baltimore. Maryland has had a significant Jewish American presence since the early 20th century, with large numbers of Jewish immigrants to the Baltimore area, followed by Jewish migration to the Washington D.C. area; Maryland has the fifth-highest percentage of Jewish residents in the country (including Washington D.C.), with 239,000 Jews making up four percent of the population, and the Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area, which has the seventh-largest number of Jews of any combined metropolitan area in the country, with a Jewish population estimated at 300,000.

The shares of European immigrants born in Eastern Europe increased significantly between 1990 and 2010. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia, many immigrants from Eastern Europe came to the United States—12 percent of whom currently reside in Maryland.

Hispanic immigrants of the later 20th century have settled in Aspen Hill, Hyattsville/Langley Park, Glenmont/Wheaton, Bladensburg, Riverdale Park, Gaithersburg, as well as Highlandtown and Greektown in East Baltimore. Maryland has the highest percentage of residents of Central American origin of any state. Salvadorans are the largest Hispanic group in Maryland, and Maryland has the largest percentage of Salvadoran residents of any state. The D.C. area also has the highest percentage of Salvadorans of any American metro area, who are particularly concentrated in Prince George&#x27;s and Montgomery counties, and has the second-highest total number of Salvadorans after the Los Angeles area. Other Hispanic groups with significant populations in the state include Mexicans, Guatemalans, Hondurans, Dominicans, Peruvians, and Puerto Ricans, along with growing populations of Brazilians, Colombians, Ecuadorians, and Bolivians. Maryland&#x27;s Hispanic population is especially concentrated in Montgomery County and Prince George&#x27;s County, with other large populations in the Baltimore area and Frederick County. Maryland has one of the most diverse Hispanic populations in the country, with significant populations from various Caribbean and Central American nations.

Caribbean Americans have a significant presence in Maryland, especially Jamaican Americans, who make up 0.6% of the population and have had a significant presence and influence in Maryland&#x27;s politics and culture; Maryland&#x27;s current governor, Wes Moore, is the son of a Jamaican immigrant mother. Other Caribbean American nationalities with a large population in Maryland include Dominicans, Haitians, Trinidadians and Tobagonians, and Guyanese. Caribbean Americans are most concentrated in Prince George&#x27;s County, the city of Baltimore, and Baltimore County.

Asian Americans are concentrated in the suburban counties surrounding Washington, D.C., and in Baltimore suburbs, especially Howard County, with Chinese American, Korean American and Taiwanese American communities in Rockville, Gaithersburg, and Germantown. Chinese in particular form the second largest group of Asian Americans, and are the largest group in Montgomery County. Maryland also has a large Korean American population, especially in Howard County, where there is a Koreatown in Ellicott City. Filipino Americans, the largest group of Southeast Asians, form major communities in Montgomery, Prince George&#x27;s, and Charles counties; other large groups of Southeast Asians include Vietnamese, who are concentrated in Montgomery County, and Burmese, who are concentrated in Frederick, Howard, and Baltimore Counties. Maryland has a very large and diverse South Asian American population that has had a major presence in the state since the 1970s. Indian Americans are the largest Asian group in Maryland, making up 1.7 percent of the population, and live throughout the state, especially in Montgomery and Howard counties, with large numbers in Baltimore, Frederick, and Prince George&#x27;s counties. The Indian American population is culturally and linguistically diverse, with the Indian languages spoken most being Hindi, Gujarati, Telugu, and Tamil. There are also large Pakistani American populations throughout the D.C. and Baltimore areas, especially in Baltimore County and Howard County, and a large Bangladeshi American community in the D.C. area. Maryland has one of the largest populations of Nepali Americans, including Bhutanese Americans of Nepali descent, in the U.S., many of whom are recent immigrants or refugees who sought asylum after expulsion from Bhutan or the 2015 Nepal earthquake; there are an estimated 20,000 to 25,000 Nepalis in Maryland, concentrated in the Baltimore area with significant populations in the D.C. area. The first Nepali American elected to a state legislature, Harry Bhandari, was elected in Maryland, representing part of Baltimore County. There are three state-recognized tribes, and in 2020, 31,845 identified as being Native American alone, and 96,805 did in combination with one or more other races.

Attracting educated Asians and Africans to the professional jobs in the region, Maryland has the fifth-largest proportions of racial minorities in the country.

In 2006, 645,744 were counted as foreign born, which represents mainly people from Latin America and Asia. About four percent are undocumented immigrants.

According to The Williams Institute&#x27;s analysis of the 2010 U.S. census, 12,538 same-sex couples are living in Maryland, representing 5.8 same-sex couples per 1,000 households.

===Religion===

Maryland has been historically prominent to American Catholic tradition because the English colony of Maryland was intended by George Calvert as a haven for English Catholics. Baltimore was the seat of the first Catholic bishop in the U.S. (1789), and Emmitsburg was the home and burial place of the first American-born citizen to be canonized, St. Elizabeth Ann Seton. Georgetown University, the first Catholic University, was founded in 1789 in what was then part of Maryland; it became a part of the District of Columbia when it was created in the 1790s. The Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary in Baltimore was the first Roman Catholic cathedral built in the United States, and the Archbishop of Baltimore is, albeit without formal primacy, the United States&#x27; quasi-primate, and often a cardinal. Among the immigrants of the 19th and 20th centuries from eastern and southern Europe were many Catholics.

Despite its historic relevance to the Catholic Church in the United States, the percentage of Catholics in the state of Maryland is below the national average of 20%. Demographically, both Protestants and those identifying with no religion are more numerous than Catholics.

According to the Pew Research Center in 2014, 69 percent of Maryland&#x27;s population identifies themselves as Christian. Nearly 52% of the adult population are Protestants. Following Protestantism, Catholicism is the second largest religious affiliation, comprising 15% percent of the population. Amish/Mennonite communities are found in St. Mary&#x27;s, Garrett, and Cecil counties. Judaism is the largest non-Christian religion in Maryland, with 241,000 adherents, or four percent of the total population. Jews are numerous throughout Montgomery County and in Pikesville and Owings Mills northwest of Baltimore. An estimated 81,500 Jewish Americans live in Montgomery County, constituting approximately 10% of the total population. The Seventh-day Adventist Church&#x27;s world headquarters and Ahmadiyya Muslims&#x27; national headquarters are located in Silver Spring, just outside Washington, D.C.

Per the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, 61 percent of Maryland&#x27;s population identified with Christianity. Protestantism and Roman Catholicism continued to dominate the Christian landscape, and the Jewish community remained at 3% of the total religious population. Of the unaffiliated, the PRRI study determined their increase to 28% of the population.

=== LGBT population ===

Maryland has one of the highest percentages of LGBT people in its populace out of any state; 5.7% of Marylanders identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer, the highest of any state. (Washington, D.C. ranks higher with a LGBT population of 8.6%.) Maryland ranks as one of the best states in the nation for rights of the LGBT community, with protections against discrimination enacted since 2001 for sexuality and 2014 for gender, same-sex marriage legalization in 2013, bans on conversion therapy enacted in 2018, abolition of the gay panic defense in 2021, and issuance in 2023 of an executive order protecting the rights of transgender individuals. In 2020, Montgomery County unanimously passed an ordinance implementing an LGBTIQ+ bill of rights.

The first person known to describe himself as a drag queen was William Dorsey Swann, born enslaved in Hancock, Maryland. Swann was the first American on record who pursued legal and political action to defend the LGBTQ community&#x27;s right to assemble.

In February 2010, Attorney General Doug Gansler issued an opinion stating that Maryland law should honor same-sex marriages from out of state. At the time, the state Supreme Court wrote a decision upholding marriage discrimination.

On March 1, 2012, Maryland Governor Martin O&#x27;Malley signed the freedom to marry bill into law after it passed in the state legislature. Opponents of same-sex marriage began collecting signatures to overturn the law, which faced a referendum, as Question 6, in the November 2012 election. A January 2011 Gonzales Research &amp; Marketing Strategies poll showed 51% support for marriage in the state.

In May 2012, Maryland&#x27;s Court of Appeals ruled that the state will recognize marriages of same-sex couples who married out-of-state, no matter the outcome of the November election. Voters upheld the bill, passing Question 6 with 52% to 48% on November 6, 2012. Same-sex couples began marrying in Maryland on January 1, 2013.

==Economy==
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that Maryland&#x27;s gross state product in 2016 was $382.4billion. However, Maryland has been using Genuine Progress Indicator, an indicator of well-being, to guide the state&#x27;s development, rather than relying only on growth indicators like GDP. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Maryland households are currently the wealthiest in the country, with a 2013 median household income of $72,483, which puts it ahead of New Jersey and Connecticut, which are second and third respectively. Two of Maryland&#x27;s counties, Howard and Montgomery, are the second and eleventh wealthiest counties in the nation respectively. Maryland has the most millionaires per capita in 2013, with a ratio of 7.7 percent. Also, the state&#x27;s poverty rate of 7.8 percent is the lowest in the country. Per capita personal income in 2006 was $43,500, fifth in the nation. As of March 2022, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 4.6 percent.

Maryland&#x27;s economy benefits from the state&#x27;s proximity to the federal government in Washington, D.C., with an emphasis on technical and administrative tasks for the defense/aerospace industry and bio-research laboratories, as well as staffing of satellite government headquarters in the suburban or exurban Baltimore/Washington area. Ft. Meade serves as the headquarters of the Defense Information Systems Agency, United States Cyber Command, and the National Security Agency/Central Security Service. In addition, a number of educational and medical research institutions are located in the state. The various components of The Johns Hopkins University and its medical research facilities are now the largest single employer in the Baltimore area.

Manufacturing, while large in dollar value, is highly diversified with no sub-sector contributing over 20 percent of the total. Typical forms of manufacturing include electronics, computer equipment, and chemicals. The once-mighty primary metals sub-sector, which once included what was then the largest steel factory in the world at Sparrows Point, still exists, but is pressed with foreign competition, bankruptcies, and mergers. During World War II, the Glenn Martin Company (now part of Lockheed Martin) airplane factory employed some 40,000 people.

Mining other than construction materials is virtually limited to coal, which is located in the mountainous western part of the state. The brownstone quarries in the east, which gave Baltimore and Washington much of their characteristic architecture in the mid-19th century, were once a predominant natural resource. Historically, there used to be small gold-mining operations in Maryland, some near Washington, but these no longer exist.

In 2022, the top private employers by number of employees were BYK Gardner, Clean Harbors, Holy Cross Hospital, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Maryland Neuroimaging Center, Northrop Grumman, University of Maryland, and University of Maryland Medical Center.

In the first three years of Maryland sports betting, over $10.2 billion was bet on sports. Based on the regulations, the state has earned over $116 million towards the Blueprint for Maryland&#x27;s Future Fund as of November 2024.

===Port of Baltimore===
One major service activity is transportation, centered on the Port of Baltimore and its related rail and trucking access. The port ranked 17th in the U.S. by tonnage in 2008. Although the port handles a wide variety of products, the most typical imports are raw materials and bulk commodities, such as iron ore, petroleum, sugar, and fertilizers, often distributed to the relatively close manufacturing centers of the inland Midwest via good overland transportation. The port also receives several brands of imported motor vehicles and is the number one auto port in the U.S.

Baltimore City is among the top 15 largest ports in the nation, and was one of six major U.S. ports that were part of the February 2006 controversy over the Dubai Ports World deal. The state as a whole is heavily industrialized, with a prosperous economy and influential technology centers. Its computer industries are some of the most sophisticated in the United States, and the federal government has invested heavily in the area. Maryland is home to several large military bases and scores of high-level government jobs.

The Chesapeake and Delaware Canal is a canal on the Eastern Shore that connects the waters of the Delaware River with those of the Chesapeake Bay, and in particular with the Port of Baltimore, carrying 40 percent of the port&#x27;s ship traffic.

===Fishing===
Maryland has a large food-production sector. A large component of this is commercial fishing, centered in the Chesapeake Bay, but also including activity off the short Atlantic seacoast. The largest catches by species are the blue crab, oysters, striped bass, and menhaden. The Bay also has overwintering waterfowl in its wildlife refuges. The waterfowl support a tourism sector of sportsmen.

===Agriculture===
Maryland has large areas of fertile agricultural land in its coastal and Piedmont zones, though this land use is being encroached upon by urbanization. Agriculture is oriented to dairy farming (especially in foothill and piedmont areas) for nearby large city milksheads, plus specialty perishable horticulture crops, such as cucumbers, watermelons, sweet corn, tomatoes, melons, squash, and peas (Source:USDA Crop Profiles). The southern counties of the western shoreline of Chesapeake Bay are warm enough to support a tobacco cash crop zone, which has existed since early Colonial times, but declined greatly after a state government buy-out in the 1990s. There is also a large automated chicken-farming sector in the state&#x27;s southeastern part; Salisbury is home to Perdue Farms. Maryland&#x27;s food-processing plants are the most significant type of manufacturing by value in the state. Farming suffers from weeds as anywhere else, including an unusual multiply resistant ragweed (&quot;Ambrosia artemisiifolia&quot;) found by Rousonelos &quot;et al.&quot;, 2012 with both ALS- and PPO-resistances and which by 2016 had developed a third, EPSP resistance. This ragweed population is a drag on soybean cultivation and, , is the worst multiresistant weed problem in the state.

===Biotechnology===
Maryland is a major center for life sciences research and development. With more than 400 biotechnology companies located there, Maryland is the fourth largest nexus in this field in the United States.

Institutions and government agencies with an interest in research and development located in Maryland include the Johns Hopkins University, the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, more than one campus of the University System of Maryland, Goddard Space Flight Center, the United States Census Bureau, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Celera Genomics company, the J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI), and AstraZeneca (formerly MedImmune).

Maryland is home to defense contractor Emergent BioSolutions, which manufactures and provides an anthrax vaccine to U.S. government military personnel.

===Tourism===
Tourism is popular in Maryland. Many tourists visit Baltimore, the beaches of the Eastern Shore, and the nature of western Maryland. Attractions in Baltimore include the Harborplace, the Baltimore Aquarium, Fort McHenry, as well as the Camden Yards baseball stadium. Ocean City on the Atlantic Coast has been a popular beach destination in summer, particularly since the Chesapeake Bay Bridge was built in 1952 connecting the Eastern Shore to the more populated Maryland cities. The state capital of Annapolis offers sites such as the state capitol building, the historic district, and the waterfront. Maryland also has several sites of interest to military history, given Maryland&#x27;s role in the American Civil War and in the War of 1812. Other attractions include the historic and picturesque towns along the Chesapeake Bay, such as Saint Mary&#x27;s, Maryland&#x27;s first colonial settlement and original capital.

===Healthcare===
As of 2017, the top two health insurers including all types of insurance were CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield with 47% market share followed by UnitedHealth Group at 15%.

Maryland has experimented with healthcare payment reforms, notably beginning in the 1970s with an all-payer rate setting program regulated by the Health Services Cost Review Commission. In 2014, it switched to a global budget revenue system, whereby hospitals receive a capitated payment to care for their population.

==Transportation==
The Maryland Department of Transportation oversees most transportation in the state through its various administration-level agencies. The independent Maryland Transportation Authority maintains and operates the state&#x27;s eight toll facilities.

===Roads===
Maryland&#x27;s Interstate highways include of Interstate95 (I-95), which enters the northeast portion of the state, travels through Baltimore, and becomes part of the eastern section of the Capital Beltway to the Woodrow Wilson Bridge. I-68 travels , connecting the western portions of the state to I-70 at the small town of Hancock. I-70 enters from Pennsylvania north of Hancock and continues east for to Baltimore, connecting Hagerstown and Frederick along the way.

I-83 has in Maryland and connects Baltimore to southern central Pennsylvania (Harrisburg and York, Pennsylvania). Maryland also has an portion of I-81 that travels through the state near Hagerstown. I-97, fully contained within Anne Arundel County and the shortest () one- or two-digit interstate highway in the contiguous US, connects the Baltimore area to the Annapolis area.

There are also several auxiliary Interstate highways in Maryland. Among them are two beltways encircling the major cities of the region: I-695, the McKeldin (Baltimore) Beltway, which encircles Baltimore; and a portion of I-495, the Capital Beltway, which encircles Washington, D.C. I-270, which connects the Frederick area with Northern Virginia and Washington, D.C. through major suburbs to the northwest of Washington, is a major commuter route and is as wide as fourteen lanes at points. I-895, also known as the Harbor Tunnel Thruway, provides an alternate route to I-95 across Baltimore Harbor.

Both I-270 and the Capital Beltway were extremely congested; however, the Intercounty Connector (ICC; MD200) has alleviated some congestion over time. Construction of the ICC was a major part of the campaign platform of former Governor Robert Ehrlich, who was in office from 2003 until 2007, and of Governor Martin O&#x27;Malley, who succeeded him. I-595, which is an unsigned highway concurrent with US50/US301, is the longest unsigned interstate in the country and connects Prince George&#x27;s County and Washington, D.C. with Annapolis and the Eastern Shore via the Chesapeake Bay Bridge.

Maryland also has a state highway system that contains routes numbered from 2through 999, however most of the higher-numbered routes are either unsigned or are relatively short. Major state highways include Routes 2 (Governor Ritchie Highway/Solomons Island Road/Southern Maryland Blvd.), 4 (Pennsylvania Avenue/Southern Maryland Blvd./Patuxent Beach Road/St. Andrew&#x27;s Church Road), 5 (Branch Avenue/Leonardtown Road/Point Lookout Road), 32, 45 (York Road), 97 (Georgia Avenue), 100 (Paul T. Pitcher Memorial Highway), 210 (Indian Head Highway), 235 (Three Notch Road), 295 (Baltimore-Washington Parkway), 355 (Wisconsin Avenue/Rockville Pike/Frederick Road), 404 (Queen Anne Highway/ Shore Highway), and 650 (New Hampshire Avenue).

===Airports===

Maryland&#x27;s largest airport is Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, more commonly referred to as BWI. The airport is named for the Baltimore-born Thurgood Marshall, the first African-American Supreme Court justice. The only other airports with commercial service are at Hagerstown and Salisbury.

The Maryland suburbs of Washington, D.C. are also served by the other two airports in the region, Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport and Dulles International Airport, both in Northern Virginia. The College Park Airport is the nation&#x27;s oldest, founded in 1909, and is still used. Wilbur Wright trained military aviators at this location.

===Rail===

Amtrak trains, including the high-speed Acela Express serve Penn Station in Baltimore, BWI Airport, New Carrollton, and Aberdeen along the Washington, D.C. to Boston Northeast Corridor. Train service is provided to Rockville and Cumberland by Amtrak&#x27;s Washington, D.C., to Chicago Capitol Limited.

The WMATA&#x27;s Metrorail rapid transit and Metrobus local bus systems (the 2nd and 6th busiest in the nation of their respective modes) provide service in Montgomery and Prince George&#x27;s counties and connect them to Washington D.C.. The Maryland Transit Administration (often abbreviated as &quot;MTA Maryland&quot;), a state agency part of the Maryland Department of Transportation also provides transit services within the state. Headquartered in Baltimore, MTA&#x27;s transit services are largely focused on central Maryland, as well as some portions of the Eastern Shore and Southern MD. Baltimore&#x27;s Light RailLink and Metro SubwayLink systems serve its densely populated inner-city and the surrounding suburbs. The MTA also serves the city and its suburbs with its local bus service (the 9th largest system in the nation). The MTA&#x27;s Commuter Bus system provides express coach service on longer routes connecting Washington, D.C. and Baltimore to parts of Central and Southern MD as well as the Eastern Shore. The commuter rail service, known as MARC, operates three lines which all terminate at Washington Union Station and provide service to Baltimore&#x27;s Penn and Camden stations, Perryville, Frederick, and Martinsburg, West Virginia. In addition, many suburban counties operate local bus systems which connect to and complement the larger MTA and WMATA/Metro services.

The MTA will also administer the Purple Line, an under-construction light rail line that will connect the Maryland branches of the Red, Green/Yellow, and Orange lines of the Washington Metro, as well as offer transfers to all three lines of the MARC commuter rail system.

Freight rail transport is handled principally by two Class I railroads, as well as several smaller regional and local carriers. CSX Transportation has more extensive trackage throughout the state, with , followed by Norfolk Southern Railway. Major rail yards are located in Baltimore and Cumberland, with an intermodal terminal (rail, truck and marine) in Baltimore.

==Law and government==


The government of Maryland is conducted according to the state constitution. The government of Maryland, like the other 49 state governments, has exclusive authority over matters that lie entirely within the state&#x27;s borders, except as limited by the Constitution of the United States.

Power in Maryland is divided among three branches of government: executive, legislative, and judicial. The Maryland General Assembly is composed of the Maryland House of Delegates and the Maryland Senate. Maryland&#x27;s governor is unique in the United States as the office is vested with significant authority in budgeting. Unlike many other states, significant autonomy is granted to many of Maryland&#x27;s counties.

Most of the business of government is conducted in Annapolis, the state capital; however some cabinet departments and state officials have their offices in Baltimore. Elections for governor and most statewide offices, as well as most county elections, are held in midterm-election years (even-numbered years not divisible by four).

The judicial branch of state government consists of one united District Court of Maryland that sits in every county and Baltimore City, as well as 24 Circuit Courts sitting in each County and Baltimore City, the latter being courts of general jurisdiction for all civil disputes over $30,000, all equitable jurisdiction and major criminal proceedings. The intermediate appellate court is known as the Appellate Court of Maryland and the state supreme court is the Supreme Court of Maryland. The appearance of the justices of the Supreme Court of Maryland is unique; Maryland is the only state whose justices wear red robes.

===Taxation===

Maryland imposes five income tax brackets, ranging from 2to 6.25 percent of personal income. The city of Baltimore and Maryland&#x27;s 23 counties levy local &quot;piggyback&quot; income taxes at rates between 1.25 and 3.2 percent of Maryland taxable income. Local officials set the rates and the revenue is returned to the local governments quarterly. The top income tax bracket of 9.45 percent is the fifth highest combined state and local income tax rates in the country, behind New York City&#x27;s 11.35 percent, California&#x27;s 10.3 percent, Rhode Island&#x27;s 9.9 percent, and Vermont&#x27;s 9.5 percent.

Maryland&#x27;s state sales tax is six percent. All real property in Maryland is subject to the property tax. Generally, properties that are owned and used by religious, charitable, or educational organizations or property owned by the federal, state or local governments are exempt. Property tax rates vary widely. No restrictions or limitations on property taxes are imposed by the state, meaning cities and counties can set tax rates at the level they deem necessary to fund governmental services.

===Elections===

Following the American Civil War, Maryland&#x27;s elections have largely been controlled by the Democratic Party, which accounted for 54.9% of the state&#x27;s registered voters as of May 2017.

State elections are dominated by Baltimore and four populous suburban counties bordering Washington, D.C., and Baltimore: Montgomery, Prince George&#x27;s, Anne Arundel, and Baltimore counties. As of July 2017, 66 percent of the state&#x27;s population resides in these six jurisdictions, most of which contain large, traditionally Democratic voting blocs: African Americans in Baltimore City and Prince George&#x27;s; federal employees in Prince George&#x27;s, Anne Arundel, and Montgomery; and post-graduates in Montgomery. The remainder of the state, particularly Western Maryland and the Eastern Shore, is more supportive of Republicans. One of Maryland&#x27;s best known political figures is a Republican – former governor Spiro Agnew, who pled no contest to tax evasion and resigned in 1973.

In 1980, Maryland was one of six states to vote for Jimmy Carter. In 1992, Bill Clinton fared better in Maryland than any other state, except his home state of Arkansas. In 1996, Maryland was Clinton&#x27;s sixth best; in 2000, Maryland ranked fourth for Gore; and in 2004, John Kerry showed his fifth-best performance in Maryland. In 2008, Barack Obama won the state&#x27;s 10 electoral votes with 61.9 percent of the vote, to John McCain&#x27;s 36.5 percent.

In 2002, former Governor Robert Ehrlich was the first Republican to be elected to that office in four decades, and after one term, he lost his seat to Baltimore Mayor and Democrat Martin O&#x27;Malley. Ehrlich ran again for governor in 2010, losing again to O&#x27;Malley.

The 2006 election brought no change in the pattern of Democratic dominance. After Democratic Senator Paul Sarbanes announced that he was retiring, Democratic Congressman Benjamin Cardin defeated Republican Lieutenant Governor Michael S. Steele, with 55 percent of the vote, against Steele&#x27;s 44 percent.

While Republicans typically win more counties in statewide elections by piling up large margins in the west and east, they are usually overcome by the densely populated and solidly Democratic Baltimore–Washington axis. In 2008, for instance, McCain won 17 counties to Obama&#x27;s six (plus Baltimore City). While McCain won most of the western and eastern counties by margins of 2-to-1 or more, he was almost completely shut out in the larger counties surrounding Baltimore and Washington; every large county except Anne Arundel went for Obama, who won by 25 points statewide.

From 2007 to 2011, U.S. Congressman Steny Hoyer (MD-5), a Democrat, was elected as Majority Leader for the 110th Congress and 111th Congress of the House of Representatives, serving in that post again from 2019 to 2023. In addition, Hoyer served as House Minority Whip from 2003 to 2006 and 2012 to 2018. His district covers parts of Anne Arundel and Prince George&#x27;s counties, in addition to all of Charles, Calvert, and St. Mary&#x27;s counties in southern Maryland.

In 2010, Republicans won control of most counties. The Democratic Party remained in control of eight county governments, including that of Baltimore.

In 2022, Wes Moore became the first Democrat elected Governor of Maryland since 2010, replacing Republican Larry Hogan, who did not run for re-election due to term limits. Moore is the first African-American elected Governor of Maryland, and the fifth African-American governor in American history.

==Media==
A well-known newspaper in Maryland is &quot;The Baltimore Sun&quot;.
Many residents of the Washington metropolitan area receive &quot;The Washington Post.&quot;

The most populous areas are served by either Baltimore or Washington, D.C. broadcast stations. The Eastern Shore is served primarily by broadcast media based around the Delmarva Peninsula; the northeastern section receives both Baltimore and Philadelphia stations. Garrett County, which is mountainous, is served by stations from Pittsburgh, and requires cable or satellite for reception. Maryland is served by statewide PBS member station Maryland Public Television (MPT).

==Education==
===Primary and secondary education===

&quot;Education Week&quot; ranked Maryland #1 in its nationwide 2009–2013 Quality Counts reports. Primary and secondary education in Maryland is overseen by the Maryland State Department of Education, which is headquartered in Baltimore. The highest educational official in the state is the State Superintendent of Schools, who is appointed by the State Board of Education to a four-year term of office. The Maryland General Assembly has given the Superintendent and State Board autonomy to make educationally related decisions, limiting its influence on the day-to-day functions of public education. Each county and county-equivalent in Maryland has a local Board of Education charged with running the public schools in that particular jurisdiction.

The budget for education was $5.5billion in 2009, representing about 40 percent of the state&#x27;s general fund. Data from the 2017 census shows that, among large school districts, four Maryland districts are in the top six for per-pupil annual spending, exceeded only by the Boston and New York City districts.

Maryland has a broad range of private primary and secondary schools. Many of these are affiliated with various religious sects, including parochial schools of the Catholic Church, Quaker schools, Seventh-day Adventist schools, and Jewish schools. In 2003, Maryland law was changed to allow for the creation of publicly funded charter schools, although the charter schools must be approved by their local Board of Education and are not exempt from state laws on education, including collective bargaining laws.

In 2008, the state led the entire country in the percentage of students passing Advanced Placement examinations. 23.4 percent of students earned passing grades on the AP tests given in May 2008. This marks the first year that Maryland earned this honor. Three Maryland high schools (in Montgomery County) were ranked among the top 100 in the country by US News in 2009, based in large part on AP test scores.

===Colleges and universities===

Maryland has several historic and renowned private colleges and universities, the most prominent of which is Johns Hopkins University, founded in 1876 with a grant from Baltimore entrepreneur Johns Hopkins.

The first public university in the state is the University of Maryland, Baltimore, which was founded in 1807 and contains the University of Maryland&#x27;s only public academic health, human services, and one of two law centers (the other being the University of Baltimore School of Law). Seven professional and graduate schools train the majority of the state&#x27;s physicians, nurses, dentists, lawyers, social workers, and pharmacists. The flagship university and largest undergraduate institution in Maryland is the University of Maryland, College Park which was founded as the Maryland Agricultural College in 1856 and became a public land grant college in 1864. Towson University, founded in 1866, is the state&#x27;s second largest university.

In 1974, Maryland, along with seven other states, mainly in the South, submitted plans to desegregate its state universities; Maryland&#x27;s plans were approved by the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

Baltimore is home to the University of Maryland, Baltimore County and the Maryland Institute College of Art. The majority of public universities in the state (Bowie State University, Coppin State University, Frostburg State University, Salisbury University and the University of Maryland-Eastern Shore) are affiliated with the University System of Maryland. Two state-funded institutions, Morgan State University and St. Mary&#x27;s College of Maryland, as well as two federally funded institutions, the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and the United States Naval Academy, are not affiliated with the University System of Maryland. The University of Maryland Global Campus is the largest public university in Maryland and one of the largest distance-learning institutions in the world.

St. John&#x27;s College in Annapolis and Washington College in Chestertown, both private institutions, are the oldest colleges in the state and among the oldest in the country. Other private institutions include Mount St. Mary&#x27;s University, McDaniel College (formerly known as Western Maryland College), Hood College, Stevenson University (formerly known as Villa Julie College), Loyola University Maryland, and Goucher College, among others.

===Public libraries===

Maryland&#x27;s 24 public library systems deliver public education for everyone in the state of Maryland through a curriculum that comprises three pillars: Self-Directed Education (books and materials in all formats, e-resources), Research Assistance &amp; Instruction (individualized research assistance, classes for students of all ages), and Instructive &amp; Enlightening Experiences (e.g., Summer Reading Clubs, author events).

Maryland&#x27;s library systems include, in part:
* Anne Arundel County Public Library
* Baltimore County Public Library
* Cecil County Public Library
* Enoch Pratt Free Library
* Frederick County Public Library
* Harford County Public Library
* Howard County Public Library
* Montgomery County Public Libraries
* Prince George&#x27;s County Memorial Library System
* St. Mary&#x27;s County Public Library

Many of the library systems have established formalized partnerships with other educational institutions in their counties and regions.

==Sports==

With two major metropolitan areas, Maryland has a number of major and minor professional sports franchises. Two National Football League teams play in Maryland, the Baltimore Ravens in Baltimore and the Washington Commanders in Landover. The Baltimore Colts represented the NFL in Baltimore from 1953 to 1983 before moving to Indianapolis.

The Baltimore Orioles are the state&#x27;s Major League Baseball franchise. The National Hockey League&#x27;s Washington Capitals and the National Basketball Association&#x27;s Washington Wizards formerly played in Maryland, until the construction of an arena in Washington, D.C. in 1997 (now known as Capital One Arena). University of Maryland&#x27;s team is the Maryland Terrapins.

Maryland enjoys considerable historical repute for the talented sports players of its past, including Cal Ripken Jr. and Babe Ruth. In 2012, &quot;The Baltimore Sun&quot; published a list of Maryland&#x27;s top ten athletes in the state&#x27;s history. The list includes Babe Ruth, Cal Ripken Jr, Johnny Unitas, Brooks Robinson, Frank Robinson, Ray Lewis, Michael Phelps, Jimmie Foxx, Jim Parker, and Wes Unseld.

Other professional sports franchises in the state include three affiliated minor league baseball teams, one independent league baseball team, the Baltimore Blast indoor soccer team, two indoor football teams and three low-level outdoor soccer teams. Maryland is also home to one of the three races in horse racing&#x27;s annual Triple Crown, the Preakness Stakes, which is run every spring at Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore. The Baltimore Stallions were a Canadian Football Team in the CFL that played the 1994–95 season.

Congressional Country Club has hosted three golf tournaments for the U.S. Open and a PGA Championship.

The official state sport of Maryland, since 1962, is jousting; the official team sport since 2004 is lacrosse. The National Lacrosse Hall of Fame is located in Sparks, Maryland at the USA Lacrosse headquarters. In 2008, intending to promote physical fitness for all ages, walking became the official state exercise. Maryland is the first state with an official state exercise.

== Friendship partners ==
Maryland has relationships with many provinces, states, and other entities worldwide.

* Bong and Maryland Counties, in Liberia
* Jalisco, Mexico (1996)
* Cross River and Ondo States, Nigeria
* KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
* Medan Marelan, Indonesia

==See also==

* Index of Maryland-related articles
* Outline of Maryland
* List of people from Maryland
* USS &quot;Maryland&quot;, 4 ships

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Davis, William Wilkins. &quot;Religion and Politics in Maryland on the Eve of the Civil War: The Letters of W. Wilkins Davis&quot;. Foreword by Charles W. Mitchell. 1988; rev. ed., Eugene, Ore.: Wipf &amp; Stock, 2009.
* 
==External links==
* 
* Maryland Office of Tourism 
* 
* Catholic Encyclopedia article 
* Maryland State Facts from USDA 
* Maryland State Archives: Special Collections, Map Collections 
* Maryland Historical Society: County Maps 
* The Huntingfield Map Collection 
* Maryland: State Resource Guide, from the Library of Congress </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="0" end="8" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="18" end="23" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="31" end="43" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261430" start="48" end="62" title="South Atlantic states" label="South Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="115" end="120" title="United States Department of Labor" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="125" end="133" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="172" end="180" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="195" end="208" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="222" end="234" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="249" end="257" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="266" end="280" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="343" end="359" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="417" end="450" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="ninth-smallest state by land area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="497" end="521" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="18th-most populous state"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="530" end="558" title="List of states and territories of the United States by population density" label="fifth-most densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="592" end="601" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="633" end="642" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="767" end="782" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="802" end="820" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="845" end="862" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q335412" start="888" end="902" title="George Calvert" label="George Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="927" end="935" title="Catholic Church in England and Wales" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1030" end="1050" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148410" start="1076" end="1092" title="colonial charter" label="colonial charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q848615" start="1128" end="1143" title="Henrietta Maria of France" label="Henrietta Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781520" start="1194" end="1217" title="Maryland Toleration Act" label="Act Concerning Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="1252" end="1262" title="toleration" label="toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="1523" end="1537" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578694" start="1563" end="1579" title="Plantation economy" label="plantation-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1622" end="1629" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720654" start="1713" end="1732" title="Indentured servitude in British America" label="indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868839" start="1737" end="1754" title="History of slavery in Maryland" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q530472" start="1824" end="1834" title="Mason–Dixon line" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781556" start="1915" end="1947" title="Maryland in the American Revolution" label="key political and military roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1955" end="1981" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="2001" end="2012" title="Slave states and free states" label="slave state"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="2023" end="2044" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="remained in the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2056" end="2074" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781554" start="2134" end="2166" title="Maryland in the American Civil War" label="a significant strategic location"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525708" start="2221" end="2242" title="Industrial Revolution in the United States" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601002" start="2501" end="2532" title="List of U.S. states by income" label="highest median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526752" start="2909" end="2956" title="Majority minority in the United States" label="non-Whites compose a majority of the population"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="2995" end="3012" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3052" end="3058" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3060" end="3064" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="3066" end="3081" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3091" end="3100" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600862" start="3191" end="3228" title="List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state" label="highest numbers of historic landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835523" start="3246" end="3253" title="Western Maryland" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="3301" end="3322" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852987" start="3328" end="3343" title="Baltimore metropolitan area" label="central portion"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="3373" end="3381" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="3391" end="3416" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="eastern side of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="3969" end="3981" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="3987" end="3995" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q9060109" start="4172" end="4182" title="Piscataway people" label="Piscataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148798" start="4198" end="4206" title="Patuxent people" label="Patuxent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742899" start="4213" end="4222" title="Nanticoke people" label="Nanticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812036" start="4238" end="4245" title="Tockwogh" label="Tocwogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877240" start="4251" end="4257" title="Ozinie" label="Ozinie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49291" start="4287" end="4295" title="Powhatan" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="4301" end="4307" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279673" start="4313" end="4326" title="Susquehannock" label="Susquehannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="4332" end="4339" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757507" start="4345" end="4351" title="Tutelo" label="Tutelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224073" start="4357" end="4363" title="Saponi" label="Saponi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206513" start="4369" end="4377" title="Pocomoke people" label="Pocomoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860819" start="4386" end="4397" title="Massawomeck people" label="Massawomeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q335412" start="4399" end="4434" title="George Calvert, 1st Lord Baltimore" label="George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4475" end="4484" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4511" end="4524" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="4542" end="4550" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678692" start="4647" end="4684" title="Cecilius Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore" label="Cecilius Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q848615" start="4786" end="4811" title="Henrietta Maria of France" label="Henrietta Maria of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321360" start="5078" end="5098" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s City, Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s City"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="5126" end="5139" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q679316" start="5424" end="5439" title="Leonard Calvert" label="Leonard Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q693032" start="5473" end="5493" title="Governor of Maryland" label="Governor of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321360" start="5541" end="5561" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s City, Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s City"/>
<link wikidata="Q511120" start="5577" end="5599" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082403" start="5634" end="5649" title="paramount chief" label="paramount chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q120669766" start="5732" end="5739" title="state capital" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="5935" end="5942" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="5944" end="5956" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="5962" end="5969" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="6031" end="6042" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6138" end="6152" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="6360" end="6368" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="6374" end="6382" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="6443" end="6452" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="6488" end="6502" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391790" start="6546" end="6557" title="Kent Island" label="Kent Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568503" start="6608" end="6625" title="William Claiborne" label="William Claiborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="6682" end="6696" title="Roundheads" label="pro-Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326678" start="6705" end="6718" title="Richard Ingle" label="Richard Ingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q679316" start="7021" end="7036" title="Leonard Calvert" label="Leonard Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="7224" end="7235" title="Trinitarianism" label="Trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7471" end="7488" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="7493" end="7504" title="Church of England" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="7871" end="7890" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8299" end="8325" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q211557" start="8573" end="8583" title="bequest" label="bequeathed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="8772" end="8785" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186266" start="8796" end="8809" title="40th parallel north" label="40th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="8832" end="8842" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="8865" end="8877" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="9045" end="9057" title="William Penn" label="William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q755393" start="9104" end="9124" title="New Castle, Delaware" label="New Castle, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="9148" end="9160" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639796" start="9713" end="9727" title="Baron Baltimore" label="Calvert family"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="9764" end="9775" title="William Penn" label="Penn family"/>
<link wikidata="Q530472" start="10431" end="10447" title="Mason–Dixon line" label="Mason–Dixon line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834802" start="10503" end="10523" title="Transpeninsular Line" label="Transpeninsular Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857570" start="10532" end="10550" title="Twelve-Mile Circle" label="Twelve-Mile Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="10644" end="10662" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="10930" end="10940" title="Mixed-race" label="Mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896875" start="11019" end="11042" title="partus sequitur ventrem" label="partus sequitur ventrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="11499" end="11516" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="thirteen colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="11559" end="11578" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="11600" end="11626" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="11736" end="11781" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="11825" end="11852" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="11918" end="11927" title="sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="11932" end="11946" title="nation state" label="national state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="12122" end="12134" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="12194" end="12211" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="12219" end="12237" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="12307" end="12320" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="12326" end="12336" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="12341" end="12361" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="12388" end="12402" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="12407" end="12417" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="12455" end="12463" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283437" start="12563" end="12596" title="District of Columbia retrocession" label="District of Columbia retrocession"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="12786" end="12803" title="American Revolution" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q102870" start="12927" end="12941" title="Harriet Tubman" label="Harriet Tubman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="12946" end="12964" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q501263" start="13002" end="13019" title="Dorchester County, Maryland" label="Dorchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q511084" start="13024" end="13037" title="Talbot County, Maryland" label="Talbot County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="13065" end="13076" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="13154" end="13166" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="13206" end="13230" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q320633" start="13252" end="13269" title="Francis Scott Key" label="Francis Scott Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214592" start="13346" end="13359" title="U.S. Route 40 in Maryland" label="U.S. Route 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="13421" end="13430" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="13434" end="13443" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="13449" end="13476" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q730938" start="13625" end="13638" title="Ellicott City, Maryland" label="Ellicott City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="13695" end="13705" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13795" end="13813" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="14007" end="14011" title="free black" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q433015" start="14023" end="14044" title="Thomas Holliday Hicks" label="Thomas Holliday Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536323" start="14097" end="14109" title="1861 Maryland gubernatorial election" label="the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="14165" end="14180" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546302" start="14269" end="14289" title="George William Brown (mayor)" label="George William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685630" start="14395" end="14407" title="Federal Hill, Baltimore, Maryland" label="Federal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588241" start="14543" end="14565" title="Baltimore riot of 1861" label="Baltimore riot of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="14712" end="14722" title="Union army" label="Union army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="14755" end="14771" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="14834" end="14852" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q754473" start="14881" end="14891" title="Sharpsburg, Maryland" label="Sharpsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856051" start="14977" end="14990" title="turning point of the American Civil War" label="turning point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="15060" end="15069" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="15234" end="15242" title="freedmen" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="15305" end="15321" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="15363" end="15374" title="History of the United States Republican Party" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164205" start="15429" end="15449" title="Maryland Constitution of 1867" label="Constitution of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="15523" end="15539" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era" label="disenfranchising"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="16278" end="16296" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="16322" end="16330" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="16475" end="16496" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q380418" start="16722" end="16735" title="Johns Hopkins" label="Johns Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379320" start="16737" end="16748" title="Enoch Pratt" label="Enoch Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q910862" start="16750" end="16764" title="George Peabody" label="George Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607379" start="16770" end="16783" title="Henry Walters" label="Henry Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="16867" end="16877" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q69478541" start="16879" end="16893" title="Enoch Pratt Free Library" label="library system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156934" start="16895" end="16923" title="Peabody Institute" label="music and dance conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q210081" start="16929" end="16939" title="Walters Art Museum" label="art museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="16942" end="16952" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="17152" end="17167" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="17497" end="17513" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="17634" end="17644" title="illiterate" label="illiterate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="18364" end="18369" title="Mining" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="18380" end="18391" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="18491" end="18517" title="workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workers&amp;#x27; compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898431" start="18640" end="18660" title="Great Baltimore Fire" label="Great Baltimore Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="18772" end="18783" title="firefighter" label="firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18850" end="18872" title="World War I#Entry of the United States" label="entry into World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q509549" start="18909" end="18919" title="Fort George G. Meade" label="Camp Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="18925" end="18948" title="Aberdeen Proving Ground" label="Aberdeen Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="18958" end="18974" title="Edgewood Arsenal" label="Edgewood Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="19024" end="19036" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578400" start="19088" end="19105" title="William D. Upshaw" label="William D. Upshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="19157" end="19168" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="19321" end="19334" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="19454" end="19470" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910386" start="19482" end="19492" title="Bonus Army" label="Bonus Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="19594" end="19604" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19839" end="19851" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27432" start="19881" end="19896" title="Bethlehem Steel" label="Bethlehem Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="19932" end="19944" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426388" start="19951" end="19963" title="Glenn L. Martin Company" label="Glenn Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397905" start="20406" end="20414" title="Columbia, Maryland" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755927" start="20416" end="20427" title="St. Charles, Maryland" label="St. Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q754801" start="20433" end="20451" title="Montgomery Village, Maryland" label="Montgomery Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="20470" end="20495" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213801" start="20541" end="20545" title="Interstate 95 in Maryland" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214113" start="20547" end="20552" title="Interstate 695 (Maryland)" label="I-695"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999662" start="20562" end="20577" title="Interstate 495 (Capital Beltway)" label="Capital Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="20695" end="20716" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="20742" end="20747" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="20982" end="20995" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="21348" end="21361" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076164" start="21389" end="21403" title="Charles Center" label="Charles Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852943" start="21412" end="21440" title="Baltimore World Trade Center" label="Baltimore World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="21738" end="21745" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="21835" end="21841" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="21923" end="21936" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="22037" end="22047" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="22152" end="22157" title="dunes" label="dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q147392" start="22242" end="22254" title="Taxodium" label="bald cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="22326" end="22341" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="22347" end="22351" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629441" start="22366" end="22384" title="List of mountains in Maryland" label="Maryland mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="22435" end="22447" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="22474" end="22482" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="22503" end="22517" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="22557" end="22570" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="22575" end="22588" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="22593" end="22601" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="22665" end="22681" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="22730" end="22740" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="22745" end="22765" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="22789" end="22809" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="22904" end="22918" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="23008" end="23021" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="23158" end="23172" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470734" start="23189" end="23207" title="Youghiogheny River" label="Youghiogheny River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="23240" end="23257" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="23436" end="23450" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="23688" end="23701" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q547943" start="23773" end="23804" title="Backbone Mountain" label="Hoye Crest on Backbone Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="23833" end="23847" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="23978" end="23985" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q530472" start="24091" end="24107" title="Mason–Dixon line" label="Mason–Dixon line"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="24149" end="24162" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="24284" end="24302" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="24369" end="24386" title="state of Delaware" label="state of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q32286" start="24426" end="24451" title="Eastern Shore of Virginia" label="Eastern Shore of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="24521" end="24531" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="24817" end="24818" title="Moment magnitude scale" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q32610" start="24822" end="24849" title="2011 Virginia earthquake" label="Virginia earthquake in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q125349769" start="25007" end="25024" title="2024 New Jersey earthquake" label="a M4.8 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="25030" end="25039" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512535" start="25252" end="25269" title="Buckel&amp;#x27;s Bog" label="Buckel&amp;#x27;s Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="25487" end="25497" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="25643" end="25651" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976487" start="25664" end="25669" title="Phragmites" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q37913738" start="25721" end="25728" title="Wye Oak" label="Wye Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163388" start="25748" end="25757" title="white oak" label="white oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841214" start="25802" end="25833" title="Middle Atlantic coastal forests" label="Middle Atlantic coastal forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="25863" end="25885" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="Atlantic coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="25925" end="25943" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058078" start="25971" end="25999" title="Northeastern coastal forests" label="Northeastern coastal forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569508" start="26004" end="26030" title="Southeastern mixed forests" label="Southeastern mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="26072" end="26093" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780829" start="26126" end="26156" title="Appalachian-Blue Ridge forests" label="Appalachian-Blue Ridge forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780886" start="26176" end="26212" title="Appalachian mixed mesophytic forests" label="Appalachian mixed mesophytic forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q775229" start="26372" end="26384" title="Lagerstroemia" label="crape myrtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q147513" start="26386" end="26401" title="Italian cypress" label="Italian cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q161116" start="26403" end="26420" title="Magnolia grandiflora" label="southern magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52387698" start="26422" end="26430" title="live oak" label="live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656653" start="26474" end="26490" title="hardy palms" label="hardy palm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="26556" end="26570" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852987" start="26755" end="26777" title="Baltimore Metropolitan Area" label="metropolitan Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525444" start="26811" end="26816" title="kudzu" label="kudzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q159570" start="26818" end="26832" title="tree of heaven" label="tree of heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q133617" start="26834" end="26849" title="multiflora rose" label="multiflora rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699638" start="26855" end="26874" title="Microstegium vimineum" label="Japanese stiltgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532820" start="26947" end="26963" title="Rudbeckia hirta" label="black-eyed susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="27085" end="27102" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="27297" end="27308" title="American black bear" label="black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="27310" end="27316" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="27326" end="27332" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q289161" start="27417" end="27434" title="Assateague Island" label="Assateague Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073686" start="27628" end="27650" title="Chincoteague, Virginia" label="Chincoteague, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880579" start="27815" end="27836" title="Misty of Chincoteague (novel)" label="Misty of Chincoteague"/>
<link wikidata="Q29084" start="27858" end="27882" title="Chesapeake Bay Retriever" label="Chesapeake Bay Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q38216" start="28078" end="28098" title="American Kennel Club" label="American Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="28129" end="28169" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q569170" start="28250" end="28270" title="diamondback terrapin" label="diamondback terrapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="28314" end="28350" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768639" start="28378" end="28396" title="Eastern box turtle" label="Eastern box turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q805774" start="28440" end="28456" title="Baltimore oriole" label="Baltimore oriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="28509" end="28512" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="28522" end="28539" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607720" start="28564" end="28590" title="List of Maryland birds" label="435 other species of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700425" start="28650" end="28681" title="Baltimore checkerspot" label="Baltimore checkerspot butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="28892" end="28906" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="29161" end="29175" title="Pacific States" label="Pacific States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423541" start="29360" end="29394" title="Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative" label="Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q291508" start="29787" end="29802" title="AES Corporation" label="AES Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970789" start="29850" end="29872" title="Warrior Run Generating Station" label="Warrior Run coal plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212903" start="30139" end="30154" title="Katabatic wind" label="downslope winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q687905" start="30201" end="30211" title="Ocean City, Maryland" label="Ocean City"/>
<link wikidata="Q755566" start="30213" end="30222" title="Salisbury, Maryland" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="30224" end="30233" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="30297" end="30306" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="30320" end="30342" title="Atlantic Coastal Plain" label="Atlantic Coastal Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="30408" end="30433" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="30435" end="30441" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="30530" end="30544" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="30554" end="30562" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q755018" start="30626" end="30637" title="Westminster, Maryland" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="30639" end="30651" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="30653" end="30662" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q755559" start="30668" end="30678" title="Hagerstown, Maryland" label="Hagerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553987" start="30830" end="30847" title="Cumberland Valley" label="Cumberland Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="30899" end="30924" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156257" start="30998" end="31006" title="Allegany County, Maryland" label="Allegany"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="31011" end="31018" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="31053" end="31063" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q374219" start="31065" end="31074" title="Frostburg, Maryland" label="Frostburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q755860" start="31080" end="31087" title="Oakland, Maryland" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="31279" end="31289" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="31547" end="31561" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Atlantic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="31598" end="31615" title="tropical cyclones" label="tropical cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="31630" end="31648" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="31672" end="31686" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852987" start="32141" end="32168" title="Baltimore metropolitan area" label="Baltimore metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="32173" end="32201" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828301" start="32233" end="32271" title="Baltimore–Washington metropolitan area" label="Baltimore–Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="32370" end="32386" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="32406" end="32415" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816534" start="32524" end="32533" title="Atlantic Seaboard fall line" label="Fall Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="32656" end="32665" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321264" start="32737" end="32749" title="Severn River (Maryland)" label="Severn River"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="32786" end="32800" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q156257" start="32937" end="32945" title="Allegany County, Maryland" label="Allegany"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="32950" end="32957" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="33028" end="33038" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q687905" start="33179" end="33189" title="Ocean City, Maryland" label="Ocean City"/>
<link wikidata="Q754512" start="33191" end="33204" title="Princess Anne, Maryland" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q755566" start="33210" end="33219" title="Salisbury, Maryland" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="33227" end="33240" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="33245" end="33255" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q374219" start="33257" end="33266" title="Frostburg, Maryland" label="Frostburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="33272" end="33279" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835523" start="33283" end="33299" title="Western Maryland" label="Western Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q650694" start="33476" end="33490" title="Lexington Park, Maryland" label="Lexington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q754567" start="33492" end="33508" title="Prince Frederick, Maryland" label="Prince Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q754623" start="33510" end="33520" title="California, Maryland" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q755056" start="33526" end="33533" title="Waldorf, Maryland" label="Waldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="33564" end="33589" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="33595" end="33622" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="33704" end="33729" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="34110" end="34121" title="Immigration to the United States" label="Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="34343" end="34354" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="34362" end="34367" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="34374" end="34379" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="34386" end="34393" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="34408" end="34419" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="34430" end="34450" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q488701" start="34501" end="34520" title="Anne Arundel County, Maryland" label="Anne Arundel County"/>
<link wikidata="Q398939" start="34525" end="34538" title="Howard County, Maryland" label="Howard County"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="34547" end="34571" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q755574" start="34575" end="34581" title="Jessup, Maryland" label="Jessup"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="34613" end="34625" title="border states (Civil War)" label="border state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="34676" end="34684" title="Northern United States" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="34693" end="34701" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835523" start="34749" end="34765" title="Western Maryland" label="Western Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923612" start="34778" end="34802" title="Eastern Panhandle of West Virginia" label="West Virginian Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="34807" end="34819" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="34827" end="34837" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570120" start="34852" end="34860" title="Southern Maryland" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193678" start="34908" end="34924" title="Culture of the Southern United States" label="Southern culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="34992" end="35001" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="35006" end="35022" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="35061" end="35070" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261430" start="35129" end="35150" title="South Atlantic States" label="South Atlantic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="35191" end="35210" title="Mid-Atlantic States" label="Mid-Atlantic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="35215" end="35241" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="35314" end="35317" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="35330" end="35363" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="35395" end="35403" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="35731" end="35745" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="35971" end="35978" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="35985" end="35992" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="36032" end="36038" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="36043" end="36047" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="36054" end="36060" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="36067" end="36073" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="36082" end="36104" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afro-Asiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="36113" end="36120" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="36131" end="36137" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="36150" end="36157" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="36234" end="36244" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="36253" end="36260" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="36269" end="36274" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="36283" end="36287" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="36296" end="36303" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="36312" end="36318" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="36327" end="36341" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="36354" end="36360" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="36519" end="36547" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic white Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065654" start="36590" end="36605" title="White Americans in Maryland" label="White Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="36617" end="36632" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102828" start="36669" end="36686" title="majority minority" label="majority minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="36813" end="36823" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="36890" end="36896" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="36898" end="36908" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="36910" end="36915" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="36917" end="36927" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="36929" end="36935" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="36941" end="36957" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16197344" start="37318" end="37335" title="African Americans in Maryland" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="37536" end="37550" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="37552" end="37579" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501319" start="37581" end="37595" title="Charles County, Maryland" label="Charles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q488668" start="37614" end="37630" title="Baltimore County, Maryland" label="Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="38049" end="38064" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007852" start="38132" end="38151" title="New Great Migration" label="New Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032863" start="38696" end="38703" title="Nigerian American" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991575" start="38725" end="38729" title="Igbo American" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="38734" end="38740" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="38749" end="38757" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464237" start="38772" end="38779" title="Amhara people" label="Amharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="38797" end="38802" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q427036" start="38807" end="38815" title="Tigrayans" label="Tigrayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="38829" end="38837" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="38839" end="38844" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="38846" end="38858" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="38864" end="38869" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="38926" end="38935" title="West Indian American" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="39288" end="39302" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="39315" end="39323" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="39476" end="39504" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150513" start="39548" end="39558" title="Ethiopians in Washington, D.C." label="Ethiopians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057409" start="39650" end="39662" title="Adams Morgan" label="Adams Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277455" start="39667" end="39671" title="Shaw, Washington, D.C." label="Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="39771" end="39784" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="39873" end="39880" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="39940" end="39945" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="39950" end="39958" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152605" start="40034" end="40042" title="Eritrean Americans" label="Eritrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="40110" end="40116" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="40124" end="40129" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="40137" end="40144" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="40151" end="40159" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="40166" end="40173" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="40184" end="40190" title="Polish American" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="40198" end="40212" title="Irish American" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088330" start="40238" end="40267" title="History of the Irish in Baltimore" label="throughout the Baltimore area"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="40845" end="40858" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570120" start="40863" end="40880" title="Southern Maryland" label="Southern Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969441" start="40900" end="40916" title="British American" label="British American"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="40981" end="40990" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="41103" end="41118" title="German-American" label="German-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197385" start="41296" end="41302" title="History of the Jews in Baltimore" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709191" start="41304" end="41311" title="History of the Italians in Baltimore" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191424" start="41313" end="41318" title="History of the Greeks in Baltimore" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151230" start="41320" end="41326" title="History of the Poles in Baltimore" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869299" start="41328" end="41333" title="History of the Czechs in Baltimore" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151213" start="41335" end="41345" title="History of the Lithuanians in Baltimore" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150567" start="41347" end="41354" title="History of Russians in Baltimore" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004752" start="41359" end="41368" title="History of the Ukrainians in Baltimore" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505056" start="41419" end="41429" title="Greek Jews" label="Greek Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="41437" end="41445" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="41450" end="41464" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="41853" end="41868" title="American Jews" label="Jewish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828301" start="42203" end="42249" title="Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area" label="Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q753733" start="42751" end="42761" title="Aspen Hill, Maryland" label="Aspen Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q754367" start="42763" end="42774" title="Hyattsville, Maryland" label="Hyattsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q753918" start="42775" end="42787" title="Langley Park, Maryland" label="Langley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568613" start="42789" end="42797" title="Glenmont, Maryland" label="Glenmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991947" start="42798" end="42805" title="Wheaton, Maryland" label="Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174272" start="42807" end="42818" title="Bladensburg, Maryland" label="Bladensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q754948" start="42820" end="42834" title="Riverdale Park, Maryland" label="Riverdale Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="42836" end="42848" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691961" start="42861" end="42873" title="Highlandtown, Baltimore" label="Highlandtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602122" start="42878" end="42887" title="Greektown, Baltimore" label="Greektown"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="42959" end="42974" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="42997" end="43008" title="Salvadoran American" label="Salvadorans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="43368" end="43384" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles area"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="43458" end="43466" title="Mexican American" label="Mexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826647" start="43468" end="43479" title="Guatemalans" label="Guatemalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892930" start="43481" end="43490" title="Honduran American" label="Hondurans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="43492" end="43502" title="People of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359289" start="43504" end="43513" title="Peruvians" label="Peruvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="43519" end="43532" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="43568" end="43578" title="Brazilians" label="Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997267" start="43580" end="43590" title="Colombians" label="Colombians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296435" start="43592" end="43603" title="Ecuadorians" label="Ecuadorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357542" start="43609" end="43618" title="Bolivians" label="Bolivians"/>
<link wikidata="Q501345" start="43792" end="43808" title="Frederick County, Maryland" label="Frederick County"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="43926" end="43935" title="Spanish Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="43940" end="43955" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127409" start="44039" end="44057" title="Jamaican Americans" label="Jamaican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983732" start="44219" end="44228" title="Wes Moore" label="Wes Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="44356" end="44366" title="People of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131845" start="44368" end="44376" title="Haitians" label="Haitians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12960308" start="44378" end="44406" title="Trinidadians and Tobagonians" label="Trinidadians and Tobagonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281236" start="44412" end="44420" title="Guyanese people" label="Guyanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q398939" start="44667" end="44680" title="Howard County, Maryland" label="Howard County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="44687" end="44703" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="44705" end="44720" title="Korean American" label="Korean American"/>
<link wikidata="Q44614" start="44725" end="44743" title="Taiwanese American" label="Taiwanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q327022" start="44759" end="44768" title="Rockville, Maryland" label="Rockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="44770" end="44782" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q755901" start="44788" end="44798" title="Germantown, Maryland" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q904319" start="45020" end="45029" title="Koreatown" label="Koreatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q730938" start="45033" end="45046" title="Ellicott City, Maryland" label="Ellicott City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="45048" end="45065" title="Filipino American" label="Filipino American"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086965" start="45409" end="45429" title="South Asian Americans" label="South Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="45501" end="45517" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="45645" end="45655" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q398939" start="45660" end="45666" title="Howard County, Maryland" label="Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q488668" start="45699" end="45708" title="Baltimore County, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q501345" start="45710" end="45719" title="Frederick County, Maryland" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="45725" end="45745" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="45873" end="45878" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="45880" end="45888" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="45890" end="45896" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="45902" end="45907" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125803" start="45930" end="45948" title="Pakistani Americans" label="Pakistani American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855425" start="46064" end="46084" title="Bangladeshi Americans" label="Bangladeshi American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374230" start="46160" end="46176" title="Nepalese Americans" label="Nepali Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150492" start="46188" end="46207" title="Bhutanese Americans" label="Bhutanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549801" start="46311" end="46332" title="Lhotshampa" label="expulsion from Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830062" start="46340" end="46361" title="April 2015 Nepal earthquake" label="2015 Nepal earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q58333654" start="46564" end="46578" title="Harry Bhandari" label="Harry Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669249" start="46660" end="46683" title="State-recognized tribes in the United States" label="state-recognized tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="47100" end="47123" title="undocumented immigrants" label="undocumented immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="47368" end="47395" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="American Catholic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452027" start="47416" end="47434" title="colony of Maryland" label="colony of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335412" start="47451" end="47465" title="George Calvert" label="George Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q754471" start="47576" end="47586" title="Emmitsburg" label="Emmitsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="47658" end="47667" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q459032" start="47669" end="47692" title="St. Elizabeth Ann Seton" label="St. Elizabeth Ann Seton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="47694" end="47715" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968407" start="47886" end="47954" title="Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary" label="Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364093" start="48043" end="48066" title="Archbishop of Baltimore" label="Archbishop of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q326330" start="48132" end="48139" title="primate (bishop)" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="48562" end="48581" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="48657" end="48666" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="48707" end="48718" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="48745" end="48756" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="48844" end="48849" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="48850" end="48859" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q511120" start="48885" end="48900" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="48902" end="48909" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q385365" start="48915" end="48920" title="Cecil County, Maryland" label="Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="48931" end="48938" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="49055" end="49059" title="American Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="49084" end="49101" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q755020" start="49109" end="49119" title="Pikesville, Maryland" label="Pikesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q755623" start="49124" end="49136" title="Owings Mills" label="Owings Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="49285" end="49313" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="49344" end="49353" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q755741" start="49405" end="49418" title="Silver Spring, Maryland" label="Silver Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="49433" end="49449" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="49459" end="49493" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="50660" end="50670" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177883" start="50675" end="50695" title="William Dorsey Swann" label="William Dorsey Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="50825" end="50840" title="LGBTQ community" label="LGBTQ community"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="50848" end="50865" title="right to assemble" label="right to assemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300500" start="50903" end="50915" title="Doug Gansler" label="Doug Gansler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="50973" end="50990" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q120260" start="51137" end="51157" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="51853" end="51880" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502719" start="51992" end="52018" title="Genuine Progress Indicator" label="Genuine Progress Indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="52160" end="52178" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="52316" end="52326" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="52331" end="52342" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622417" start="52469" end="52502" title="Highest-income counties in the United States" label="wealthiest counties in the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166835" start="52682" end="52708" title="Per capita personal income in the United States" label="Per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="52916" end="52932" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5251388" start="53210" end="53244" title="Defense Information Systems Agency" label="Defense Information Systems Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783579" start="53246" end="53273" title="United States Cyber Command" label="United States Cyber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="53283" end="53307" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492824" start="53308" end="53332" title="Central Security Service" label="Central Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="53461" end="53485" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492714" start="53916" end="53930" title="Sparrows Point" label="Sparrows Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="53987" end="53999" title="Bankruptcy" label="bankruptcies"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="54005" end="54011" title="merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="54073" end="54088" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q797226" start="54639" end="54650" title="BYK Additives &amp;amp; Instruments" label="BYK Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130494" start="54652" end="54665" title="Clean Harbors" label="Clean Harbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691986" start="54667" end="54686" title="Holy Cross Hospital (Silver Spring)" label="Holy Cross Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692069" start="54688" end="54724" title="Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center" label="Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q249373" start="54726" end="54777" title="Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory" label="Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q858729" start="54779" end="54822" title="Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine" label="Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="54824" end="54852" title="University of Maryland" label="Maryland Neuroimaging Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="54854" end="54870" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480532" start="54872" end="54894" title="University System of Maryland" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692453" start="54900" end="54937" title="University of Maryland Medical Center" label="University of Maryland Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506462" start="54977" end="54991" title="sports betting" label="sports betting"/>
<link wikidata="Q116730698" start="55108" end="55144" title="Blueprint for Maryland&amp;#x27;s Future" label="Blueprint for Maryland&amp;#x27;s Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q377595" start="55258" end="55275" title="Port of Baltimore" label="Port of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="55292" end="55296" title="railroad" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="55498" end="55506" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="55508" end="55517" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="55519" end="55524" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="55530" end="55540" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="55621" end="55628" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310596" start="55909" end="55920" title="Dubai Ports World controversy" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154956" start="55930" end="55947" title="Dubai Ports World" label="Dubai Ports World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092885" start="56302" end="56331" title="Chesapeake and Delaware Canal" label="Chesapeake and Delaware Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="56337" end="56342" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621396" start="56644" end="56651" title="List of freshwater fishes of Maryland" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844839" start="56785" end="56794" title="Callinectes sapidus" label="blue crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="56796" end="56803" title="oysters" label="oysters"/>
<link wikidata="Q842647" start="56805" end="56817" title="striped bass" label="striped bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q218526" start="56823" end="56831" title="menhaden" label="menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="56923" end="56950" title="birdwatching" label="tourism sector of sportsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="57044" end="57052" title="Piedmont Plateau" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="57296" end="57304" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="57307" end="57317" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966" start="57320" end="57330" title="sweet corn" label="sweet corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="57332" end="57338" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q81602" start="57342" end="57348" title="Cucumis melo" label="melons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="57350" end="57356" title="Squash (fruit)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="57362" end="57366" title="peas" label="peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="57490" end="57497" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="57498" end="57507" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="57660" end="57667" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q755566" start="57722" end="57731" title="Salisbury, Maryland" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167716" start="57743" end="57755" title="Perdue Farms" label="Perdue Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="57932" end="57950" title="multiple herbicide resistance" label="multiply resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q682164" start="57966" end="57989" title="Ambrosia artemisiifolia" label="Ambrosia artemisiifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823839" start="58052" end="58056" title="ALS resistance" label="ALS-"/>
<link wikidata="Q408154" start="58061" end="58064" title="PPO resistance" label="PPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q24741291" start="58118" end="58133" title="EPSP resistance" label="EPSP resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="58172" end="58179" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q864928" start="58306" end="58319" title="life sciences" label="life sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="58592" end="58616" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q249373" start="58622" end="58662" title="Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory" label="Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480532" start="58692" end="58721" title="University System of Maryland" label="University System of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="58723" end="58750" title="Goddard Space Flight Center" label="Goddard Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="58756" end="58783" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="58789" end="58818" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="58830" end="58876" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967405" start="58889" end="58924" title="National Institute of Mental Health" label="National Institute of Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457886" start="58937" end="58981" title="Walter Reed National Military Medical Center" label="Walter Reed National Military Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="58995" end="59023" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512226" start="59035" end="59066" title="Howard Hughes Medical Institute" label="Howard Hughes Medical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q643341" start="59072" end="59087" title="Celera Genomics" label="Celera Genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439786" start="59101" end="59126" title="J. Craig Venter Institute" label="J. Craig Venter Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q731938" start="59139" end="59150" title="AstraZeneca" label="AstraZeneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335294" start="59161" end="59170" title="MedImmune" label="MedImmune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370757" start="59213" end="59234" title="Emergent BioSolutions" label="Emergent BioSolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007170" start="59271" end="59286" title="anthrax vaccine" label="anthrax vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654747" start="59511" end="59522" title="Harborplace" label="Harborplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000257" start="59528" end="59546" title="Baltimore Aquarium" label="Baltimore Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="59548" end="59560" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141174" start="59577" end="59589" title="Camden Yards" label="Camden Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q687905" start="59608" end="59618" title="Ocean City, Maryland" label="Ocean City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="59712" end="59733" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="59841" end="59850" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858066" start="59876" end="59898" title="Maryland State House" label="state capitol building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148283" start="59904" end="59921" title="Colonial Annapolis Historic District" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781554" start="60042" end="60060" title="Maryland in the American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850527" start="60072" end="60083" title="Battle of Baltimore" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="60156" end="60170" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321360" start="60180" end="60197" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s City, Maryland" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043357" start="60359" end="60389" title="CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield" label="CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103926" start="60424" end="60442" title="UnitedHealth Group" label="UnitedHealth Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011949" start="60550" end="60572" title="all-payer rate setting" label="all-payer rate setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035821" start="60722" end="60731" title="Capitation (healthcare)" label="capitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8469802" start="60794" end="60831" title="Maryland Department of Transportation" label="Maryland Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781521" start="60941" end="60974" title="Maryland Transportation Authority" label="Maryland Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="61067" end="61086" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213801" start="61098" end="61110" title="Interstate 95 in Maryland" label="Interstate95"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="61184" end="61193" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999662" start="61242" end="61257" title="Interstate 495 (Capital Beltway)" label="Capital Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q664332" start="61265" end="61286" title="Woodrow Wilson Bridge" label="Woodrow Wilson Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="61288" end="61292" title="Interstate 68 in Maryland" label="I-68"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213710" start="61351" end="61355" title="Interstate 70 in Maryland" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q755559" start="61481" end="61491" title="Hagerstown, Maryland" label="Hagerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="61496" end="61505" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q94891" start="61522" end="61526" title="Interstate 83 in Maryland" label="I-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="61600" end="61610" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q821105" start="61615" end="61633" title="York, Pennsylvania" label="York, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213745" start="61668" end="61672" title="Interstate 81 in Maryland" label="I-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q94974" start="61721" end="61725" title="Interstate 97" label="I-97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894739" start="61924" end="61953" title="List of auxiliary Interstate Highways" label="auxiliary Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214113" start="62038" end="62043" title="Interstate 695 (Maryland)" label="I-695"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999662" start="62123" end="62128" title="Interstate 495 (Capital Beltway)" label="I-495"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="62167" end="62183" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2213923" start="62184" end="62189" title="Interstate 270 (Maryland)" label="I-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="62230" end="62247" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214185" start="62393" end="62398" title="Interstate 895 (Maryland)" label="I-895"/>
<link wikidata="Q377595" start="62484" end="62500" title="Baltimore Harbor" label="Baltimore Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="62553" end="62562" title="Traffic congestion" label="congested"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480195" start="62577" end="62598" title="Intercounty Connector" label="Intercounty Connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480195" start="62605" end="62610" title="Maryland Route 200" label="MD200"/>
<link wikidata="Q888007" start="62739" end="62753" title="Robert Ehrlich" label="Robert Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q120260" start="62811" end="62831" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214728" start="62852" end="62857" title="Interstate 595 (Maryland)" label="I-595"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897470" start="62871" end="62887" title="unsigned highway" label="unsigned highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214728" start="62904" end="62908" title="U.S. Route 50 in Maryland" label="US50"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214862" start="62909" end="62914" title="U.S. Route 301 in Maryland" label="US301"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="62979" end="63006" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="63033" end="63042" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="63051" end="63064" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="63073" end="63094" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788582" start="63117" end="63130" title="state highway" label="state highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305291" start="63311" end="63312" title="Maryland Route 2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305363" start="63386" end="63387" title="Maryland Route 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455053" start="63389" end="63408" title="Pennsylvania Avenue (Washington, D.C.)" label="Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305390" start="63485" end="63486" title="Maryland Route 5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306043" start="63540" end="63542" title="Maryland Route 32" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306305" start="63544" end="63546" title="Maryland Route 45" label="45"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307206" start="63560" end="63562" title="Maryland Route 97" label="97"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448222" start="63581" end="63584" title="Maryland Route 100" label="100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480202" start="63621" end="63624" title="Maryland Route 210" label="210"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480238" start="63648" end="63651" title="Maryland Route 235" label="235"/>
<link wikidata="Q453188" start="63672" end="63675" title="Maryland Route 295" label="295"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480424" start="63708" end="63711" title="Maryland Route 355" label="355"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480494" start="63762" end="63765" title="Maryland Route 404" label="404"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480680" start="63807" end="63810" title="Maryland Route 650" label="650"/>
<link wikidata="Q94895" start="63887" end="63947" title="Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport" label="Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="64027" end="64044" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="64073" end="64094" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914582" start="64151" end="64161" title="Hagerstown Regional Airport" label="Hagerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404846" start="64166" end="64175" title="Wicomico Regional Airport" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q676576" start="64276" end="64317" title="Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport" label="Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="64322" end="64350" title="Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="64360" end="64377" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655471" start="64383" end="64403" title="College Park Airport" label="College Park Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="64469" end="64482" title="Wilbur Wright" label="Wilbur Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="64540" end="64546" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q481759" start="64580" end="64593" title="Acela Express" label="Acela Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374785" start="64600" end="64612" title="Pennsylvania Station (Baltimore)" label="Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="64616" end="64625" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836843" start="64627" end="64638" title="BWI Rail Station" label="BWI Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006384" start="64640" end="64654" title="New Carrollton (Washington Metro)" label="New Carrollton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666875" start="64660" end="64668" title="Aberdeen (Amtrak station)" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="64679" end="64695" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="64699" end="64705" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="64706" end="64724" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q327022" start="64755" end="64764" title="Rockville, Maryland" label="Rockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="64769" end="64779" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="64783" end="64789" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="64818" end="64825" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q756629" start="64826" end="64841" title="Capitol Limited (Amtrak)" label="Capitol Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972051" start="64848" end="64853" title="WMATA" label="WMATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="64861" end="64870" title="Washington Metro" label="Metrorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="64871" end="64884" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824810" start="64889" end="64897" title="Metrobus (Washington, D.C.)" label="Metrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602914" start="64921" end="64924" title="List of United States rapid transit systems by ridership" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153865" start="64929" end="64932" title="List of United States local bus agencies by ridership" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863801" start="65087" end="65118" title="Maryland Transit Administration" label="Maryland Transit Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8469802" start="65195" end="65232" title="Maryland Department of Transportation" label="Maryland Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333820" start="65459" end="65473" title="Baltimore Light RailLink" label="Light RailLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q805751" start="65478" end="65494" title="Baltimore Metro SubwayLink" label="Metro SubwayLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718408" start="65625" end="65634" title="MTA Maryland bus service" label="local bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153865" start="65648" end="65666" title="List of United States local bus agencies by ridership" label="9th largest system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65698" end="65710" title="Maryland Transit Administration#Commuter bus" label="Commuter Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714458" start="65910" end="65914" title="Maryland Area Rail Commuter" label="MARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570" start="65960" end="65984" title="Washington Union Station" label="Washington Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374785" start="66025" end="66029" title="Baltimore Penn Station" label="Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025819" start="66034" end="66040" title="Camden Station" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q753761" start="66051" end="66061" title="Perryville, Maryland" label="Perryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q472675" start="66063" end="66072" title="Frederick, Maryland" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010194" start="66078" end="66104" title="Martinsburg, West Virginia" label="Martinsburg, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261432" start="66275" end="66286" title="Purple Line (Maryland)" label="Purple Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="66373" end="66376" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715207" start="66378" end="66383" title="Green Line (Washington Metro)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710841" start="66384" end="66390" title="Yellow Line (Washington Metro)" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715683" start="66396" end="66402" title="Orange Line (Washington Metro)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234623" start="66515" end="66537" title="Freight rail transport" label="Freight rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="66568" end="66584" title="Class I railroad" label="Class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="66643" end="66661" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="66681" end="66689" title="rail tracks" label="trackage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="66731" end="66755" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563580" start="66763" end="66772" title="rail yard" label="rail yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675313" start="66823" end="66833" title="Intermodal freight transport" label="intermodal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589245" start="66912" end="66934" title="government of Maryland" label="government of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164205" start="66965" end="66983" title="Maryland Constitution" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67031" end="67048" title="Politics of the United States#Local government" label="state governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="67163" end="67196" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="67264" end="67273" title="executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="67275" end="67286" title="legislative branch" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="67292" end="67300" title="judicial branch" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566065" start="67306" end="67331" title="Maryland General Assembly" label="Maryland General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q165752" start="67351" end="67378" title="Maryland House of Delegates" label="Maryland House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494656" start="67387" end="67402" title="Maryland Senate" label="Maryland Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q693032" start="67404" end="67428" title="Governor of Maryland" label="Maryland&amp;#x27;s governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="67610" end="67618" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="67672" end="67681" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="67693" end="67700" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="67777" end="67786" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570656" start="67885" end="67907" title="United States midterm election" label="midterm-election years"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932596" start="68017" end="68043" title="Maryland District Court" label="District Court of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781282" start="68104" end="68118" title="Maryland Circuit Courts" label="Circuit Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781296" start="68355" end="68382" title="Appellate Court of Maryland" label="Appellate Court of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603882" start="68391" end="68410" title="state supreme court" label="state supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781295" start="68418" end="68443" title="Supreme Court of Maryland" label="Supreme Court of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="68617" end="68627" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="69233" end="69242" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="69307" end="69319" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="69744" end="69762" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225018" start="69795" end="69818" title="Political party strength in Maryland" label="largely been controlled"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="69826" end="69842" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="69958" end="69967" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="70014" end="70030" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="70047" end="70057" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="70059" end="70079" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q488701" start="70081" end="70093" title="Anne Arundel County, Maryland" label="Anne Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q488668" start="70099" end="70117" title="Baltimore County" label="Baltimore counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640988" start="70268" end="70279" title="voting bloc" label="voting bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="70282" end="70299" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="70344" end="70351" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="70421" end="70435" title="Postgraduate education" label="post-graduates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835523" start="70492" end="70508" title="Western Maryland" label="Western Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="70517" end="70530" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="70554" end="70565" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="70653" end="70664" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="70675" end="70685" title="nolo contendere" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="70727" end="70731" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="70776" end="70788" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="70793" end="70797" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="70799" end="70811" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="70884" end="70892" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="70897" end="70901" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="70946" end="70950" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="70992" end="70996" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="70998" end="71008" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="71059" end="71063" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="71065" end="71077" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="71152" end="71163" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q888007" start="71211" end="71225" title="Robert Ehrlich" label="Robert Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627428" start="71337" end="71352" title="Baltimore Mayor" label="Baltimore Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q120260" start="71366" end="71386" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895804" start="71561" end="71574" title="Paul Sarbanes" label="Paul Sarbanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q723295" start="71630" end="71645" title="Benjamin Cardin" label="Benjamin Cardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q331838" start="71686" end="71703" title="Michael S. Steele" label="Michael S. Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892834" start="71991" end="71995" title="2008 United States presidential election in Maryland" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q516515" start="72384" end="72395" title="Steny Hoyer" label="Steny Hoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345779" start="72397" end="72401" title="Maryland&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district" label="MD-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="72406" end="72414" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738431" start="72431" end="72446" title="Majority Leader" label="Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q170018" start="72455" end="72469" title="110th United States Congress" label="110th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170375" start="72474" end="72488" title="111th United States Congress" label="111th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="72496" end="72520" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q488701" start="72682" end="72694" title="Anne Arundel County, Maryland" label="Anne Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="72699" end="72719" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q501319" start="72752" end="72759" title="Charles County, Maryland" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q501277" start="72761" end="72768" title="Calvert County, Maryland" label="Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q511120" start="72774" end="72789" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570120" start="72802" end="72819" title="southern Maryland" label="southern Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="72961" end="72970" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047194" start="72976" end="72980" title="2022 Maryland gubernatorial election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983732" start="72982" end="72991" title="Wes Moore" label="Wes Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781553" start="73053" end="73057" title="2010 Maryland gubernatorial election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731303" start="73080" end="73091" title="Larry Hogan" label="Larry Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="73327" end="73344" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="73374" end="73402" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="73417" end="73436" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="73490" end="73499" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="73503" end="73519" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="73581" end="73596" title="broadcasting" label="broadcast media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044515" start="73614" end="73632" title="Delmarva Peninsula" label="Delmarva Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="73687" end="73699" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="73710" end="73724" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="73775" end="73785" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="73866" end="73869" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692165" start="73885" end="73911" title="Maryland Public Television" label="Maryland Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781499" start="74134" end="74172" title="Maryland State Department of Education" label="Maryland State Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="74200" end="74209" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643464" start="74264" end="74295" title="Superintendent (education)" label="State Superintendent of Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="74321" end="74345" title="Board of education" label="State Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637297" start="74626" end="74650" title="List of school districts in Maryland" label="local Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318286" start="75177" end="75194" title="parochial schools" label="parochial schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="75202" end="75217" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="75219" end="75225" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="75235" end="75256" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="75270" end="75276" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="75630" end="75648" title="Advanced Placement" label="Advanced Placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="76102" end="76126" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q380418" start="76185" end="76198" title="Johns Hopkins" label="Johns Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119470" start="76249" end="76282" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17681492" start="76378" end="76384" title="University of Maryland School of Medicine" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895695" start="76417" end="76428" title="University of Maryland School of Law" label="law centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895108" start="76450" end="76487" title="University of Baltimore School of Law" label="University of Baltimore School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="76722" end="76758" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland, College Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="76842" end="76860" title="land grant college" label="land grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474129" start="76870" end="76887" title="Towson University" label="Towson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="77199" end="77239" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781349" start="77248" end="77281" title="Maryland Institute College of Art" label="Maryland Institute College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480532" start="77501" end="77530" title="University System of Maryland" label="University System of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054905" start="77563" end="77586" title="Morgan State University" label="Morgan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590249" start="77591" end="77626" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s College of Maryland" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s College of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114428" start="77678" end="77730" title="Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences" label="Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="77739" end="77766" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692455" start="77831" end="77867" title="University of Maryland Global Campus" label="University of Maryland Global Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q663625" start="77982" end="78005" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College (Annapolis/Santa Fe)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="78009" end="78018" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564567" start="78023" end="78041" title="Washington College" label="Washington College"/>
<link wikidata="Q755851" start="78045" end="78056" title="Chestertown, Maryland" label="Chestertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923804" start="78194" end="78226" title="Mount St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University" label="Mount St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800835" start="78228" end="78244" title="McDaniel College" label="McDaniel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897438" start="78291" end="78303" title="Hood College" label="Hood College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615536" start="78305" end="78325" title="Stevenson University" label="Stevenson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399470" start="78367" end="78393" title="Loyola University Maryland" label="Loyola University Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134258" start="78399" end="78414" title="Goucher College" label="Goucher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264155" start="78941" end="78975" title="Anne Arundel County Public Library" label="Anne Arundel County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852845" start="78978" end="79009" title="Baltimore County Public Library" label="Baltimore County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056024" start="79012" end="79039" title="Cecil County Public Library" label="Cecil County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q69478541" start="79042" end="79066" title="Enoch Pratt Free Library" label="Enoch Pratt Free Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994815" start="79103" end="79132" title="Harford County Public Library" label="Harford County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152010" start="79135" end="79163" title="Howard County Public Library" label="Howard County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q23136604" start="79166" end="79200" title="Montgomery County Public Libraries" label="Montgomery County Public Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085883" start="79203" end="79254" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County Memorial Library System" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County Memorial Library System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="79557" end="79581" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="79610" end="79626" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="79630" end="79639" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="79648" end="79669" title="Washington Commanders" label="Washington Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811669" start="79673" end="79681" title="Landover, Maryland" label="Landover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984507" start="79687" end="79702" title="History of the Baltimore Colts" label="Baltimore Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="79771" end="79783" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="79790" end="79807" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="79829" end="79850" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="79866" end="79888" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q204627" start="79896" end="79915" title="Washington Capitals" label="Washington Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="79924" end="79955" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="79963" end="79981" title="Washington Wizards" label="Washington Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223240" start="80088" end="80105" title="Capital One Arena" label="Capital One Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="80108" end="80130" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518575" start="80150" end="80168" title="Maryland Terrapins" label="Maryland Terrapins"/>
<link wikidata="Q731168" start="80273" end="80287" title="Cal Ripken Jr." label="Cal Ripken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="80292" end="80301" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="80318" end="80335" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q716029" start="80468" end="80481" title="Johnny Unitas" label="Johnny Unitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q521270" start="80483" end="80498" title="Brooks Robinson" label="Brooks Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317158" start="80500" end="80514" title="Frank Robinson" label="Frank Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44428" start="80516" end="80525" title="Ray Lewis" label="Ray Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39562" start="80527" end="80541" title="Michael Phelps" label="Michael Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="80543" end="80554" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689186" start="80556" end="80566" title="Jim Parker (American football)" label="Jim Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q456776" start="80572" end="80582" title="Wes Unseld" label="Wes Unseld"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="80660" end="80681" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053079" start="80693" end="80720" title="independent league baseball" label="independent league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852786" start="80731" end="80746" title="Baltimore Blast (current)" label="Baltimore Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856617" start="80931" end="80947" title="Preakness Stakes" label="Preakness Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194656" start="80978" end="80997" title="Pimlico Race Course" label="Pimlico Race Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496446" start="81012" end="81035" title="Baltimore Stallions" label="The Baltimore Stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="81073" end="81076" title="Canadian Football League" label="CFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088876" start="81110" end="81136" title="Congressional Country Club" label="Congressional Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="81179" end="81188" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="81195" end="81211" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413053" start="81267" end="81275" title="jousting" label="jousting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="81315" end="81323" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468875" start="81329" end="81359" title="National Lacrosse Hall of Fame" label="National Lacrosse Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573698" start="81374" end="81390" title="Sparks, Maryland" label="Sparks, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875900" start="81398" end="81410" title="US Lacrosse" label="USA Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81486" end="81493" title="Walking#Leisure activity" label="walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q877578" start="81707" end="81711" title="Bong County" label="Bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q870138" start="81716" end="81733" title="Maryland County" label="Maryland Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="81738" end="81745" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="81748" end="81755" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="81757" end="81763" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739676" start="81773" end="81784" title="Cross River State" label="Cross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q836654" start="81789" end="81799" title="Ondo State" label="Ondo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="81802" end="81809" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="81812" end="81825" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="81827" end="81839" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10317549" start="81842" end="81855" title="Medan Marelan" label="Medan Marelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="81857" end="81866" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247788" start="81884" end="81918" title="Index of Maryland-related articles" label="Index of Maryland-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112350" start="81921" end="81940" title="Outline of Maryland" label="Outline of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632597" start="81943" end="81971" title="List of people from Maryland" label="List of people from Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536574" start="81974" end="81998" title="USS Maryland" label="USS &amp;quot;Maryland&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18859" wikidata="Q1166" url="?curid=18859" title="Michigan">
<text>Michigan ( ) is a peninsular state in the Great Lakes region of the Upper Midwestern United States. It shares water and land boundaries with Minnesota to the northwest, Wisconsin to the west, Indiana and Illinois to the southwest, Ohio to the southeast, and the Canadian province of Ontario to the east, northeast and north. With a population of 10.14 million and an area of , Michigan is the 10th-largest state by population, the 11th-largest by area, and the largest by total area east of the Mississippi River. The state capital is Lansing, while its most populous city is Detroit. The Metro Detroit region in Southeast Michigan is among the nation&#x27;s most populous and largest metropolitan economies. Other important metropolitan areas include Grand Rapids, Flint, Ann Arbor, Kalamazoo, the Tri-Cities, and Muskegon. 

Michigan consists of two peninsulas: the heavily forested Upper Peninsula (commonly called &quot;the U.P.&quot;), which juts eastward from northern Wisconsin, and the more populated Lower Peninsula, stretching north from Ohio and Indiana. The peninsulas are separated by the Straits of Mackinac, which connects Lake Michigan and Lake Huron, and are linked by the 5-mile-long Mackinac Bridge along Interstate 75. Bordering four of the five Great Lakes and Lake St. Clair, Michigan has the longest freshwater coastline of any U.S. political subdivision, measuring 3,288 miles. The state ranks second behind Alaska in water coverage by square miles and first in percentage, with approximately 42%, and it also contains 64,980 inland lakes and ponds.

In the 17th century, French explorers claimed the Great Lakes region for New France, though the area had largely been inhabited for thousands of years by Indigenous peoples such as the Ojibwe, Odawa, Potawatomi, and Wyandot. French settlers and Métis established forts and settlements. Some people contend that the region’s name is derived from the Ojibwe word ᒥᓯᑲᒥ (mishigami), meaning &quot;large water&quot; or &quot;large lake&quot;. While others say that it comes from the Mishiiken Tribe of Mackinac Island, also called Michinemackinawgo by Ottawa historian Andrew Blackbird , whose surrounding lands were referred to as Mishiiken-imakinakom, later shortened to Michilimackinac. After France&#x27;s defeat in the French and Indian War in 1762, the area came under British control and later the U.S. following the Treaty of Paris (1783), though control remained disputed with Indigenous tribes until treaties between 1795 and 1842. The area was part of the larger Northwest Territory; the Michigan Territory was organized in 1805. Michigan was admitted as the 26th state on January 26, 1837, entering as a free state and quickly developing into an industrial and trade hub that attracted European immigrants, particularly from Finland, Macedonia, and the Netherlands. In the 1930s, migration from Appalachia and the Great Migration of Black Southerners further shaped the state, especially in Metro Detroit.

Michigan has a diversified economy with a gross state product of $711.481billion as of Q3 2024, ranking 14th among the 50 states. Although the state has developed a diverse economy, in the early 20th century it became widely known as the center of the U.S. automotive industry, which developed as a major national economic force. It is home to the country&#x27;s three major automobile companies (whose headquarters are all in Metro Detroit). Once exploited for logging and mining, today the sparsely populated Upper Peninsula is important for tourism because of its abundance of natural resources. The Lower Peninsula is a center of manufacturing, forestry, agriculture, services, and high-tech industry.

==History==

When the first European explorers arrived, the most populous tribes were the Algonquian peoples, which include the Anishinaabe groups of Ojibwe, Odaawaa/Odawa (Ottawa), and the Boodewaadamii/Bodéwadmi (Potawatomi). The three nations coexisted peacefully as part of a loose confederation called the Council of Three Fires. The Ojibwe, whose numbers are estimated to have been at least 35,000, were the largest.

The Ojibwe Indians (also known as Chippewa in the U.S.), an Anishinaabe tribe, were established in Michigan&#x27;s Upper Peninsula and northern and central Michigan. Bands also inhabited Ontario and southern Manitoba, Canada; and northern Wisconsin, and northern and north-central Minnesota. The Ottawa Indians lived primarily south of the Straits of Mackinac in northern, western, and southern Michigan, but also in southern Ontario, northern Ohio, and eastern Wisconsin. The Potawatomi were in southern and western Michigan, in addition to northern and central Indiana, northern Illinois, southern Wisconsin, and southern Ontario. Other Algonquian tribes in Michigan, in the south and east, were the Mascouten, the Menominee, the Miami, the Sac (or Sauk), and the Meskwaki (Fox). The Wyandot were an Iroquoian-speaking people in this area; they were historically known as the Huron by the French, and were the historical adversaries of the Iroquois Confederation.

===17th century===


French &quot;voyageurs&quot; and &quot;coureurs des bois&quot; explored and settled in Michigan in the 17th century. The first Europeans to reach what became Michigan were those of Étienne Brûlé&#x27;s expedition in 1622. The first permanent European settlement was founded in 1668 on the site where Père Jacques Marquette established Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, as a base for Catholic missions. Missionaries in 1671–75 founded outlying stations at Saint Ignace and Marquette. Jesuit missionaries were well received by the area&#x27;s Indian populations, with few difficulties or hostilities. In 1679, Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle built Fort Miami at present-day St. Joseph. In 1691, the French established a trading post and Fort St. Joseph along the St. Joseph River at the present-day city of Niles.

===18th century===
In 1701, French explorer and army officer Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac founded Fort Pontchartrain du Détroit or &quot;Fort Pontchartrain on-the-Strait&quot; on the strait, known as the Detroit River, between lakes Saint Clair and Erie. Cadillac had convinced King Louis XIV&#x27;s chief minister, Louis Phélypeaux, Comte de Pontchartrain, that a permanent community there would strengthen French control over the upper Great Lakes and discourage British aspirations.

The hundred soldiers and workers who accompanied Cadillac built a fort enclosing one arpent (about , the equivalent of just under per side) and named it Fort Pontchartrain. Cadillac&#x27;s wife, Marie Thérèse Guyon, soon moved to Detroit, becoming one of the first European women to settle in what was considered the wilderness of Michigan. The town quickly became a major fur-trading and shipping post. The &quot;Église de Saint-Anne&quot; (Catholic Church of Saint Anne) was founded the same year. While the original building does not survive, the congregation remains active. Cadillac later departed to serve as the French governor of Louisiana from 1710 to 1716. French attempts to consolidate the fur trade led to the Fox Wars, in which the Meskwaki (Fox) and their allies fought the French and their Native allies.

At the same time, the French strengthened Fort Michilimackinac at the Straits of Mackinac to better control their lucrative fur-trading empire. By the mid-18th century, the French also occupied forts at present-day Niles and Sault Ste. Marie, though most of the rest of the region remained unsettled by Europeans. France offered free land to attract families to Detroit, which grew to 800 people in 1765. It was the largest city between Montreal and New Orleans. French settlers also established small farms south of the Detroit River opposite the fort, near a Jesuit mission and Huron village.


From 1660 until the end of French rule, Michigan was part of the Royal Province of New France. In 1760, Montreal fell to the British forces, ending the French and Indian War (1754–1763), the North American front of the Seven Years&#x27; War in Europe. Under the 1763 Treaty of Paris, Michigan and the rest of New France east of the Mississippi River were ceded by defeated France to Great Britain. After the Quebec Act was passed in 1774, Michigan became part of the British Province of Quebec. By 1778, Detroit&#x27;s population reached 2,144 and it was the third-largest city in Quebec province.

During the American Revolutionary War, Detroit was an important British supply center. Most of the inhabitants were French-Canadians or American Indians, many of whom had been allied with the French because of long trading ties. Because of imprecise cartography and unclear language defining the boundaries in the 1783 Treaty of Paris, the British retained control of Detroit and Michigan after the American Revolution. When Quebec split into Lower and Upper Canada in 1791, Michigan was part of Kent County, Upper Canada. It held its first democratic elections in August 1792 to send delegates to the new provincial parliament at Newark (now Niagara-on-the-Lake).

Under terms negotiated in the 1794 Jay Treaty, Britain withdrew from Detroit and Michilimackinac in 1796. It retained control of territory east and south of the Detroit River, which are now included in Ontario, Canada. Questions remained over the boundary for many years, and the United States did not have uncontested control of the Upper Peninsula and Drummond Island until 1818 and 1847, respectively.

===19th century===
During the War of 1812, the United States forces at Fort Detroit surrendered Michigan Territory (effectively consisting of Detroit and the surrounding area) after a nearly bloodless siege in 1812. A U.S. attempt to retake Detroit resulted in a severe American defeat in the River Raisin Massacre. This battle, still ranked as the bloodiest ever fought in the state, had the highest number of American casualties of any battle of the war.

Michigan was recaptured by the Americans in 1813 after the Battle of Lake Erie. They used Michigan as a base to launch an invasion of Canada, which culminated in the Battle of the Thames. But the more northern areas of Michigan were held by the British until the peace treaty restored the old boundaries. A number of forts, including Fort Wayne, were built by the United States in Michigan during the 19th century out of fears of renewed fighting with Britain.

&quot;[[Walk-in-the-Water]]&quot; steamboat at Detroit, 1820
Michigan Territory governor and judges established the University of Michigan in 1817, as the Catholepistemiad, or the University of Michigania.

The population grew slowly until the opening in 1825 of the Erie Canal through the Mohawk Valley in New York, connecting the Great Lakes to the Hudson River and New York City. The new route attracted a large influx of settlers to the Michigan territory. They worked as farmers, lumbermen, shipbuilders, and merchants and shipped out grain, lumber, and iron ore. By the 1830s, Michigan had 30,000 residents, more than enough to apply and qualify for statehood.

On November 1, 1935, the U.S. Post Office issued a commemorative 3-cent stamp celebrating the 100th anniversary of Michigan statehood. Michigan&#x27;s statehood, however, wasn&#x27;t officially established until January 26, 1837, but since the campaign for statehood actually began in 1835, Michigan chose to hold its centennial celebration in 1935, the year the stamp was first issued.

A constitutional convention of assent was held to lead the territory to statehood. In October 1835 the people approved the constitution of 1835, thereby forming a state government. Congressional recognition was delayed pending resolution of a boundary dispute with Ohio known as the Toledo War. Congress awarded the &quot;Toledo Strip&quot; to Ohio. Michigan received the western part of the Upper Peninsula as a concession and formally entered the Union as a free state on January 26, 1837. The Upper Peninsula proved to be a rich source of lumber, iron, and copper. Michigan led the nation in lumber production from the 1850s to the 1880s. Railroads became a major engine of growth from the 1850s onward, with Detroit the chief hub.

A second wave of French-Canadian immigrants settled in Michigan during the late 19th to early 20th century, working in lumbering areas in counties on the Lake Huron side of the Lower Peninsula, such as the Saginaw Valley, Alpena, and Cheboygan counties, as well as throughout the Upper Peninsula, with large concentrations in Escanaba and the Keweenaw Peninsula. 

The first statewide meeting of the Republican Party took place on July 6, 1854, in Jackson, Michigan, where the party adopted its platform. The state was predominantly Republican until the 1930s, reflecting the political continuity of migrants from across the Northern Tier of New England and New York. Michigan made a significant contribution to the Union in the American Civil War and sent more than forty regiments of volunteers to the federal armies.

Michigan modernized and expanded its system of education in this period. The Michigan State Normal School, now Eastern Michigan University, was founded in 1849, for the training of teachers. It was the fourth oldest normal school in the United States and the first U.S. normal school outside New England. In 1899, the Michigan State Normal School became the first normal school in the nation to offer a four-year curriculum. Michigan Agricultural College (1855), now Michigan State University in East Lansing, was founded as the first agricultural college in the nation. Many private colleges were founded as well, and the smaller cities established high schools late in the century.

=== 20th–21st centuries ===

Michigan&#x27;s economy underwent a transformation at the turn of the 20th century. Many individuals, including Ransom E. Olds, John and Horace Dodge, Henry Leland, David Dunbar Buick, Henry Joy, Charles King, and Henry Ford, provided the concentration of engineering know-how and technological enthusiasm to develop the automotive industry. Ford&#x27;s development of the moving assembly line in Highland Park marked a new era in transportation. Like the steamship and railroad, mass production of automobiles was a far-reaching development. More than the forms of public transportation, the affordable automobile transformed private life. Automobile production became the major industry of Detroit and Michigan, and permanently altered the socioeconomic life of the United States and much of the world.

With the growth, the auto industry created jobs in Detroit that attracted immigrants from Europe and migrants from across the United States, including both blacks and whites from the rural South. By 1920, Detroit was the fourth-largest city in the U.S.. Residential housing was in short supply, and it took years for the market to catch up with the population boom. By the 1930s, so many immigrants had arrived that more than 30 languages were spoken in the public schools, and ethnic communities celebrated in annual heritage festivals. Over the years immigrants and migrants contributed greatly to Detroit&#x27;s diverse urban culture, including popular music trends. The influential Motown Sound of the 1960s was led by a variety of individual singers and groups.

Grand Rapids, the second-largest city in Michigan also became an important center of manufacturing. Since 1838, the city has been noted for its furniture industry. In the 21st century, it is home to five of the world&#x27;s leading office furniture companies. Grand Rapids is home to a number of major companies including Steelcase, Amway, and Meijer. Grand Rapids is also an important center for GE Aviation Systems.

Michigan held its first United States presidential primary election in 1910. With its rapid growth in industry, it was an important center of industry-wide union organizing, such as the rise of the United Auto Workers.

In 1920 WWJ (AM) in Detroit became the first radio station in the United States to regularly broadcast commercial programs. Throughout that decade, some of the country&#x27;s largest and most ornate skyscrapers were built in the city. Particularly noteworthy are the Fisher Building, Cadillac Place, and the Guardian Building, each of which has been designated as a National Historic Landmark (NHL).
In 1927 a school bombing took place in Clinton County. The Bath School disaster resulted in the deaths of 38 schoolchildren and constitutes the deadliest mass murder in a school in U.S. history.

Michigan converted much of its manufacturing to satisfy defense needs during World War II; it manufactured 10.9% of the United States military armaments produced during the war, ranking second (behind New York) among the 48 states.

Detroit continued to expand through the 1950s, at one point doubling its population in a decade. After World War II, housing was developed in suburban areas outside city cores to meet demand for residences. The federal government subsidized the construction of interstate highways, which were intended to strengthen military access, but also allowed commuters and business traffic to travel the region more easily. Since 1960, modern advances in the auto industry have led to increased automation, high-tech industry, and increased suburban growth. Longstanding tensions in Detroit culminated in the Twelfth Street riot in July 1967.

During the late 1970s and the early 1980s, increasing fuel costs and other factors made significantly more global competition and recession among families. Michigan lost a significant amount of population due to global competition and the dramatic unavailability of manufacturing jobs. Meanwhile, Michigan had increased use of technology, specifically when the IBM Personal Computer started selling in the state, in which became mostly used at work.

Michigan became the leading auto-producing state in the U.S., with the industry primarily located throughout the Midwestern United States; Ontario, Canada; and the Southern United States. With almost ten million residents in 2010, Michigan is a large and influential state, ranking tenth in population among the fifty states. Detroit is the centrally located metropolitan area of the Great Lakes megalopolis and the second-largest metropolitan area in the U.S. (after Chicago) linking the Great Lakes system.

The Metro Detroit area in Southeast Michigan is the state&#x27;s largest metropolitan area (roughly 50% of the population resides there) and the eleventh largest in the United States. The Grand Rapids metropolitan area in Western Michigan is the state&#x27;s fastest-growing metro area, with more than 1.3 million residents .

==Geography==


Michigan consists of two peninsulas separated by the Straits of Mackinac. The 45th parallel north runs through the state, marked by highway signs and the Polar-Equator Trail— along a line including Mission Point Light near Traverse City, the towns of Gaylord and Alpena in the Lower Peninsula and Menominee in the Upper Peninsula. With the exception of two tiny areas drained by the Mississippi River by way of the Wisconsin River in the Upper Peninsula and by way of the Kankakee-Illinois River in the Lower Peninsula, Michigan is drained by the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence watershed and is the only state with the majority of its land thus drained. No point in the state is more than from a natural water source or more than from a Great Lakes shoreline.

The Great Lakes that border Michigan from east to west are Lake Erie, Lake Huron, Lake Michigan and Lake Superior. The state is bounded on the south by the states of Ohio and Indiana, sharing land and water boundaries with both. Michigan&#x27;s western boundaries are almost entirely water boundaries, from south to north, with Illinois and Wisconsin in Lake Michigan; then a land boundary with Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula, that is principally demarcated by the Menominee and Montreal Rivers; then water boundaries again, in Lake Superior, with Wisconsin and Minnesota to the west, capped around by the Canadian province of Ontario to the north and east.

The heavily forested Upper Peninsula is relatively mountainous in the west. The Porcupine Mountains, which are part of one of the oldest mountain chains in the world, rise to an altitude of almost above sea level and form the watershed between the streams flowing into Lake Superior and Lake Michigan. The surface on either side of this range is rugged. The state&#x27;s highest point, in the Huron Mountains northwest of Marquette, is Mount Arvon at . The peninsula is as large as Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island combined but has fewer than 330,000 inhabitants. The people are sometimes called &quot;Yoopers&quot; (from &quot;U.P.&#x27;ers&quot;), and their speech (the &quot;Yooper dialect&quot;) has been heavily influenced by the numerous Scandinavian and Canadian immigrants who settled the area during the lumbering and mining boom of the late 19th century.



The Lower Peninsula is shaped like a mitten and many residents hold up a hand to depict where they are from. It is long from north to south and from east to west and occupies nearly two-thirds of the state&#x27;s land area. The surface of the peninsula is generally level, broken by conical hills and glacial moraines usually not more than a few hundred feet tall. It is divided by a low water divide running north and south. The larger portion of the state is on the west of this and gradually slopes toward Lake Michigan. The highest point in the Lower Peninsula is either Briar Hill at , or one of several points nearby in the vicinity of Cadillac. The lowest point is the surface of Lake Erie at .

The geographic orientation of Michigan&#x27;s peninsulas makes for a long distance between the ends of the state. Ironwood, in the far western Upper Peninsula, lies by highway from Lambertville in the Lower Peninsula&#x27;s southeastern corner. The geographic isolation of the Upper Peninsula from Michigan&#x27;s political and population centers makes the region culturally and economically distinct. Frequent attempts to establish the Upper Peninsula as its own state have failed to gain traction. 

A feature of Michigan that gives it the distinct shape of a mitten is the Thumb, which projects into Lake Huron, forming Saginaw Bay. Other notable peninsulas of Michigan include the Keweenaw Peninsula, which projects northeasterly into Lake Superior from the Upper Peninsula and largely comprising Michigan&#x27;s Copper Country region, and the Leelanau Peninsula, projecting from the Lower Peninsula into Lake Michigan, forming Michigan&#x27;s &quot;little finger&quot;.

Numerous lakes and marshes mark both peninsulas, and the coast is much indented. Keweenaw Bay, Whitefish Bay, and the Big and Little Bays De Noc are the principal indentations on the Upper Peninsula. The Grand and Little Traverse, Thunder, and Saginaw bays indent the Lower Peninsula. Michigan has the second longest shoreline of any state—, including of island shoreline.

The state has numerous large islands, the principal ones being the North Manitou and South Manitou, Beaver, and Fox groups in Lake Michigan; Isle Royale and Grande Isle in Lake Superior; Marquette, Bois Blanc, and Mackinac islands in Lake Huron; and Neebish, Sugar, and Drummond islands in St. Mary&#x27;s River. Michigan has about 150 lighthouses, the most of any U.S. state. The first lighthouses in Michigan were built between 1818 and 1822. They were built to project light at night and to serve as a landmark during the day to safely guide the passenger ships and freighters traveling the Great Lakes (see: lighthouses in the United States).

The state&#x27;s rivers are generally small, short and shallow, and few are navigable. The principal ones include the Detroit River, St. Marys River, and St. Clair River which connect the Great Lakes; the Au Sable, Cheboygan, and Saginaw, which flow into Lake Huron; the Ontonagon, and Tahquamenon, which flow into Lake Superior; and the St. Joseph, Kalamazoo, Grand, Muskegon, Manistee, and Escanaba, which flow into Lake Michigan. The state has 11,037 inland lakes—totaling of inland water—in addition to of Great Lakes waters. No point in Michigan is more than from an inland lake or more than from one of the Great Lakes.

The state is home to several areas maintained by the National Park Service including: Isle Royale National Park, in Lake Superior, about southeast of Thunder Bay, Ontario. Other national protected areas in the state include: Keweenaw National Historical Park, Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore, Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore, Huron National Forest, Manistee National Forest, Hiawatha National Forest, Ottawa National Forest and Father Marquette National Memorial. The largest section of the North Country National Scenic Trail passes through Michigan.

With 78 state parks, 19 state recreation areas, and six state forests, Michigan has the largest state park and state forest system of any state.

===Climate===


Michigan has a continental climate with two distinct regions. The southern and central parts of the Lower Peninsula (south of Saginaw Bay and from the Grand Rapids area southward) have a warmer climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Dfa&quot;) with hot summers and cold winters. The northern part of the Lower Peninsula and the entire Upper Peninsula has a more severe climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;), with warm, but shorter summers and longer, cold to very cold winters. Some parts of the state average high temperatures below freezing from December through February, and into early March in the far northern parts. During the winter through the middle of February, the state is frequently subjected to heavy lake-effect snow. The state averages from of precipitation annually; however, some areas in the northern lower peninsula and the upper peninsula average almost of snowfall per year. Michigan&#x27;s highest recorded temperature is at Mio on July 13, 1936, and the coldest recorded temperature is at Vanderbilt on February 9, 1934.

The state averages 30 days of thunderstorm activity per year. These can be severe, especially in the southern part of the state. The state averages 17 tornadoes per year, which are more common in the state&#x27;s extreme southern section. Portions of the southern border have been almost as vulnerable historically as states further west and in Tornado Alley. For this reason, many communities in the very southern portions of the state have tornado sirens to warn residents of approaching tornadoes. Farther north, in Central Michigan, Northern Michigan, and the Upper Peninsula, tornadoes are rare.

===Geology===

The geological formation of the state is greatly varied, with the Michigan Basin being the most major formation. Primary boulders are found over the entire surface of the Upper Peninsula (being principally of primitive origin), while Secondary deposits cover the entire Lower Peninsula. The Upper Peninsula exhibits Lower Silurian sandstones, limestones, copper and iron bearing rocks, corresponding to the Huronian system of Canada. The central portion of the Lower Peninsula contains coal measures and rocks of the Pennsylvanian period. Devonian and sub-Carboniferous deposits are scattered over the entire state.

Michigan rarely experiences earthquakes, and those that it does experience are generally smaller ones that do not cause significant damage. A 4.6-magnitude earthquake struck in August 1947. More recently, a 4.2-magnitude earthquake occurred on Saturday, May 2, 2015, shortly after noon, about five miles south of Galesburg, Michigan (9 miles southeast of Kalamazoo) in central Michigan, about 140 miles west of Detroit, according to the Colorado-based U.S. Geological Survey&#x27;s National Earthquake Information Center. No major damage or injuries were reported, according to then-Governor Rick Snyder&#x27;s office.

=== Administrative divisions ===


State government is decentralized among three tiers—statewide, county and township. Counties are administrative divisions of the state, and townships are administrative divisions of a county. Both of them exercise state government authority, localized to meet the particular needs of their jurisdictions, as provided by state law. There are 83 counties in Michigan.

Cities, state universities, and villages are vested with home rule powers of varying degrees. Home rule cities can generally do anything not prohibited by law. The fifteen state universities have broad power and can do anything within the parameters of their status as educational institutions that is not prohibited by the state constitution. Villages, by contrast, have limited home rule and are not completely autonomous from the county and township in which they are located.

There are two types of township in Michigan: &quot;general law&quot; township and &quot;charter&quot;. Charter township status was created by the Legislature in 1947 and grants additional powers and stream-lined administration in order to provide greater protection against annexation by a city. , there were 127 charter townships in Michigan. In general, charter townships have many of the same powers as a city but without the same level of obligations. For example, a charter township can have its own fire department, water and sewer department, police department, and so on—just like a city—but it is not &quot;required&quot; to have those things, whereas cities &quot;must&quot; provide those services. Charter townships can opt to use county-wide services instead, such as deputies from the county sheriff&#x27;s office instead of a home-based force of ordinance officers.

==Demographics==

Since 1800 U.S. census, Michigan has experienced relatively positive and stable population growth trends; beginning with a population of 3,757, the 2010 census recorded 9,883,635 residents. At the 2020 United States census, its population was 10,077,331, an increase of 2.03% since 2010&#x27;s tabulation. According to the United States Census Bureau, it is the third-most populous state in the Midwest and its East North Central subregion, behind Ohio and Illinois.

The center of population of Michigan is in Shiawassee County, in the southeastern corner of the civil township of Bennington, which is northwest of the village of Morrice.

According to the American Immigration Council in 2019, an estimated 6.8% of Michiganders were immigrants, while 3.8% were native-born U.S. citizens with at least one immigrant parent. Numbering approximately 678,255 according to the 2019 survey, the majority of Michigander immigrants came from Mexico (11.5%), India (11.3%), Iraq (7.5%), China (5.3%), and Canada (5.3%); the primary occupations of its immigrants were technology, agriculture, and healthcare. Among its immigrant cohort, there were 108,105 undocumented immigrants, making up 15.9% of the total immigrant population.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 8,206 homeless people in Michigan.

=== Race and ethnicity ===
Since colonial European and American settlement, the majority of Michigan&#x27;s population has been predominantly non-Hispanic or non-Latino white; Americans of European descent live throughout every county in the state, and most of Metro Detroit. Large European American groups include those of German, British, Irish, Polish and Belgian ancestry. Scandinavian and Finnish Americans have a notable presence in the Upper Peninsula. Western Michigan is known for its Dutch heritage, especially in Holland and metropolitan Grand Rapids.

Black and African Americans—coming to Detroit and other northern cities in the Great Migration of the early 20th century—have formed a majority of the population in Detroit and other cities including Flint and Benton Harbor. Since the 2021 census estimates—while Detroit was still the largest city in Michigan with a majority black population—it was no longer the largest black-majority city in the U.S., citing crime and higher-paying jobs given to whites.

, about 300,000 people in Southeastern Michigan trace their descent from the Middle East and Asia. Dearborn has a sizeable Arab American community, with many Assyrians, and Lebanese who immigrated for jobs in the auto industry in the 1920s, along with more recent Yemenis and Iraqis. , almost 8,000 Hmong people lived in the state of Michigan, about double their 1999 presence in the state. Most lived in northeastern Detroit, but they had been increasingly moving to Pontiac and Warren. By 2015, the number of Hmong in the Detroit city limits had significantly declined. Lansing hosts a statewide Hmong New Year Festival. The Hmong community also had a prominent portrayal in the 2008 film &quot;Gran Torino&quot;, which was set in Detroit.

, 80% of Michigan&#x27;s Japanese population lived in the counties of Macomb, Oakland, Washtenaw, and Wayne in the Detroit and Ann Arbor areas. , the largest Japanese national population is in Novi, with 2,666 Japanese residents, and the next largest populations are respectively in Ann Arbor, West Bloomfield Township, Farmington Hills, and Battle Creek. The state has 481 Japanese employment facilities providing 35,554 local jobs. 391 of them are in Southeast Michigan, providing 20,816 jobs, and the 90 in other regions in the state provide 14,738 jobs. The Japanese Direct Investment Survey of the Consulate-General of Japan, Detroit stated more than 2,208 additional Japanese residents were employed in the State of Michigan , than in 2011. During the 1990s, the Japanese population of Michigan experienced an increase, and many Japanese people with children moved to particular areas for their proximity to Japanese grocery stores and high-performing schools.

===Languages===

In 2010, about 91.11% (8,507,947) of Michigan residents age five and older spoke only English at home, while 2.93% (273,981) spoke Spanish, 1.04% (97,559) Arabic, 0.44% (41,189) German, 0.36% (33,648) Chinese (which includes Mandarin), 0.31% (28,891) French, 0.29% (27,019) Polish, and Syriac languages (such as Modern Aramaic and Northeastern Neo-Aramaic) was spoken as a main language by 0.25% (23,420) of the population over the age of five. In total, 8.89% (830,281) of Michigan&#x27;s population age five and older spoke a mother language other than English. Since 2021, 90.1% of residents aged five and older spoke only English at home, and Spanish was the second-most spoken language with 2.9% of the population speaking it.

===Religion===

Following British and French colonization of the region surrounding Michigan, Christianity became the dominant religion, with Roman Catholicism historically being the largest single Christian group for the state. Until the 19th century, the Roman Catholic Church was the only organized religious group in Michigan, reflecting the territory&#x27;s French colonial roots. Detroit&#x27;s St. Anne&#x27;s parish, established in 1701 by Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac, is the second-oldest Roman Catholic parish in the United States. On March 8, 1833, the Holy See formally established a diocese in the Michigan territory, which included all of Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas east of the Mississippi River. When Michigan became a state in 1837, the boundary of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Detroit was redrawn to coincide with that of the state; the other dioceses were later carved out from the Detroit Diocese but remain part of the Ecclesiastical Province of Detroit. Several Native American religions have been practiced in Michigan. 

In 2020, there were 1,492,732 adherents of Roman Catholicism. There&#x27;s also a significant Independent Catholic presence in Metro Detroit, including the Ecumenical Catholic Church of Christ established by Archbishop Karl Rodig; the see of this church operates in a former Roman Catholic parish church.

With the introduction of Protestantism to the state, it began to form the largest collective Christian group. In 2010, the Association of Religion Data Archives reported the largest Protestant denomination was the United Methodist Church with 228,521 adherents; followed by the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod with 219,618, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 120,598 adherents. The Christian Reformed Church in North America had almost 100,000 members and more than 230 congregations in Michigan. The Reformed Church in America had 76,000 members and 154 congregations in the state. By the 2020 study, non- and inter-denominational Protestant churches formed the largest Protestant group in Michigan, numbering 508,904. The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod grew to become the second-largest single Christian denomination, and United Methodists declined to being the third-largest. The Lutheran Protestant tradition was introduced by German and Scandinavian immigrants. Altogether, Baptists numbered 321,581 between the National Missionary Baptists, National Baptists, American Baptists, Southern Baptists, National Baptists of America, Progressive National Baptists, and Full Gospel Baptists; black Baptists formed the largest constituency. In West Michigan, Dutch immigrants fled from the specter of religious persecution and famine in the Netherlands around 1850 and settled in and around what is now Holland, Michigan, establishing a &quot;colony&quot; on American soil that fervently held onto Calvinist doctrine that established a significant presence of Reformed churches.

In the same 2010 survey, Jewish adherents in the state of Michigan were estimated at 44,382, and Muslims at 120,351. The first Jewish synagogue in the state was Temple Beth El, founded by twelve German Jewish families in Detroit in 1850. Islam was introduced by immigrants from the Near East during the 20th century. Michigan is home to the largest mosque in North America, the Islamic Center of America in Dearborn. Battle Creek, Michigan, is also the birthplace of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, which was founded on May 21, 1863.

==Economy==


In 2022, 3,939,076 people in Michigan were employed at 227,870 establishments, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

The U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated Michigan&#x27;s Q3 2024 gross state product to be $711.481 billion, ranking 14th out of the 50 states. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, , the state&#x27;s seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was estimated at 4.8%.

Products and services include automobiles, food products, information technology, aerospace, military equipment, furniture, and mining of copper and iron ore. Michigan is the third-largest grower of Christmas trees with of land dedicated to Christmas tree farming in 2007. The beverage Vernors Ginger Ale was invented in Michigan in 1866, sharing the title of oldest soft drink with Hires Root Beer. Faygo was founded in Detroit on November 4, 1907. Two of the top four pizza chains were founded in Michigan and are headquartered there: Domino&#x27;s Pizza by Tom Monaghan and Little Caesars Pizza by Mike Ilitch. Michigan became the 24th right-to-work state in the U.S. in 2012, however, in 2023 this law was repealed.

Since 2009, GM, Ford and Chrysler have managed a significant reorganization of their benefit funds structure after a volatile stock market which followed the September 11 attacks and early 2000s recession impacted their respective U.S. pension and benefit funds (OPEB). General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler reached agreements with the United Auto Workers Union to transfer the liabilities for their respective health care and benefit funds to a 501(c)(9) Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association (VEBA). Manufacturing in the state grew 6.6% from 2001 to 2006, but the high speculative price of oil became a factor for the U.S. auto industry during the economic crisis of 2008 impacting industry revenues. In 2009, GM and Chrysler emerged from Chapter 11 restructurings with financing provided in part by the U.S. and Canadian governments. GM began its initial public offering (IPO) of stock in 2010. For 2010, the Big Three domestic automakers have reported significant profits indicating the beginning of rebound.

, Michigan ranked fourth in the U.S. in high-tech employment with 568,000 high-tech workers, which includes 70,000 in the automotive industry. Michigan typically ranks third or fourth in overall research and development (R&amp;D) expenditures in the United States. Its research and development, which includes automotive, comprises a higher percentage of the state&#x27;s overall gross domestic product than for any other U.S. state. The state is an important source of engineering job opportunities. The domestic auto industry accounts directly and indirectly for one of every ten jobs in the U.S.

Michigan was second in the U.S. in 2004 for new corporate facilities and expansions. From 1997 to 2004, Michigan was the only state to top the 10,000 mark for the number of major new developments; however, the effects of the late 2000s recession have slowed the state&#x27;s economy. In 2008, Michigan placed third in a site selection survey among the states for luring new business which measured capital investment and new job creation per one million population. In August 2009, Michigan and Detroit&#x27;s auto industry received $1.36 B in grants from the U.S. Department of Energy for the manufacture of electric vehicle technologies which is expected to generate 6,800 immediate jobs and employ 40,000 in the state by 2020. From 2007 to 2009, Michigan ranked 3rd in the U.S. for new corporate facilities and expansions.
As leading research institutions, the University of Michigan, Michigan State University, and Wayne State University are important partners in the state&#x27;s economy and its University Research Corridor. Michigan&#x27;s public universities attract more than $1.5 B in research and development grants each year. The National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory is at Michigan State University. Michigan&#x27;s workforce is well-educated and highly skilled, making it attractive to companies. It has the third highest number of engineering graduates nationally.

Detroit Metropolitan Airport is one of the nation&#x27;s most recently expanded and modernized airports with six major runways, and large aircraft maintenance facilities capable of servicing and repairing a Boeing 747 and is a major hub for Delta Air Lines. Michigan&#x27;s schools and colleges rank among the nation&#x27;s best. The state has maintained its early commitment to public education. The state&#x27;s infrastructure gives it a competitive edge; Michigan has 38 deep water ports. In 2007, Bank of America announced that it would commit $25 billion to community development in Michigan following its acquisition of LaSalle Bank in Troy.

Michigan led the nation in job creation improvement in 2010.

On December 20, 2019, Governor Gretchen Whitmer signed a package of bills into law effectively legalizing online gambling activities in Michigan, which allowed commercial and tribal casinos to apply for internet gaming licenses.

===Taxation===

Michigan&#x27;s personal income tax is a flat rate of 4.25%. In addition, 22 cities impose income taxes; rates are set at 1% for residents and 0.5% for non-residents in all but four cities. Michigan&#x27;s state sales tax is 6%, though items such as food and medication are exempted. Property taxes are assessed on the local level, but every property owner&#x27;s local assessment contributes six mills (a rate of $6 per $1000 of property value) to the statutory State Education Tax. Property taxes are appealable to local boards of review and need the approval of the local electorate to exceed millage rates prescribed by state law and local charters. In 2011, the state repealed its business tax and replaced it with a 6% corporate income tax which substantially reduced taxes on business. Article IX of the Constitution of the State of Michigan also provides limitations on how much the state can tax.

A 6% use tax is levied on goods purchased outside the state (that are brought in and used in state), at parity with the sales tax. The use tax applies to internet sales/purchases from outside Michigan and is equivalent to the sales tax.

===Agriculture===

A wide variety of commodity crops, fruits, and vegetables are grown in Michigan, making it second only to California among US states in the diversity of its agriculture. The state has 54,800 farms utilizing of land which sold $6.49 billion worth of products in 2010. The most valuable agricultural product is milk. Leading crops include corn, soybeans, flowers, wheat, sugar beets, and potatoes. Livestock in the state included 78,000 sheep, a million cattle, a million hogs, and more than three million chickens. Livestock products accounted for 38% of the value of agricultural products while crops accounted for the majority.

Michigan is a leading grower of fruit in the US, including blueberries, tart cherries, apples, grapes, and peaches. 
Michigan produces 70 percent of the country&#x27;s cherries. Most of these cherries are Montmorency cherries.
Plums, pears, and strawberries are also grown in Michigan. These fruits are mainly grown in West Michigan due to the moderating effect of Lake Michigan on the climate. There is also significant fruit production, especially cherries, but also grapes, apples, and other fruits, in northwest Michigan along Lake Michigan. Michigan produces wines, beers and a multitude of processed food products. Kellogg&#x27;s cereal is based in Battle Creek, Michigan and processes many locally grown foods. Thornapple Valley, Ball Park Franks, Koegel Meat Company, and Hebrew National sausage companies are all based in Michigan.

Michigan is home to very fertile land in the Saginaw Valley and Thumb areas. Products grown there include corn, sugar beets, navy beans, and soybeans. Sugar beet harvesting usually begins the first of October. It takes the sugar factories about five months to process the 3.7 million tons of sugarbeets into 485,000 tons of pure, white sugar. Michigan&#x27;s largest sugar refiner, Michigan Sugar Company is the largest east of the Mississippi River and the fourth largest in the nation. Michigan sugar brand names are Pioneer Sugar and the newly incorporated Big Chief Sugar. Potatoes are grown in Northern Michigan, and corn is dominant in Central Michigan. Alfalfa, cucumbers, and asparagus are also grown.

===Tourism===

As of 2011, Michigan&#x27;s tourists spent $17.2 billion per year in the state, supporting 193,000 tourism jobs. Michigan&#x27;s tourism website ranks among the busiest in the nation. Destinations draw vacationers, hunters, and nature enthusiasts from across the United States and Canada. Michigan is over 50% forest land, much of it quite remote. The forests, lakes and thousands of miles of beaches are top attractions. Event tourism draws large numbers to occasions like the Tulip Time Festival and the National Cherry Festival.

In 2006, the Michigan State Board of Education mandated all public schools in the state hold their first day of school after Labor Day, in accordance with the new post-Labor Day school law. A survey found 70% of all tourism business comes directly from Michigan residents, and the Michigan Hotel, Motel, &amp; Resort Association claimed the shorter summer between school years cut into the annual tourism season. However, a bill introduced in 2023 would cancel this requirement, allowing individual districts to decide when their school year should begin.

Tourism in metropolitan Detroit draws visitors to leading attractions, especially The Henry Ford, the Detroit Institute of Arts, the Detroit Zoo, and to sports in Detroit. Other museums include the Detroit Historical Museum, the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, museums in the Cranbrook Educational Community, and the Arab American National Museum. The metro area offers four major casinos, MGM Grand Detroit, Hollywood Casino, Motor City, and Caesars Windsor in Windsor, Ontario, Canada; moreover, Detroit is the largest American city and metropolitan region to offer casino resorts.

Hunting and fishing are significant industries in the state. Charter boats are based in many Great Lakes cities to fish for salmon, trout, walleye, and perch. Michigan ranks first in the nation in licensed hunters (over one million) who contribute $2 billion annually to its economy. More than three-quarters of a million hunters participate in white-tailed deer season alone. Many school districts in rural areas of Michigan cancel school on the opening day of firearm deer season, because of attendance concerns.

Michigan&#x27;s Department of Natural Resources manages the largest dedicated state forest system in the nation. The forest products industry and recreational users contribute $12 billion and 200,000 associated jobs annually to the state&#x27;s economy. Public hiking and hunting access has also been secured in extensive commercial forests. The state has the highest number of golf courses and registered snowmobiles in the nation.

The state has numerous historical markers, which can themselves become the center of a tour. The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.

With its position in relation to the Great Lakes and the countless ships that have foundered over the many years they have been used as a transport route for people and bulk cargo, Michigan is a world-class scuba diving destination. The Michigan Underwater Preserves are 11 underwater areas where wrecks are protected for the benefit of sport divers.

==Culture==
===Arts===
====Music====
Michigan music is known for three music trends: early punk rock, Motown/soul music and techno music. Michigan musicians include Tally Hall, Bill Haley &amp; His Comets, the Supremes, the Marvelettes, the Temptations, the Four Tops, Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye &quot;The Prince of Soul&quot;, Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, Aretha Franklin, Mary Wells, Tommy James and the Shondells, ? and the Mysterians, Al Green, The Spinners, Grand Funk Railroad, the Stooges, the MC5, the Knack, Madonna &quot;The Queen of Pop&quot;, Bob Seger, Jack Scott, Ray Parker Jr., Jackie Wilson, Aaliyah, Eminem, Babytron, Kid Rock, Jack White and Meg White (the White Stripes), Big Sean, Alice Cooper, Greta Van Fleet, Mustard Plug, and Del Shannon.

====Performance arts====
Major theaters in Michigan include the Fox Theatre, Music Hall, Gem Theatre, Masonic Temple Theatre, the Detroit Opera House, Fisher Theatre, The Fillmore Detroit, Saint Andrew&#x27;s Hall, Majestic Theater, and Orchestra Hall.

The Nederlander Organization, the largest controller of Broadway productions in New York City, originated in Detroit.

===Sports===


Michigan&#x27;s major-league sports teams include: Detroit Tigers baseball team, Detroit Lions football team, Detroit Red Wings ice hockey team, and the Detroit Pistons men&#x27;s basketball team. All of Michigan&#x27;s major league teams play in the Metro Detroit area. The state also has a professional second-tier (USL Championship) soccer team in Detroit City FC, which plays its home games at Keyworth Stadium in Hamtramck, Michigan.

The Pistons played at Detroit&#x27;s Cobo Arena until 1978 and at the Pontiac Silverdome until 1988 when they moved into The Palace of Auburn Hills. In 2017, the team moved to the newly built Little Caesars Arena in downtown Detroit. The Detroit Lions played at Tiger Stadium in Detroit until 1974, then moved to the Pontiac Silverdome where they played for 27 years between 1975 and 2002 before moving to Ford Field in Detroit in 2002. The Detroit Tigers played at Tiger Stadium (formerly known as Navin Field and Briggs Stadium) from 1912 to 1999. In 2000 they moved to Comerica Park. The Red Wings played at Olympia Stadium before moving to Joe Louis Arena in 1979. They later moved to Little Caesars Arena to join the Pistons as tenants in 2017. Professional hockey got its start in 1903 in Houghton, when the Portage Lakers were formed.

The Michigan International Speedway is the site of NASCAR races and Detroit was formerly the site of a Formula One World Championship Grand Prix race. From 1959 to 1961, Detroit Dragway hosted the NHRA&#x27;s U.S. Nationals. Michigan is home to one of the major canoeing marathons: the Au Sable River Canoe Marathon. The Port Huron to Mackinac Boat Race is also a favorite.

Twenty-time Grand Slam champion Serena Williams was born in Saginaw. The 2011 World Champion for Women&#x27;s Artistic Gymnastics, Jordyn Wieber is from DeWitt. Wieber was also a member of the gold medal team at the London Olympics in 2012.

Collegiate sports in Michigan are popular in addition to professional sports. The state&#x27;s two largest athletic programs are the Michigan Wolverines and Michigan State Spartans, which play in the NCAA Big Ten Conference. Michigan Stadium in Ann Arbor, home to the Michigan Wolverines football team, is the largest stadium in the Western Hemisphere and the third-largest stadium worldwide.

The Michigan High School Athletic Association features around 300,000 participants.

==Education==


Michigan&#x27;s education system serves 1.6 million K-12 students in public schools. More than 124,000 students attend private schools and an uncounted number are homeschooled under certain legal requirements. The public school system had a $14.5 billion budget in 2008–09. From 2009 to 2019, over 200 private schools in Michigan closed, partly due to competition from charter schools. In 2022, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; rated three Michigan high schools among the nation&#x27;s 100 best: City High Middle School (18th), the International Academy of Macomb (21st), and the International Academy (52nd). Washtenaw International High School ranked 107th.

The University of Michigan is Michigan&#x27;s oldest higher educational institution and among the oldest research universities in the nation. It was founded in 1817, 20 years before Michigan Territory achieved statehood. Kalamazoo College is the state&#x27;s oldest private liberal arts college, founded in 1833 by a group of Baptist ministers as the Michigan and Huron Institute. From 1840 to 1850, the college operated as the Kalamazoo Branch of the University of Michigan. Methodist settlers in Spring Arbor Township founded Albion College in 1835. It is the state&#x27;s second-oldest private liberal arts college.

Michigan Technological University is the first post-secondary institution in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, founded in 1885 as the Michigan Mining School. Eastern Michigan University was founded in 1849 as the Michigan State Normal School for the training of teachers. It was the nation&#x27;s fourth-oldest normal school and the first U.S. normal school outside New England. In 1899, the Michigan State Normal School became the nation&#x27;s first normal school to offer a four-year curriculum. Michigan State University was founded in 1855 as the nation&#x27;s first agricultural college.

The Carnegie Foundation classifies eight of the state&#x27;s institutions (Michigan State University, Michigan Technological University, Eastern Michigan University, Wayne State University, Central Michigan University, Western Michigan University, Oakland University, University of Michigan) as research universities.

== Infrastructure ==

=== Energy ===


In 2020, Michigan consumed 113,740- gigawatt-hours (GWh) of electrical energy and produced 116,700 (GWh) of electrical energy.

Coal power is Michigan&#x27;s leading source of electricity, producing roughly half its supply or 53,100 GWh of electrical energy (12.6 GW total capacity) in 2020. Although Michigan has no active coal mines, coal is easily moved from other states by train and across the Great Lakes by lake freighters. The lower price of natural gas is leading to the closure of most coal plants, with Consumer Energy planning to close all of its remaining coal plants by 2025; DTE plans to retire 2100MW of coal power by 2023. The coal-fired Monroe Power Plant in Monroe, on the western shore of Lake Erie, is the nation&#x27;s 11th-largest electric plant, with a net capacity of 3,400 MW.

Nuclear power is also a significant source of electrical power in Michigan, producing roughly one-quarter of the state&#x27;s supply or 28,000-gigawatt-hours (GWh) of electrical energy (4.3 GW total capacity) in 2020. The three active nuclear power plants supply Michigan with about 26% of its electricity. Donald C. Cook Nuclear Plant, just north of Bridgman, is the state&#x27;s largest nuclear power plant, with a net capacity of 2,213 MW. The Enrico Fermi Nuclear Generating Station is the second-largest, with a net capacity of 1,150 MW. It is also one of the two nuclear power plants in the Detroit metropolitan area (within a 50-mile radius of Detroit&#x27;s city center), about halfway between Detroit and Toledo, Ohio, the other being the Davis–Besse Nuclear Power Station, in Ottawa County, Ohio. The Palisades Nuclear Power Plant, south of South Haven, closed in May 2022. The Big Rock Point Nuclear Power Plant, Michigan&#x27;s first nuclear power plant and the nation&#x27;s fifth, was decommissioned in 1997.

Utility companies were required to generate at least 10% of their energy from renewable sources by 2015, under Public Act 295 of 2008. In 2016, the legislature set another mandate to reach at least 12.5% renewable energy by 2019 and 15% by end of year 2021, which all utilities subject to the law successfully met. By the end of 2022, Michigan had at least 6 GW of renewable generating capacity, and was projected to have at least 8 GW by the end of 2026. Wind energy accounted for 59% of all Michigan energy credits in 2021.

=== Transportation ===
==== International crossings ====

Michigan has nine international road crossings with Ontario, Canada:
* Ambassador Bridge, North America&#x27;s busiest international border, crossing the Detroit River
* Blue Water Bridge, a twin-span bridge (Port Huron, Michigan, and Point Edward, Ontario, but the larger city of Sarnia is usually referred to on the Canadian side)
* Blue Water Ferry (Marine City, Michigan, and Sombra, Ontario)
* Canadian Pacific Railway tunnel
* Detroit–Windsor Truck Ferry (Detroit and Windsor)
* Detroit–Windsor Tunnel
* International Bridge (Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, and Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario)
* St. Clair River Railway Tunnel (Port Huron and Sarnia)
* Walpole Island Ferry (Algonac, Michigan, and Walpole Island First Nation, Ontario)

The Gordie Howe International Bridge, a second international bridge between Detroit and Windsor, is under construction. It is expected to be completed in 2024.

====Railroads====

Michigan is served by four Class I railroads: the Canadian National Railway, the Canadian Pacific Railway, CSX Transportation, and the Norfolk Southern Railway. These are augmented by several dozen short line railroads. The vast majority of rail service in Michigan is devoted to freight, with Amtrak and various scenic railroads the exceptions.

Three Amtrak passenger rail routes serve the state. The Pere Marquette from Chicago to Grand Rapids, the Blue Water from Chicago to Port Huron, and the Wolverine from Chicago to Pontiac. There are plans for commuter rail for Detroit and its suburbs (see SEMCOG Commuter Rail).

====Roadways====

* Interstate 75 (I-75) is the main thoroughfare between Detroit, Flint, and Saginaw extending north to Sault Ste. Marie and providing access to Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario. The freeway crosses the Mackinac Bridge between the Lower and Upper Peninsulas. Auxiliary highways include I-275 and I-375 in Detroit; I-475 in Flint; and I-675 in Saginaw.
* I-69 enters the state near the Michigan–Ohio–Indiana border, and it extends to Port Huron and provides access to the Blue Water Bridge crossing into Sarnia, Ontario.
* I-94 enters the western end of the state at the Indiana border, and it travels east to Detroit and then northeast to Port Huron and ties in with I-69. I-194 branches off from this freeway in Battle Creek. I-94 is the main artery between Chicago and Detroit.
* I-96 runs east–west between Detroit and Muskegon. I-496 loops through Lansing. I-196 branches off from this freeway at Grand Rapids and connects to I-94 near Benton Harbor. I-696 branches off from this freeway at Novi and connects to I-94 near St. Clair Shores.
* U.S. Highway 2 (U.S. 2) enters Michigan at the city of Ironwood and travels east to the town of Crystal Falls, where it turns south and briefly re-enters Wisconsin northwest of Florence. It re-enters Michigan north of Iron Mountain and continues through the Upper Peninsula of Michigan to the cities of Escanaba, Manistique, and St. Ignace. Along the way, it cuts through the Ottawa and Hiawatha national forests and follows the northern shore of Lake Michigan. Its eastern terminus lies at exit 344 on I-75, just north of the Mackinac Bridge.
* U.S. Highway 23 enters Michigan at the Ohio state line in the suburban spillover of Toledo, Ohio, as a freeway and leads northward to Ann Arbor before merging with I-75 just south of Flint. Concurrent with I-75 through Flint, Saginaw, and Bay City, it splits from I-75 at Standish as an intermittently four lane/two-lane surface road closely following the western shore of Lake Huron generally northward through Alpena before turning west to northwest toward Mackinaw City and Interstate 75 again, where it terminates.
* U.S. Highway 31 enters Michigan as Interstate-quality freeway at the Indiana state line just northwest of South Bend, Indiana, heads north to Interstate 196 near Benton Harbor, and follows the eastern shore of Lake Michigan to Mackinaw City, where it has its northern terminus.
* U.S. Highway 127 enters Michigan from Ohio south of Hudson as a two-lane, undivided highway and closely follows the Michigan meridian, the principal north–south line used to survey Michigan in the early 19th century. It passes north through Jackson and Lansing before terminating south of Grayling at I-75, and is a four-lane freeway for the majority of its course.
* U.S. Highway 131 has its southern terminus at the Indiana Toll Road roughly one mile south of the Indiana state line as a two-lane surface road. It passes through Kalamazoo and Grand Rapids as a freeway of Interstate standard and continues as such to Manton, where it reverts to two-lane surface road to its northern terminus at U.S. 31 in Petoskey.

====Intercity bus services====
*Amtrak Thruway
*Barons Bus Lines
*Flixbus
*Greyhound Lines
*Indian Trails
*Megabus

====Airports====


Detroit Metropolitan Airport in the western suburb of Romulus, was in 2010 the 16th busiest airfield in North America measured by passenger traffic. The Gerald R. Ford International Airport in Grand Rapids is the next busiest airport in the state, served by eight airlines to 23 destinations. Flint Bishop International Airport is the third largest airport in the state, served by four airlines to several primary hubs. Other frequently trafficked airports include Cherry Capital Airport, in Traverse City; Kalamazoo/Battle Creek International Airport, serving the Kalamazoo and Battle Creek region; Capital Region International Airport, located outside of Lansing; and MBS International Airport serving the Midland, Bay City and Saginaw tri-city region. Additionally, smaller regional and local airports are located throughout the state including on several islands.

== Government ==
===State government===


Michigan is governed as a republic, with three branches of government: the executive branch consisting of the Governor of Michigan and the other independently elected constitutional officers; the legislative branch consisting of the House of Representatives and Senate; and the judicial branch. The Michigan Constitution allows for the direct participation of the electorate by statutory initiative and referendum, recall, and constitutional initiative and referral (Article II, § 9, defined as &quot;the power to propose laws and to enact and reject laws, called the initiative, and the power to approve or reject laws enacted by the legislature, called the referendum. The power of initiative extends only to laws which the legislature may enact under this constitution&quot;). Lansing is the state capital and is home to all three branches of state government.

The governor and the other state constitutional officers serve four-year terms and may be re-elected only once. The current governor is Gretchen Whitmer. Michigan has two official Governor&#x27;s Residences; one is in Lansing, and the other is on Mackinac Island. The other constitutionally elected executive officers are the lieutenant governor, who is elected on a joint ticket with the governor; the secretary of state; and the attorney general. The lieutenant governor presides over the Senate (voting only in case of a tie) and is also a member of the cabinet. The secretary of state is the chief elections officer and is charged with running many licensure programs including motor vehicles, all of which are done through the branch offices of the secretary of state.

The Michigan Legislature consists of a 38-member Senate and 110-member House of Representatives. Members of both houses of the legislature are elected through first past the post elections by single-member electoral districts of near-equal population that often have boundaries which coincide with county and municipal lines. Senators serve four-year terms concurrent to those of the governor, while representatives serve two-year terms. The Michigan State Capitol was dedicated in 1879 and has hosted the executive and legislative branches of the state ever since.

The Michigan judiciary consists of two courts with primary jurisdiction (the Circuit Courts and the District Courts), one intermediate level appellate court (the Michigan Court of Appeals), and the Michigan Supreme Court. There are several administrative courts and specialized courts. District courts are trial courts of limited jurisdiction, handling most traffic violations, small claims, misdemeanors, and civil suits where the amount contended is below $25,000. District courts are often responsible for handling the preliminary examination and for setting bail in felony cases. District court judges are elected to terms of six years. In a few locations, municipal courts have been retained to the exclusion of the establishment of district courts. There are 57 circuit courts in the State of Michigan, which have original jurisdiction over all civil suits where the amount contended in the case exceeds $25,000 and all criminal cases involving felonies. Circuit courts are also the only trial courts in the State of Michigan which possess the power to issue equitable remedies. Circuit courts have appellate jurisdiction from district and municipal courts, as well as from decisions and decrees of state agencies. Most counties have their own circuit court, but sparsely populated counties often share them. Circuit court judges are elected to terms of six years. State appellate court judges are elected to terms of six years, but vacancies are filled by an appointment by the governor. There are four divisions of the Court of Appeals in Detroit, Grand Rapids, Lansing, and Marquette. Cases are heard by the Court of Appeals by panels of three judges, who examine the application of the law and not the facts of the case unless there has been grievous error pertaining to questions of fact. The Michigan Supreme Court consists of seven members who are elected on non-partisan ballots for staggered eight-year terms. The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction only in narrow circumstances but holds appellate jurisdiction over the entire state judicial system.

===Law===


Michigan has had four constitutions, the first of which was ratified on October5 and 6, 1835. There were also constitutions from 1850 and 1908, in addition to the current constitution from 1963. The current document has a preamble, 11 articles, and one section consisting of a schedule and temporary provisions. Michigan, like every U.S. state except Louisiana, has a common law legal system.

===Politics===


Having been a Democratic-leaning state at the presidential level since the 1990s, Michigan has evolved into a swing state after Donald Trump won the state in 2016. He then won it again in 2024, after losing it by a slim 2.8% to Democrat Joe Biden in 2020. Governors since the 1970s have alternated between the Democrats and Republicans, and statewide offices including attorney general, secretary of state, and senator have been held by members of both parties in varying proportion. Additionally, from 1994 until 2022, the governor-elect had always come from the party opposite the presidency. Following the 2024 elections, control of Michigan Legislature is split, with the Democratic Party having a slim majority of two seats in the Senate while the Republican Party holds a 58 seat majority in the House. The state&#x27;s congressional delegation is commonly split, with one party or the other typically holding a narrow majority; as of 2025 Republicans have a 7-6 majority.

Michigan was the home of Gerald Ford, the 38th president of the United States. Born in Nebraska, he moved as an infant to Grand Rapids. The Gerald R. Ford Museum is in Grand Rapids, and the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library is on the campus of his alma mater, the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

In a 2020 study, Michigan was ranked as the 13th easiest state for citizens to vote in. In 2022, Michigan voters passed an amendment recognising abortion and contraceptive rights within the state&#x27;s constitution.

==State symbols and nicknames==

Michigan is traditionally known as &quot;The Wolverine State&quot;, and the University of Michigan uses the wolverine as its mascot. The association is well and long established: for example, many Detroiters volunteered to fight during the American Civil War and George Armstrong Custer, who led the Michigan Brigade, called them the &quot;Wolverines&quot;. The origins of this association are obscure; it may derive from a busy trade in wolverine furs in Sault Ste. Marie in the 18th century or may recall a disparagement intended to compare early settlers in Michigan with the vicious mammal. Wolverines are, however, extremely rare in Michigan. A sighting in February 2004 near Ubly was the first confirmed sighting in Michigan in 200 years. Another wolverine was found dead in 2010.

* State nicknames: &quot;Wolverine State&quot;, &quot;Great Lakes State&quot;, &quot;Mitten State&quot;, &quot;Water-Winter Wonderland&quot;
* State motto: &quot;Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam circumspice&quot; (Latin: &quot;If you seek a pleasant peninsula, look about you&quot;) adopted in 1835 on the coat-of-arms, but never as an official motto. This is a paraphrase of the epitaph of British architect Sir Christopher Wren about his masterpiece, St. Paul&#x27;s Cathedral.
* State song: &quot;My Michigan&quot; (official since 1937, but disputed amongst residents), &quot;Michigan, My Michigan&quot; (unofficial state song, since the civil war)
* State bird: American robin (since 1931)
* State animal: wolverine (traditional)
* State game animal: white-tailed deer (since 1997)
* State fish: brook trout (since 1965)
* State reptile: painted turtle (since 1995)
* State fossil: mastodon (since 2000)
* State flower: apple blossom (adopted in 1897, official in 1997)
* State wildflower: dwarf lake iris (since 1998) a federally listed threatened species
* State tree: white pine (since 1955)
* State stone: Petoskey stone (since 1965). It is composed of fossilized coral (&quot;Hexagonaria pericarnata&quot;) from long ago when the middle of the continent was covered with a shallow sea.
* State gem: Isle Royale greenstone (since 1973). Also called &quot;chlorastrolite&quot; (literally &quot;green star stone&quot;), the mineral is found on Isle Royale and the Keweenaw peninsula.
* State quarter: US coin issued in 2004 with the Michigan motto &quot;Great Lakes State&quot;.
* State soil: Kalkaska sand (since 1990), ranges in color from black to yellowish brown, covers nearly in 29 counties.
==Sister regions==
* Shiga Prefecture, Japan
* Sichuan Province, People&#x27;s Republic of China

==See also==

* Index of Michigan-related articles
* Outline of Michigan: organized list of topics about Michigan
* USS &quot;Michigan&quot;, 3 ships
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* State of Michigan government website 
* Energy Data &amp; Statistics for Michigan
* Info Michigan, detailed information on 630 cities 
* Historical Society of Michigan 
* Clarke Historical Library, Central Michigan University, Bibliographies for Michigan by region, counties, etc. .
* Michigan State Guide from the Library of Congress 
* Michigan Official Travel Site 
* Michigan Official Business Site 
* Michigan Official Talent Site 
* Michigan State Fact Sheet from the US Department of Agriculture
* The Michigan Municipal League 
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="0" end="8" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="29" end="34" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="42" end="53" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="68" end="84" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="85" end="98" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="141" end="150" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="169" end="178" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="192" end="199" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="204" end="212" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="231" end="235" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="271" end="279" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="283" end="290" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="393" end="405" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="10th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="431" end="443" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="11th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="495" end="512" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="535" end="542" title="Lansing, Michigan" label="Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="576" end="583" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="589" end="602" title="Metro Detroit" label="Metro Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502886" start="613" end="631" title="Southeast Michigan" label="Southeast Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q120644015" start="725" end="743" title="List of Michigan metropolitan areas" label="metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552704" start="752" end="764" title="Grand Rapids metropolitan area" label="Grand Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q497695" start="766" end="771" title="Genesee County, Michigan" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q137916" start="773" end="782" title="Washtenaw County, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306365" start="784" end="793" title="Kalamazoo–Portage metropolitan area" label="Kalamazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448661" start="799" end="809" title="Saginaw, Midland, and Bay City metropolitan area" label="Tri-Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q63719" start="815" end="823" title="Muskegon County, Michigan" label="Muskegon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="885" end="900" title="Upper Peninsula" label="Upper Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073685" start="1102" end="1121" title="Straits of Mackinac" label="Straits of Mackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12568" start="1202" end="1217" title="Mackinac Bridge" label="Mackinac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q94689" start="1224" end="1237" title="Interstate 75" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="1266" end="1277" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736707" start="1282" end="1296" title="Lake St. Clair" label="Lake St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1323" end="1333" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1432" end="1438" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624793" start="1550" end="1572" title="List of lakes of Michigan" label="inland lakes and ponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="1648" end="1658" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="1760" end="1766" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="1768" end="1773" title="Odawa" label="Odawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="1775" end="1785" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213396" start="1791" end="1798" title="Wyandot people" label="Wyandot"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="1820" end="1825" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="2294" end="2315" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="2394" end="2416" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris (1783)"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="2544" end="2563" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360064" start="2569" end="2587" title="Michigan Territory" label="Michigan Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q906228" start="2624" end="2632" title="List of U.S. states by date of admission to the Union" label="admitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="2686" end="2696" title="Slave states and free states" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="2807" end="2814" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="2816" end="2825" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2835" end="2846" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="2877" end="2887" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="2896" end="2911" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060614" start="2915" end="2932" title="Black Southerners" label="Black Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="3093" end="3097" title="List of U.S. states and territories by GDP" label="14th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995270" start="3241" end="3265" title="Automotive industry in the United States" label="U.S. automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q859399" start="3352" end="3384" title="Big Three (automobile manufacturers)" label="three major automobile companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3623" end="3636" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="3638" end="3646" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="3648" end="3659" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="3661" end="3669" title="service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="3675" end="3684" title="high-tech" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="3786" end="3804" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956640" start="3824" end="3835" title="Anishinaabe" label="Anishinaabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="3846" end="3852" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="3854" end="3876" title="Ottawa (tribe)" label="Odaawaa/Odawa (Ottawa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="3886" end="3922" title="Potawatomi" label="Boodewaadamii/Bodéwadmi (Potawatomi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491749" start="4007" end="4029" title="Council of Three Fires" label="Council of Three Fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343570" start="4255" end="4263" title="northern Michigan" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945568" start="4268" end="4284" title="central Michigan" label="central Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="4307" end="4314" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="4328" end="4336" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="4359" end="4368" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="4401" end="4410" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073685" start="4460" end="4479" title="Straits of Mackinac" label="Straits of Mackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358100" start="4493" end="4500" title="western Michigan" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570136" start="4506" end="4523" title="southern Michigan" label="southern Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q838408" start="4822" end="4831" title="Mascouten" label="Mascouten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447438" start="4837" end="4846" title="Menominee" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="4852" end="4857" title="Miami (tribe)" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="4863" end="4866" title="Sac people" label="Sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="4886" end="4900" title="Meskwaki" label="Meskwaki (Fox)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213396" start="4906" end="4913" title="Wyandot people" label="Wyandot"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="5062" end="5084" title="Iroquois Confederation" label="Iroquois Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812669" start="5121" end="5130" title="voyageurs" label="voyageurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q511878" start="5147" end="5164" title="Coureur des bois" label="coureurs des bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q289416" start="5289" end="5302" title="Étienne Brûlé" label="Étienne Brûlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="5413" end="5430" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q986634" start="5443" end="5469" title="Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan" label="Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946253" start="5557" end="5569" title="Saint Ignace, Michigan" label="Saint Ignace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12443" start="5574" end="5583" title="Marquette, Michigan" label="Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="5710" end="5744" title="Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle" label="Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q430020" start="5751" end="5761" title="Fort Miami (Michigan)" label="Fort Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205508" start="5777" end="5787" title="St. Joseph, Michigan" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442951" start="5910" end="5915" title="Niles, Michigan" label="Niles"/>
<link wikidata="Q586595" start="5979" end="6007" title="Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac" label="Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q74880" start="6016" end="6045" title="Fort Pontchartrain du Détroit" label="Fort Pontchartrain du Détroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q318435" start="6122" end="6135" title="Detroit River" label="Detroit River"/>
<link wikidata="Q736707" start="6151" end="6162" title="Lake Saint Clair (North America)" label="Saint Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="6167" end="6171" title="Lake Erie" label="Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="6196" end="6217" title="Louis XIV of France" label="King Louis XIV&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262231" start="6234" end="6274" title="Louis Phélypeaux (1643-1727)" label="Louis Phélypeaux, Comte de Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="6383" end="6390" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q10839915" start="6490" end="6496" title="arpent" label="arpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q74880" start="6558" end="6576" title="Fort Pontchartrain" label="Fort Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="6778" end="6789" title="fur trade" label="fur-trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810425" start="6819" end="6839" title="Ste. Anne de Detroit Catholic Church" label="Église de Saint-Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477039" start="7128" end="7136" title="Fox Wars" label="Fox Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q370648" start="7269" end="7289" title="Fort Michilimackinac" label="Fort Michilimackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="7907" end="7917" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7928" end="7936" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="7976" end="7997" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="8043" end="8064" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="8086" end="8106" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="1763 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q764479" start="8232" end="8242" title="Quebec Act" label="Quebec Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="8299" end="8317" title="Province of Quebec (1763-1791)" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8434" end="8460" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="8737" end="8757" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="1783 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="8822" end="8841" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391659" start="8919" end="8930" title="Kent County, Ontario" label="Kent County"/>
<link wikidata="Q448372" start="9066" end="9085" title="Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario" label="Niagara-on-the-Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="9124" end="9134" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261310" start="9443" end="9458" title="Drummond Island" label="Drummond Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="9525" end="9536" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360064" start="9591" end="9609" title="Michigan Territory" label="Michigan Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888469" start="9696" end="9701" title="Siege of Detroit" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q586801" start="9788" end="9809" title="River Raisin Massacre" label="River Raisin Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q990715" start="10012" end="10031" title="Battle of Lake Erie" label="Battle of Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q645288" start="10119" end="10139" title="Battle of the Thames" label="Battle of the Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472269" start="10287" end="10297" title="Fort Wayne (Detroit)" label="Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10415" end="10475" title=" File:Detroit in 1820 and steamboat Walk-in-the-Water.jpg" label="&amp;quot;[[Walk-in-the-Water]]&amp;quot; steamboat at Detroit, 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="10531" end="10553" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="10682" end="10692" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="11652" end="11665" title="United States Congress" label="Congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="11736" end="11740" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369423" start="11754" end="11764" title="Toledo War" label="Toledo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="11931" end="11941" title="slave and free states" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868609" start="12113" end="12122" title="History of railroads in Michigan" label="Railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724015" start="12183" end="12204" title="History of Detroit" label="Detroit the chief hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430" start="12550" end="12568" title="Keweenaw Peninsula" label="Keweenaw Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="12607" end="12623" title="History of the United States Republican Party" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q984374" start="12655" end="12672" title="Jackson, Michigan" label="Jackson, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837832" start="12889" end="12915" title="Michigan in the American Civil War" label="a significant contribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="12923" end="12928" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12936" end="12954" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278221" start="13139" end="13166" title="Eastern Michigan University" label="Eastern Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="13244" end="13257" title="normal school" label="normal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13265" end="13278" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13293" end="13311" title="normal school#United States" label="U.S. normal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="13320" end="13331" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="13495" end="13520" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q871265" start="13524" end="13536" title="East Lansing, Michigan" label="East Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11638004" start="13563" end="13583" title="agricultural college" label="agricultural college"/>
<link wikidata="Q560676" start="13854" end="13868" title="Ransom E. Olds" label="Ransom E. Olds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361117" start="13870" end="13874" title="John Francis Dodge" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346488" start="13879" end="13891" title="Horace Elgin Dodge" label="Horace Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q957621" start="13893" end="13905" title="Henry Leland" label="Henry Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499167" start="13907" end="13925" title="David Dunbar Buick" label="David Dunbar Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501174" start="13927" end="13936" title="Henry Bourne Joy" label="Henry Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q787908" start="13938" end="13950" title="Charles Brady King" label="Charles King"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="13956" end="13966" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129377" start="14063" end="14082" title="History of the automobile" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="14122" end="14135" title="assembly line" label="assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144544" start="14139" end="14152" title="Highland Park, Michigan" label="Highland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="14198" end="14207" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="14737" end="14742" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="15026" end="15032" title="ethnic" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="15234" end="15246" title="Motown" label="Motown Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q184587" start="15316" end="15328" title="Grand Rapids, Michigan" label="Grand Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q479167" start="15638" end="15647" title="Steelcase" label="Steelcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q481800" start="15649" end="15654" title="Amway" label="Amway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917753" start="15660" end="15666" title="Meijer" label="Meijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513253" start="15713" end="15732" title="GE Aviation Systems" label="GE Aviation Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916312" start="15759" end="15793" title="United States presidential primary" label="United States presidential primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="15933" end="15952" title="United Auto Workers" label="United Auto Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564859" start="15963" end="15971" title="WWJ (AM)" label="WWJ (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816899" start="16154" end="16165" title="List of tallest buildings in Detroit" label="skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q933431" start="16222" end="16237" title="Fisher Building" label="Fisher Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q525790" start="16239" end="16253" title="Cadillac Place" label="Cadillac Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079894" start="16263" end="16280" title="Guardian Building" label="Guardian Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="16321" end="16347" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q94669" start="16394" end="16408" title="Clinton County, Michigan" label="Clinton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090177" start="16414" end="16434" title="Bath School disaster" label="Bath School disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16628" end="16640" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="16752" end="16760" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="17045" end="17064" title="Interstate Highway System" label="interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q768155" start="17384" end="17403" title="1967 Detroit riot" label="Twelfth Street riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569702" start="17473" end="17483" title="Gasoline and diesel usage and pricing" label="fuel costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="17613" end="17623" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="17780" end="17801" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM Personal Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="17983" end="18007" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q967322" start="18254" end="18277" title="Great Lakes megalopolis" label="Great Lakes megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="18338" end="18345" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="18359" end="18370" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="18384" end="18397" title="Metro Detroit" label="Metro Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502886" start="18406" end="18424" title="Southeast Michigan" label="Southeast Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552704" start="18568" end="18598" title="Grand Rapids metropolitan area" label="Grand Rapids metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073685" start="18776" end="18795" title="Straits of Mackinac" label="Straits of Mackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256191" start="18801" end="18820" title="45th parallel north" label="45th parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878674" start="18921" end="18940" title="Mission Point Light" label="Mission Point Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q984544" start="18946" end="18959" title="Traverse City, Michigan" label="Traverse City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300663" start="18974" end="18981" title="Gaylord, Michigan" label="Gaylord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012455" start="18986" end="18992" title="Alpena, Michigan" label="Alpena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635319" start="19020" end="19029" title="Menominee, Michigan" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="19106" end="19123" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q978496" start="19138" end="19153" title="Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8642" start="19195" end="19203" title="Kankakee River" label="Kankakee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="19204" end="19218" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois River"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="19282" end="19294" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="19537" end="19546" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="19548" end="19558" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="19560" end="19573" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="19578" end="19591" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="19644" end="19648" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="19653" end="19660" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="19806" end="19814" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="19819" end="19828" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130" start="19946" end="19955" title="Menominee River" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906320" start="19960" end="19975" title="Montreal River (Wisconsin-Michigan)" label="Montreal Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="20161" end="20176" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322342" start="20220" end="20239" title="Porcupine Mountains" label="Porcupine Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322334" start="20533" end="20548" title="Huron Mountains" label="Huron Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164979" start="20576" end="20587" title="Mount Arvon" label="Mount Arvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060510" start="20840" end="20854" title="Yooper dialect" label="Yooper dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="20906" end="20917" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716079" start="20989" end="21000" title="Copper mining in Michigan" label="mining boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596" start="21034" end="21049" title="Lower Peninsula of Michigan" label="Lower Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="21339" end="21346" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025149" start="21672" end="21680" title="Cadillac, Michigan" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002936" start="21847" end="21855" title="Ironwood, Michigan" label="Ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195020" start="21914" end="21926" title="Lambertville, Michigan" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591842" start="22189" end="22202" title="Superior (proposed U.S. state)" label="its own state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523012" start="22305" end="22314" title="the Thumb" label="the Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211837" start="22356" end="22367" title="Saginaw Bay" label="Saginaw Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430" start="22418" end="22436" title="Keweenaw Peninsula" label="Keweenaw Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q387163" start="22550" end="22564" title="Copper Country" label="Copper Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516276" start="22581" end="22599" title="Leelanau Peninsula" label="Leelanau Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="22728" end="22733" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12341531" start="22804" end="22817" title="Whitefish Bay" label="Whitefish Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649014" start="22835" end="22841" title="Little Bay de Noc" label="Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652328" start="22923" end="22938" title="Little Traverse Bay" label="Little Traverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798907" start="22940" end="22947" title="Thunder Bay (Michigan)" label="Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624479" start="23097" end="23119" title="Islands of Michigan" label="numerous large islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403852" start="23150" end="23163" title="North Manitou Island" label="North Manitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q604220" start="23168" end="23181" title="South Manitou Island" label="South Manitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q813485" start="23183" end="23189" title="Beaver Island (Lake Michigan)" label="Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476766" start="23195" end="23198" title="Fox Islands (Michigan)" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q163503" start="23224" end="23235" title="Isle Royale" label="Isle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594696" start="23240" end="23251" title="Grand Island (Michigan)" label="Grande Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q891060" start="23281" end="23291" title="Bois Blanc Island (Michigan)" label="Bois Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431148" start="23297" end="23305" title="Mackinac Island" label="Mackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716243" start="23333" end="23340" title="Neebish Island" label="Neebish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634848" start="23342" end="23347" title="Sugar Island (Michigan)" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q940488" start="23373" end="23394" title="St. Marys River (Michigan-Ontario)" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="23419" end="23429" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625451" start="23695" end="23727" title="lighthouses in the United States" label="lighthouses in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473267" start="23735" end="23754" title="List of Michigan rivers" label="state&amp;#x27;s rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="23885" end="23900" title="St. Clair River" label="St. Clair River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818973" start="23936" end="23944" title="Au Sable River (Michigan)" label="Au Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088994" start="23946" end="23955" title="Cheboygan River" label="Cheboygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q455185" start="23961" end="23968" title="Saginaw River" label="Saginaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095064" start="24002" end="24011" title="Ontonagon River" label="Ontonagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675645" start="24017" end="24028" title="Tahquamenon River" label="Tahquamenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433802" start="24069" end="24079" title="St. Joseph River (Lake Michigan)" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q615010" start="24081" end="24090" title="Kalamazoo River" label="Kalamazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542859" start="24092" end="24097" title="Grand River (Michigan)" label="Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942769" start="24099" end="24107" title="Muskegon River" label="Muskegon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749927" start="24109" end="24117" title="Manistee River" label="Manistee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396867" start="24123" end="24131" title="Escanaba River" label="Escanaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="24411" end="24432" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q163515" start="24444" end="24469" title="Isle Royale National Park" label="Isle Royale National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="24545" end="24560" title="protected areas" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q163481" start="24583" end="24616" title="Keweenaw National Historical Park" label="Keweenaw National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382575" start="24618" end="24651" title="Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore" label="Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585822" start="24653" end="24691" title="Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore" label="Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384278" start="24693" end="24714" title="Huron National Forest" label="Huron National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33389968" start="24716" end="24740" title="Manistee National Forest" label="Manistee National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750580" start="24742" end="24766" title="Hiawatha National Forest" label="Hiawatha National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109216" start="24768" end="24790" title="Ottawa National Forest" label="Ottawa National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398024" start="24795" end="24829" title="Father Marquette National Memorial" label="Father Marquette National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716246" start="24858" end="24893" title="North Country National Scenic Trail" label="North Country National Scenic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="24928" end="24938" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324919" start="24976" end="24989" title="state forests" label="state forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324919" start="25031" end="25043" title="state forest" label="state forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="25097" end="25116" title="humid continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="25285" end="25314" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969483" start="25799" end="25815" title="lake-effect snow" label="lake-effect snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567984" start="26032" end="26035" title="Mio, Michigan" label="Mio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611337" start="26097" end="26107" title="Vanderbilt, Michigan" label="Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="26281" end="26288" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="26475" end="26488" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107632" start="26813" end="26827" title="Michigan Basin" label="Michigan Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="27069" end="27077" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="27173" end="27179" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="27264" end="27277" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="27286" end="27294" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="27392" end="27402" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209756" start="27677" end="27696" title="Galesburg, Michigan" label="Galesburg, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167155" start="27719" end="27728" title="Kalamazoo" label="Kalamazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="27816" end="27838" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266735" start="27846" end="27884" title="National Earthquake Information Center" label="National Earthquake Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q887111" start="27956" end="27967" title="Rick Snyder" label="Rick Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394476" start="28093" end="28101" title="Civil township" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q588061" start="28363" end="28383" title="List of counties in Michigan" label="counties in Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075106" start="28394" end="28412" title="State university system" label="state universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="28443" end="28452" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086782" start="28970" end="28986" title="Charter township" label="Charter township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526899" start="29772" end="29788" title="1800 United States census" label="1800 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="29914" end="29925" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="29963" end="29988" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="30089" end="30116" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="30161" end="30168" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189467" start="30177" end="30195" title="East North Central states" label="East North Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="30238" end="30258" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q115480" start="30277" end="30294" title="Shiawassee County, Michigan" label="Shiawassee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889888" start="30348" end="30358" title="Bennington Township, Michigan" label="Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779858" start="30397" end="30404" title="Morrice, Michigan" label="Morrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325150" start="30424" end="30452" title="American Immigration Council" label="American Immigration Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="31004" end="31007" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="31020" end="31053" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="31085" end="31093" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="31257" end="31289" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic or non-Latino white"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="31291" end="31320" title="Americans of European descent" label="Americans of European descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="31439" end="31445" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969441" start="31447" end="31454" title="British Americans" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="31456" end="31461" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="31463" end="31469" title="Polish Americans" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894388" start="31474" end="31481" title="Belgian Americans" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753422" start="31492" end="31504" title="Nordic and Scandinavian Americans" label="Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072663" start="31509" end="31526" title="Finnish Americans" label="Finnish Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358100" start="31575" end="31591" title="Western Michigan" label="Western Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="31609" end="31614" title="Dutch Americans" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001742" start="31639" end="31646" title="Holland, Michigan" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="31679" end="31706" title="African Americans" label="Black and African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q490584" start="31879" end="31884" title="Flint, Michigan" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q818338" start="31889" end="31902" title="Benton Harbor, Michigan" label="Benton Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502886" start="32164" end="32185" title="Southeastern Michigan" label="Southeastern Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="32237" end="32245" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q787519" start="32261" end="32274" title="Arab Americans" label="Arab American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810428" start="32296" end="32305" title="Assyrian Americans" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510842" start="32311" end="32319" title="Lebanese Americans" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052117" start="32402" end="32409" title="Yemeni American" label="Yemenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149944" start="32414" end="32420" title="Iraqi Americans" label="Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="32437" end="32449" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong people"/>
<link wikidata="Q126699" start="32835" end="32846" title="Gran Torino" label="Gran Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q993575" start="33074" end="33078" title="Novi, Michigan" label="Novi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851708" start="33175" end="33199" title="West Bloomfield Township, Michigan" label="West Bloomfield Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q989919" start="33201" end="33217" title="Farmington Hills, Michigan" label="Farmington Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="33223" end="33235" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229227" start="33484" end="33519" title="Consulate-General of Japan, Detroit" label="Consulate-General of Japan, Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="33952" end="33959" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="33997" end="34004" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="34021" end="34027" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="34044" end="34050" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="34067" end="34074" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="34091" end="34099" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="34117" end="34123" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="34140" end="34146" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34152" end="34168" title="Assyrian people#Language" label="Syriac languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="34178" end="34192" title="Neo-Aramaic languages" label="Modern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560578" start="34197" end="34221" title="Northeastern Neo-Aramaic" label="Northeastern Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="34239" end="34252" title="main language" label="main language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="34394" end="34409" title="mother language" label="mother language"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="34625" end="34632" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="34637" end="34656" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116393" start="34693" end="34705" title="Christianity in the United States" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="34741" end="34758" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="35164" end="35172" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q625160" start="35561" end="35584" title="Ecclesiastical Province" label="Ecclesiastical Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162345" start="35605" end="35630" title="Native American religions" label="Native American religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="35760" end="35780" title="Independent Catholicism" label="Independent Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q120643810" start="35822" end="35858" title="Ecumenical Catholic Church of Christ" label="Ecumenical Catholic Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="36186" end="36209" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="36250" end="36280" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="36303" end="36341" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q533493" start="36370" end="36412" title="Christian Reformed Church in North America" label="Christian Reformed Church in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="36489" end="36515" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Reformed Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="36590" end="36619" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="non- and inter-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="36919" end="36925" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974370" start="37005" end="37033" title="National Missionary Baptist Convention of America" label="National Missionary Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="37035" end="37052" title="National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc." label="National Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="37054" end="37071" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="American Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="37073" end="37090" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970937" start="37092" end="37120" title="National Baptist Convention of America International, Inc." label="National Baptists of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248425" start="37122" end="37151" title="Progressive National Baptist Convention" label="Progressive National Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508059" start="37157" end="37177" title="Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship" label="Full Gospel Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698460" start="37727" end="37741" title="Temple Beth El (Detroit, Michigan)" label="Temple Beth El"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394334" start="37944" end="37969" title="Islamic Center of America" label="Islamic Center of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="38037" end="38065" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="38213" end="38231" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="38238" end="38270" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241935" start="38305" end="38324" title="List of U.S. states and territories by GDP" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928428" start="38401" end="38432" title="Bureau of Labor Statistics" label="U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132699" start="38453" end="38490" title="List of U.S. states by unemployment rate" label="seasonally adjusted unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="38714" end="38728" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922309" start="38801" end="38819" title="Vernors Ginger Ale" label="Vernors Ginger Ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769794" start="38898" end="38913" title="Hires Root Beer" label="Hires Root Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580010" start="38915" end="38920" title="Faygo" label="Faygo"/>
<link wikidata="Q839466" start="39052" end="39071" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q944733" start="39075" end="39087" title="Tom Monaghan" label="Tom Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393809" start="39092" end="39106" title="Little Caesars" label="Little Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q719156" start="39116" end="39127" title="Mike Ilitch" label="Mike Ilitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333460" start="39154" end="39167" title="Right-to-work law" label="right-to-work"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="39394" end="39414" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326574" start="39419" end="39440" title="early 2000s recession" label="early 2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108653" start="39499" end="39503" title="OPEB" label="OPEB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940951" start="39689" end="39731" title="Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association" label="Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="39888" end="39911" title="Late-2000s recession" label="economic crisis of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="39979" end="39989" title="Chapter 11" label="Chapter 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="40088" end="40111" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="40447" end="40471" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="41077" end="41097" title="late 2000s recession" label="late 2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978772" start="41994" end="42039" title="National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory" label="National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q652505" start="42241" end="42269" title="Detroit Metropolitan Airport" label="Detroit Metropolitan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="42448" end="42458" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="42482" end="42497" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="42715" end="42731" title="deep-water port" label="deep water ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q990271" start="42883" end="42887" title="Troy, Michigan" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607720" start="42983" end="42999" title="Gretchen Whitmer" label="Gretchen Whitmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="43058" end="43073" title="online gambling" label="online gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417645" start="43127" end="43141" title="tribal casinos" label="tribal casinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="43223" end="43233" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="43410" end="43419" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="43482" end="43494" title="Property tax" label="Property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183019" start="43595" end="43600" title="Mill (currency)" label="mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155766" start="44110" end="44117" title="use tax" label="use tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407594" start="45064" end="45077" title="Cherry production in Michigan" label="tart cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946680" start="45197" end="45217" title="Montmorency cherries" label="Montmorency cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358100" start="45311" end="45324" title="West Michigan" label="West Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555790" start="45556" end="45561" title="Michigan wine" label="wines"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="45613" end="45627" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881015" start="45729" end="45745" title="Ball Park Franks" label="Ball Park Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425533" start="45747" end="45766" title="Koegel Meat Company" label="Koegel Meat Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695863" start="45772" end="45787" title="Hebrew National" label="Hebrew National"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538628" start="45879" end="45893" title="Tri-Cities (Michigan)" label="Saginaw Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837748" start="46216" end="46238" title="Michigan Sugar Company" label="Michigan Sugar Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111313" start="47038" end="47057" title="Tulip Time Festival" label="Tulip Time Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12246020" start="47066" end="47090" title="National Cherry Festival" label="National Cherry Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534117" start="47650" end="47681" title="Tourism in metropolitan Detroit" label="Tourism in metropolitan Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521242" start="47732" end="47746" title="The Henry Ford" label="The Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201549" start="47752" end="47777" title="Detroit Institute of Arts" label="Detroit Institute of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576018" start="47783" end="47794" title="Detroit Zoo" label="Detroit Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493984" start="47803" end="47820" title="sports in Detroit" label="sports in Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265941" start="47848" end="47873" title="Detroit Historical Museum" label="Detroit Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078673" start="47879" end="47931" title="Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History" label="Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q906437" start="47948" end="47979" title="Cranbrook Educational Community" label="Cranbrook Educational Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330679" start="47989" end="48018" title="Arab American National Museum" label="Arab American National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416198" start="48062" end="48079" title="MGM Grand Detroit" label="MGM Grand Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602124" start="48081" end="48097" title="Hollywood Casino at Greektown" label="Hollywood Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q520432" start="48099" end="48109" title="Motor City Casino" label="Motor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025472" start="48115" end="48130" title="Caesars Windsor" label="Caesars Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="48602" end="48619" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="49179" end="49189" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="49230" end="49247" title="historical marker" label="historical marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q839038" start="49304" end="49327" title="Great Lakes Circle Tour" label="Great Lakes Circle Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837774" start="49663" end="49692" title="Michigan Underwater Preserves" label="Michigan Underwater Preserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="49869" end="49878" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="49902" end="49914" title="techno music" label="techno music"/>
<link wikidata="Q564968" start="49943" end="49953" title="Tally Hall" label="Tally Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="49955" end="49982" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q218837" start="49984" end="49996" title="the Supremes" label="the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542338" start="49998" end="50013" title="the Marvelettes" label="the Marvelettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="50015" end="50030" title="the Temptations" label="the Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q653480" start="50032" end="50045" title="the Four Tops" label="the Four Tops"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="50047" end="50060" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="50062" end="50073" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761222" start="50106" end="50138" title="Smokey Robinson and the Miracles" label="Smokey Robinson and the Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="50140" end="50155" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q435857" start="50157" end="50167" title="Mary Wells" label="Mary Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932040" start="50169" end="50198" title="Tommy James and the Shondells" label="Tommy James and the Shondells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887722" start="50200" end="50220" title="? and the Mysterians" label="? and the Mysterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q313260" start="50222" end="50230" title="Al Green" label="Al Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030958" start="50232" end="50244" title="The Spinners (American group)" label="The Spinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q622815" start="50246" end="50265" title="Grand Funk Railroad" label="Grand Funk Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="50267" end="50278" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q830316" start="50284" end="50287" title="MC5" label="MC5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427240" start="50289" end="50298" title="the Knack" label="the Knack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="50300" end="50307" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q364131" start="50338" end="50347" title="Bob Seger" label="Bob Seger"/>
<link wikidata="Q439267" start="50349" end="50359" title="Jack Scott (singer)" label="Jack Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q381022" start="50361" end="50375" title="Ray Parker Jr." label="Ray Parker Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q181483" start="50377" end="50390" title="Jackie Wilson" label="Jackie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11617" start="50392" end="50399" title="Aaliyah" label="Aaliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="50401" end="50407" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q114297165" start="50409" end="50417" title="Babytron" label="Babytron"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="50419" end="50427" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="50429" end="50439" title="Jack White" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q530377" start="50444" end="50453" title="Meg White" label="Meg White"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="50455" end="50472" title="the White Stripes" label="the White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q367634" start="50475" end="50483" title="Big Sean" label="Big Sean"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="50485" end="50497" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q30636835" start="50499" end="50514" title="Greta Van Fleet" label="Greta Van Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993091" start="50516" end="50528" title="Mustard Plug" label="Mustard Plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q323456" start="50534" end="50545" title="Del Shannon" label="Del Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080199" start="50612" end="50623" title="Fox Theatre (Detroit)" label="Fox Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941534" start="50625" end="50635" title="Music Hall Center for the Performing Arts" label="Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530563" start="50637" end="50648" title="Gem Theatre (Detroit)" label="Gem Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907270" start="50650" end="50672" title="Detroit Masonic Temple" label="Masonic Temple Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564213" start="50678" end="50697" title="Detroit Opera House" label="Detroit Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q933431" start="50699" end="50713" title="Fisher Theatre" label="Fisher Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733852" start="50715" end="50735" title="The Fillmore Detroit" label="The Fillmore Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400911" start="50737" end="50761" title="Saint Andrew&amp;#x27;s Hall" label="Saint Andrew&amp;#x27;s Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737711" start="50763" end="50779" title="Majestic Theater (Detroit, Michigan)" label="Majestic Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100235" start="50785" end="50799" title="Orchestra Hall (Detroit)" label="Orchestra Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063654" start="50806" end="50830" title="Nederlander Organization" label="Nederlander Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="50987" end="51001" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="51017" end="51030" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="51031" end="51039" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="51046" end="51063" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="51064" end="51074" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="51089" end="51104" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="51254" end="51270" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355144" start="51287" end="51302" title="Detroit City FC" label="Detroit City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095860" start="51334" end="51350" title="Keyworth Stadium" label="Keyworth Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013717" start="51354" end="51373" title="Hamtramck, Michigan" label="Hamtramck, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104711" start="51413" end="51423" title="Cobo Arena" label="Cobo Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q211662" start="51446" end="51464" title="Pontiac Silverdome" label="Pontiac Silverdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327633" start="51497" end="51523" title="The Palace of Auburn Hills" label="The Palace of Auburn Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154984" start="51568" end="51588" title="Little Caesars Arena" label="Little Caesars Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750255" start="51638" end="51651" title="Tiger Stadium (Detroit)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142586" start="51782" end="51792" title="Ford Field" label="Ford Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q868482" start="51948" end="51961" title="Comerica Park" label="Comerica Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201545" start="51987" end="52002" title="Olympia Stadium" label="Olympia Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q168579" start="52020" end="52035" title="Joe Louis Arena" label="Joe Louis Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429" start="52171" end="52179" title="Houghton, Michigan" label="Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="52223" end="52254" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="52270" end="52276" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9214" start="52353" end="52363" title="Detroit Grand Prix" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265917" start="52389" end="52404" title="Detroit Dragway" label="Detroit Dragway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="52416" end="52420" title="NHRA" label="NHRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818969" start="52505" end="52534" title="Au Sable River Canoe Marathon" label="Au Sable River Canoe Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230705" start="52540" end="52572" title="Port Huron to Mackinac Boat Race" label="Port Huron to Mackinac Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459" start="52626" end="52641" title="Serena Williams" label="Serena Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q221504" start="52667" end="52723" title="2011 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships" label="2011 World Champion for Women&amp;#x27;s Artistic Gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q602245" start="52725" end="52738" title="Jordyn Wieber" label="Jordyn Wieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q284435" start="52787" end="52802" title="Gymnastics at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s artistic team all-around" label="gold medal team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174102" start="52969" end="52988" title="Michigan Wolverines" label="Michigan Wolverines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325235" start="52993" end="53016" title="Michigan State Spartans" label="Michigan State Spartans"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="53036" end="53040" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="53041" end="53059" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640118" start="53061" end="53077" title="Michigan Stadium" label="Michigan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837794" start="53104" end="53132" title="Michigan Wolverines football" label="Michigan Wolverines football"/>
<link wikidata="Q586638" start="53146" end="53187" title="List of largest stadiums" label="largest stadium in the Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837559" start="53234" end="53275" title="Michigan High School Athletic Association" label="Michigan High School Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890427" start="53494" end="53506" title="Homeschooling in the United States" label="homeschooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="53633" end="53648" title="private schools" label="private schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="53700" end="53715" title="charter schools" label="charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123218" start="53835" end="53858" title="City High Middle School" label="City High Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875208" start="53871" end="53902" title="International Academy of Macomb" label="International Academy of Macomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716157" start="53919" end="53940" title="International Academy" label="International Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059829" start="53949" end="53984" title="Ypsilanti Community Schools" label="Washtenaw International High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="54004" end="54026" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="54105" end="54126" title="research universities" label="research universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360064" start="54182" end="54200" title="Michigan Territory" label="Michigan Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350383" start="54221" end="54238" title="Kalamazoo College" label="Kalamazoo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="54326" end="54333" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="54476" end="54485" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580379" start="54498" end="54519" title="Spring Arbor Township" label="Spring Arbor Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831920" start="54528" end="54542" title="Albion College" label="Albion College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="54620" end="54653" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="54701" end="54728" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278221" start="54777" end="54804" title="Eastern Michigan University" label="Eastern Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54930" end="54943" title="normal school#United States" label="normal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="54985" end="54996" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="55118" end="55143" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11638004" start="55191" end="55211" title="agricultural college" label="agricultural college"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491651" start="55218" end="55237" title="Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching" label="Carnegie Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="55380" end="55402" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q250205" start="55404" end="55431" title="Central Michigan University" label="Central Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="55433" end="55460" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q782116" start="55462" end="55480" title="Oakland University" label="Oakland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="55509" end="55530" title="research universities" label="research universities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55608" end="55622" title="Kilowatt hour#Watt-hour multiples" label="gigawatt-hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="55700" end="55710" title="Coal power" label="Coal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="55971" end="55982" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165999" start="55986" end="56000" title="lake freighter" label="lake freighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944698" start="56227" end="56245" title="Monroe Power Plant" label="Monroe Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q995533" start="56249" end="56255" title="Monroe, Michigan" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="56281" end="56290" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="56376" end="56389" title="Nuclear power" label="Nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56519" end="56533" title="Kilowatt hour#Watt-hour multiples" label="gigawatt-hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q605091" start="56683" end="56711" title="Donald C. Cook Nuclear Plant" label="Donald C. Cook Nuclear Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074992" start="56727" end="56735" title="Bridgman, Michigan" label="Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="56765" end="56784" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q522938" start="56823" end="56862" title="Enrico Fermi Nuclear Generating Station" label="Enrico Fermi Nuclear Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="56973" end="56998" title="Detroit metropolitan area" label="Detroit metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="57078" end="57085" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="57090" end="57102" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739392" start="57124" end="57157" title="Davis–Besse Nuclear Power Station" label="Davis–Besse Nuclear Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q485596" start="57162" end="57181" title="Ottawa County, Ohio" label="Ottawa County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q533357" start="57187" end="57216" title="Palisades Nuclear Power Plant" label="Palisades Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q953719" start="57227" end="57238" title="South Haven, Michigan" label="South Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q836568" start="57264" end="57298" title="Big Rock Point Nuclear Power Plant" label="Big Rock Point Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12575" start="58056" end="58073" title="Ambassador Bridge" label="Ambassador Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q885931" start="58155" end="58172" title="Blue Water Bridge" label="Blue Water Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000222" start="58194" end="58214" title="Port Huron, Michigan" label="Port Huron, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859882" start="58220" end="58241" title="Point Edward, Ontario" label="Point Edward, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="58266" end="58272" title="Sarnia" label="Sarnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239483" start="58338" end="58359" title="Marine City, Michigan" label="Marine City, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458330" start="58384" end="58415" title="Michigan Central Railway Tunnel" label="Canadian Pacific Railway tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266068" start="58418" end="58445" title="Detroit–Windsor Truck Ferry" label="Detroit–Windsor Truck Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="58459" end="58466" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129573" start="58470" end="58492" title="Detroit–Windsor Tunnel" label="Detroit–Windsor Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596245" start="58495" end="58515" title="Sault Ste. Marie International Bridge" label="International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q463165" start="58549" end="58574" title="Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario" label="Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587584" start="58578" end="58608" title="St. Clair Tunnel" label="St. Clair River Railway Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593256" start="58635" end="58649" title="Walpole Island" label="Walpole Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731289" start="58657" end="58674" title="Algonac, Michigan" label="Algonac, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593256" start="58680" end="58694" title="Walpole Island" label="Walpole Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266001" start="58723" end="58755" title="Gordie Howe International Bridge" label="Gordie Howe International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="58926" end="58942" title="Class I railroad" label="Class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="58949" end="58974" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="58980" end="59004" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="59006" end="59024" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="59034" end="59058" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038271" start="59097" end="59116" title="short line railroad" label="short line railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234623" start="59179" end="59186" title="freight rail" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="59252" end="59258" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232584" start="59302" end="59316" title="Pere Marquette (Amtrak train)" label="Pere Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q570482" start="59351" end="59361" title="Blue Water (train)" label="Blue Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q260450" start="59398" end="59407" title="Wolverine (Amtrak train)" label="Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="59453" end="59466" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389726" start="59500" end="59520" title="SEMCOG Commuter Rail" label="SEMCOG Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351623" start="59544" end="59557" title="Interstate 75 in Michigan" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q719" start="59618" end="59625" title="Saginaw, Michigan" label="Saginaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q463165" start="59645" end="59661" title="Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario" label="Sault Ste. Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12568" start="59737" end="59752" title="Mackinac Bridge" label="Mackinac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351889" start="59820" end="59825" title="Interstate 275 (Michigan)" label="I-275"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351916" start="59830" end="59835" title="Interstate 375 (Michigan)" label="I-375"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351951" start="59848" end="59853" title="Interstate 475 (Michigan)" label="I-475"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351996" start="59868" end="59873" title="Interstate 675 (Michigan)" label="I-675"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351597" start="59888" end="59892" title="Interstate 69 in Michigan" label="I-69"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000222" start="59967" end="59977" title="Port Huron, Michigan" label="Port Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q885931" start="60005" end="60022" title="Blue Water Bridge" label="Blue Water Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="60037" end="60043" title="Sarnia" label="Sarnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351720" start="60056" end="60060" title="Interstate 94 in Michigan" label="I-94"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351802" start="60207" end="60212" title="Interstate 194 (Michigan)" label="I-194"/>
<link wikidata="Q94971" start="60316" end="60320" title="Interstate 96" label="I-96"/>
<link wikidata="Q952097" start="60356" end="60364" title="Muskegon, Michigan" label="Muskegon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351976" start="60366" end="60371" title="Interstate 496" label="I-496"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351856" start="60395" end="60400" title="Interstate 196" label="I-196"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108" start="60489" end="60494" title="Interstate 696" label="I-696"/>
<link wikidata="Q993575" start="60529" end="60533" title="Novi, Michigan" label="Novi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022954" start="60560" end="60576" title="St. Clair Shores, Michigan" label="St. Clair Shores"/>
<link wikidata="Q449983" start="60580" end="60594" title="U.S. Route 2 in Michigan" label="U.S. Highway 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002936" start="60635" end="60643" title="Ironwood, Michigan" label="Ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738898" start="60676" end="60689" title="Crystal Falls, Michigan" label="Crystal Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460542" start="60757" end="60765" title="Florence (CDP), Wisconsin" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q567814" start="60798" end="60811" title="Iron Mountain, Michigan" label="Iron Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022872" start="60883" end="60891" title="Escanaba, Michigan" label="Escanaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616145" start="60893" end="60903" title="Manistique, Michigan" label="Manistique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946253" start="60909" end="60919" title="St. Ignace, Michigan" label="St. Ignace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109216" start="60956" end="60962" title="Ottawa National Forest" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750580" start="60967" end="60975" title="Hiawatha National Forest" label="Hiawatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q449994" start="61126" end="61141" title="U.S. Route 23 in Michigan" label="U.S. Highway 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="61210" end="61222" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089171" start="61398" end="61406" title="Standish, Michigan" label="Standish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351277" start="61647" end="61662" title="U.S. Route 31 in Michigan" label="U.S. Highway 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351402" start="61927" end="61943" title="U.S. Route 127 in Michigan" label="U.S. Highway 127"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971943" start="61979" end="61985" title="Hudson, Michigan" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837835" start="62043" end="62060" title="Michigan meridian" label="Michigan meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q984374" start="62168" end="62175" title="Jackson, Michigan" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738881" start="62216" end="62224" title="Grayling, Michigan" label="Grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q440540" start="62295" end="62311" title="U.S. Route 131" label="U.S. Highway 131"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151492" start="62546" end="62552" title="Manton, Michigan" label="Manton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="62678" end="62692" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884797" start="62694" end="62710" title="Barons Bus Lines" label="Barons Bus Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="62712" end="62719" title="Flixbus" label="Flixbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="62721" end="62736" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021774" start="62738" end="62751" title="Indian Trails" label="Indian Trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808155" start="62753" end="62760" title="Megabus (North America)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q652505" start="62781" end="62809" title="Detroit Metropolitan Airport" label="Detroit Metropolitan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544846" start="62835" end="62842" title="Romulus, Michigan" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510001" start="62934" end="62970" title="Gerald R. Ford International Airport" label="Gerald R. Ford International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q597396" start="63080" end="63108" title="Bishop International Airport" label="Bishop International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433080" start="63246" end="63268" title="Cherry Capital Airport" label="Cherry Capital Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457490" start="63288" end="63332" title="Kalamazoo/Battle Creek International Airport" label="Kalamazoo/Battle Creek International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q597590" start="63381" end="63417" title="Capital Region International Airport" label="Capital Region International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q652272" start="63451" end="63476" title="MBS International Airport" label="MBS International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005953" start="63489" end="63496" title="Midland, Michigan" label="Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q746820" start="63498" end="63506" title="Bay City, Michigan" label="Bay City"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="63739" end="63761" title="separation of powers" label="branches of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="63767" end="63783" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589680" start="63802" end="63822" title="Governor of Michigan" label="Governor of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="63888" end="63906" title="legislative branch" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="63925" end="63949" title="Michigan State House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494600" start="63954" end="63960" title="Michigan Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="63970" end="63985" title="judicial branch" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q196227" start="63991" end="64012" title="Michigan Constitution" label="Michigan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="64080" end="64090" title="Popular initiative" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="64095" end="64105" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196663" start="64107" end="64113" title="recall election" label="recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="64149" end="64157" title="ratification" label="referral"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="64472" end="64479" title="Lansing, Michigan" label="Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="64487" end="64500" title="list of capitals in the United States" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607720" start="64693" end="64709" title="Gretchen Whitmer" label="Gretchen Whitmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837555" start="64737" end="64763" title="Michigan Governor&amp;#x27;s Residence" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Residences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431148" start="64804" end="64819" title="Mackinac Island" label="Mackinac Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586403" start="64883" end="64902" title="Lieutenant Governor of Michigan" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147324" start="64960" end="64978" title="Secretary of State of Michigan" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837452" start="64988" end="65004" title="Attorney General of Michigan" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270273" start="65336" end="65356" title="Michigan Legislature" label="Michigan Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="65491" end="65510" title="first past the post" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579713" start="65774" end="65796" title="Michigan State Capitol" label="Michigan State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837507" start="66061" end="66086" title="Michigan Court of Appeals" label="Michigan Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415342" start="66097" end="66119" title="Michigan Supreme Court" label="Michigan Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12201088" start="66221" end="66241" title="limited jurisdiction" label="limited jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="66291" end="66302" title="misdemeanor" label="misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="66719" end="66740" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="66850" end="66858" title="felony" label="felonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43899484" start="66964" end="66982" title="equitable remedies" label="equitable remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="67004" end="67026" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="68333" end="68342" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="68350" end="68360" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="68407" end="68417" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="68503" end="68514" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="68521" end="68533" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="68551" end="68555" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="68581" end="68585" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="68630" end="68639" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="68643" end="68647" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="68717" end="68728" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837452" start="68762" end="68778" title="Michigan Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147324" start="68780" end="68798" title="Michigan Secretary of State" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="68804" end="68811" title="United States Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837823" start="68896" end="68900" title="1994 Michigan gubernatorial election" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844629" start="68907" end="68911" title="2022 Michigan gubernatorial election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q117285696" start="69002" end="69016" title="2024 Michigan elections" label="2024 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270273" start="69029" end="69049" title="Michigan Legislature" label="Michigan Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851292" start="69219" end="69243" title="United States congressional delegations from Michigan" label="congressional delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="69398" end="69409" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103913" start="69513" end="69534" title="Gerald R. Ford Museum" label="Gerald R. Ford Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026274" start="69563" end="69598" title="Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library" label="Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q196227" start="69867" end="69892" title="Michigan Constitution" label="state&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="70191" end="70214" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696992" start="70609" end="70613" title="Ubly, Michigan" label="Ubly"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="70718" end="70732" title="State nickname" label="State nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357912" start="70859" end="70870" title="List of U.S. state mottos" label="State motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034345" start="70878" end="70919" title="Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam circumspice" label="Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam circumspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="71126" end="71142" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="71166" end="71191" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q783790" start="71195" end="71205" title="State song" label="State song"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946039" start="71213" end="71224" title="My Michigan" label="My Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837430" start="71292" end="71313" title="Michigan, My Michigan" label="Michigan, My Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13517610" start="71367" end="71377" title="List of U.S. state birds" label="State bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q460967" start="71379" end="71393" title="American robin" label="American robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244241" start="71409" end="71421" title="List of U.S. state mammals" label="State animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="71423" end="71432" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="71468" end="71485" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q491045" start="71501" end="71511" title="List of U.S. state fish" label="State fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q723654" start="71513" end="71524" title="brook trout" label="brook trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863485" start="71540" end="71553" title="List of U.S. state reptiles" label="State reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199203" start="71555" end="71569" title="painted turtle" label="painted turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044076" start="71585" end="71597" title="State fossil" label="State fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="71599" end="71607" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851570" start="71623" end="71635" title="List of U.S. state flowers" label="State flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="71637" end="71650" title="apple" label="apple blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070364" start="71707" end="71722" title="dwarf lake iris" label="dwarf lake iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474110" start="71776" end="71786" title="List of U.S. state trees" label="State tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q157230" start="71788" end="71798" title="eastern white pine" label="white pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891002" start="71814" end="71825" title="List of U.S. state minerals, rocks, stones and gemstones" label="State stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079951" start="71827" end="71841" title="Petoskey stone" label="Petoskey stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="71885" end="71890" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891002" start="72010" end="72019" title="List of U.S. state minerals, rocks, stones and gemstones" label="State gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102915" start="72021" end="72043" title="Chlorastrolite" label="Isle Royale greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q163503" start="72163" end="72174" title="Isle Royale" label="Isle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q529878" start="72205" end="72218" title="50 State Quarters" label="State quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851564" start="72300" end="72310" title="List of U.S. state soils" label="State soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353364" start="72312" end="72325" title="Kalkaska sand" label="Kalkaska sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q131358" start="72438" end="72454" title="Shiga Prefecture" label="Shiga Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="72464" end="72480" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018448" start="72531" end="72565" title="Index of Michigan-related articles" label="Index of Michigan-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112357" start="72568" end="72587" title="Outline of Michigan" label="Outline of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329749" start="72631" end="72655" title="USS Michigan" label="USS &amp;quot;Michigan&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18862" wikidata="Q186228" url="?curid=18862" title="Minimum wage">
<text>A minimum wage is the lowest remuneration that employers can legally pay their employees—the price floor below which employees may not sell their labor. Most countries had introduced minimum wage legislation by the end of the 20th century. Because minimum wages increase the cost of labor, companies often try to avoid minimum wage laws by using gig workers, by moving labor to locations with lower or nonexistent minimum wages, or by automating job functions. Minimum wage policies can vary significantly between countries or even within a country, with different regions, sectors, or age groups having their own minimum wage rates. These variations are often influenced by factors such as the cost of living, regional economic conditions, and industry-specific factors.

The movement for minimum wages was first motivated as a way to stop the exploitation of workers in sweatshops, by employers who were thought to have unfair bargaining power over them. Over time, minimum wages came to be seen as a way to help lower-income families. Modern national laws enforcing compulsory union membership which prescribed minimum wages for their members were first passed in New Zealand in 1894. Although minimum wage laws are now in effect in many jurisdictions, differences of opinion exist about the benefits and drawbacks of a minimum wage. Additionally, minimum wage policies can be implemented through various methods, such as directly legislating specific wage rates, setting a formula that adjusts the minimum wage based on economic indicators, or having wage boards that determine minimum wages in consultation with representatives from employers, employees, and the government.

Supply and demand models suggest that there may be employment losses from minimum wages; however, minimum wages can increase the efficiency of the labor market in monopsony scenarios, where individual employers have a degree of wage-setting power over the market as a whole. Supporters of the minimum wage say it increases the standard of living of workers, reduces poverty, reduces inequality, and boosts morale. In contrast, opponents of the minimum wage say it increases poverty and unemployment because some low-wage workers &quot;will be unable to find work ... [and] will be pushed into the ranks of the unemployed&quot;.

==History==

Modern minimum wage laws trace their origin to the Ordinance of Labourers (1349), which was a decree by King Edward III that set a&quot; maximum wage&quot; for laborers in medieval England. Edward, who was a wealthy landowner, was dependent, like his lords, on serfs to work the land. In the autumn of 1348, the Black Plague reached England and decimated the population. The severe shortage of labor caused wages to soar and encouraged King Edward III to set a wage ceiling. Subsequent amendments to the ordinance, such as the Statute of Labourers (1351), increased the penalties for paying a wage above the set rates.

While the laws governing wages initially set a ceiling on compensation, they were eventually used to set a living wage. An amendment to the Statute of Labourers in 1389 effectively fixed wages to the price of food. As time passed, the Justice of the Peace, who was charged with setting the maximum wage, also began to set formal minimum wages. The practice was eventually formalized with the passage of the Act Fixing a Minimum Wage in 1604 by King James I for workers in the textile industry.

By the early 19th century, the Statutes of Labourers was repealed as the increasingly capitalistic United Kingdom embraced &quot;laissez-faire&quot; policies which disfavored regulations of wages (whether upper or lower limits). The subsequent 19th century saw significant labor unrest affect many industrial nations. As trade unions were decriminalized during the century, attempts to control wages through collective agreement were made.

It was not until the 1890s that the first modern legislative attempts to regulate minimum wages were seen in New Zealand and Australia. The movement for a minimum wage was initially focused on stopping sweatshop labor and controlling the proliferation of sweatshops in manufacturing industries. The sweatshops employed large numbers of women and young workers, paying them what were considered to be substandard wages. The sweatshop owners were thought to have unfair bargaining power over their employees, and a minimum wage was proposed as a means to make them pay fairly. Over time, the focus changed to helping people, especially families, become more self-sufficient.

In the United States, the late 19th-century ideas for favoring a minimum wage also coincided with the eugenics movement. As a consequence, some economists at the time, including Royal Meeker and Henry Rogers Seager, argued for the adoption of a minimum wage not only to support the worker, but to support their desired semi- and skilled laborers while forcing the undesired workers (including the idle, immigrants, women, racial minorities, and the disabled) out of the labor market. The result, over the longer term, would be to limit the nondesired workers&#x27; ability to earn money and have families, and thereby, remove them from the economists&#x27; ideal society.

==Minimum wage laws==

The first modern national minimum wages were enacted by the government recognition of unions which in turn established minimum wage policy among their members, as in New Zealand in 1894, followed by Australia in 1896 and the United Kingdom in 1909. In the United States, statutory minimum wages were first introduced nationally in 1938, and they were reintroduced and expanded in the United Kingdom in 1998. There is now legislation or binding collective bargaining regarding minimum wage in more than 90 percent of all countries. In the European Union, 21 out of 27 member states currently have national minimum wages. Other countries, such as Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Switzerland, Austria, and Italy, have no minimum wage laws, but rely on employer groups and trade unions to set minimum earnings through collective bargaining.

Minimum wage rates vary greatly across many different jurisdictions, not only in setting a particular amount of money—for example $7.25 per hour ($14,500 per year) under certain US state laws (or $2.13 for employees who receive tips, which is known as the tipped minimum wage), $16.28 per hour in the U.S. state of Washington, or £11.44 (for those aged 21+) in the United Kingdom—but also in terms of which pay period (for example Russia and China set monthly minimum wages) or the scope of coverage. Currently the United States federal minimum wage is $7.25 per hour, though most states have a higher minimum wage. However, some states do not have a minimum wage law, such as Louisiana and Tennessee, and other states have minimum wages below the federal minimum wage such as Georgia and Wyoming, although the federal minimum wage is enforced in those states. Some jurisdictions allow employers to count tips given to their workers as credit towards the minimum wage levels. India was one of the first developing countries to introduce minimum wage policy in its law in 1948. However, it is rarely implemented, even by contractors of government agencies. In Mumbai, as of 2017, the minimum wage was Rs. 348/day.
India also has one of the most complicated systems with more than 1,200 minimum wage rates depending on the geographical region.

===Informal minimum wages===
Customs, tight labor markets, and extra-legal pressures from governments or labor unions can each produce a &quot;de facto&quot; minimum wage. So can international public opinion, by pressuring multinational companies to pay Third World workers wages usually found in more industrialized countries. The latter situation in Southeast Asia and Latin America was publicized in the 2000s, but it existed with companies in West Africa in the middle of the 20th century.

===Setting minimum wage===
Among the indicators that might be used to establish an initial minimum wage rate are ones that minimize the loss of jobs while preserving international competitiveness. Among these are general economic conditions as measured by real and nominal gross domestic product; inflation; labor supply and demand; wage levels, distribution and differentials; employment terms; productivity growth; labor costs; business operating costs; the number and trend of bankruptcies; economic freedom rankings; standards of living and the prevailing average wage rate.

In the business sector, concerns include the expected increased cost of doing business, threats to profitability, rising levels of unemployment (and subsequent higher government expenditure on welfare benefits raising tax rates), and the possible knock-on effects to the wages of more experienced workers who might already be earning the new statutory minimum wage, or slightly more. Among workers and their representatives, political considerations weigh in as labor leaders seek to win support by demanding the highest possible rate. Other concerns include purchasing power, inflation indexing and standardized working hours.

===Impact of minimum wage on income inequality and poverty===
Minimum wage policies have been debated for their impact on income inequality and poverty levels. Proponents argue that raising the minimum wage can help reduce income disparities, enabling low-income workers to afford basic necessities and contribute to the overall economy. Higher minimum wages may also have a ripple effect, pushing up wages for those earning slightly above the minimum wage.

However, opponents contend that minimum wage increases can lead to job losses, particularly for low-skilled and entry-level workers, as businesses may be unable to afford higher labor costs and may respond by cutting jobs or hours. They also argue that minimum wage increases may not effectively target those living in poverty, as many minimum wage earners are secondary earners in households with higher incomes. Some studies suggest that targeted income support programs, such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) in the United States, may be more effective in addressing poverty. The effectiveness of minimum wage policies in reducing income inequality and poverty remains a subject of ongoing debate and research.

==Economic models==
===Supply and demand model===

According to the supply and demand model of the labor market shown in many economics textbooks, increasing the minimum wage decreases the employment of minimum-wage workers. One such textbook states:
A firm&#x27;s cost is an increasing function of the wage rate. The higher the wage rate, the fewer hours an employer will demand of employees. This is because, as the wage rate rises, it becomes more expensive for firms to hire workers and so firms hire fewer workers (or hire them for fewer hours). The demand of labor curve is therefore shown as a line moving down and to the right. Since higher wages increase the quantity supplied, the supply of labor curve is upward sloping, and is shown as a line moving up and to the right. If no minimum wage is in place, wages will adjust until the quantity of labor demanded is equal to quantity supplied, reaching equilibrium, where the supply and demand curves intersect. Minimum wage behaves as a classical price floor on labor. Standard theory says that, if set above the equilibrium price, more labor will be willing to be provided by workers than will be demanded by employers, creating a surplus of labor, i.e. unemployment. The economic model of markets predicts the same of other commodities (like milk and wheat, for example): Artificially raising the price of the commodity tends to cause an increase in quantity supplied and a decrease in quantity demanded. The result is a surplus of the commodity. When there is a wheat surplus, the government buys it. Since the government does not hire surplus labor, the labor surplus takes the form of unemployment, which tends to be higher with minimum wage laws than without them.

The supply and demand model implies that by mandating a price floor above the equilibrium wage, minimum wage laws will cause unemployment. This is because a greater number of people are willing to work at the higher wage while a smaller number of jobs will be available at the higher wage. Companies can be more selective in those whom they employ thus the least skilled and least experienced will typically be excluded. An imposition or increase of a minimum wage will generally only affect employment in the low-skill labor market, as the equilibrium wage is already at or below the minimum wage, whereas in higher skill labor markets the equilibrium wage is too high for a change in minimum wage to affect employment.

===Monopsony===
The supply and demand model predicts that raising the minimum wage helps workers whose wages are raised, and hurts people who are not hired (or lose their jobs) when companies cut back on employment. But proponents of the minimum wage hold that the situation is much more complicated than the model can account for. One complicating factor is possible monopsony in the labor market, whereby the individual employer has some market power in determining wages paid. Thus it is at least theoretically possible that the minimum wage may boost employment. Though single employer market power is unlikely to exist in most labor markets in the sense of the traditional &#x27;company town,&#x27; asymmetric information, imperfect mobility, and the personal element of the labor transaction give some degree of wage-setting power to most firms.

Modern economic theory predicts that although an excessive minimum wage may raise unemployment as it fixes a price above most demand for labor, a minimum wage at a more reasonable level can increase employment, and enhance growth and efficiency. This is because labor markets are monopsonistic and workers persistently lack bargaining power. When poorer workers have more to spend it stimulates effective aggregate demand for goods and services.

===Criticisms of the supply and demand model===
The argument that a minimum wage decreases employment is based on a simple supply and demand model of the labor market. A number of economists, such as Pierangelo Garegnani, Robert L. Vienneau, and Arrigo Opocher and Ian Steedman, building on the work of Piero Sraffa, argue that that model, even given all its assumptions, is logically incoherent. Michael Anyadike-Danes and Wynne Godley argue, based on simulation results, that little of the empirical work done with the textbook model constitutes a potentially falsifiable theory, and consequently empirical evidence hardly exists for that model. Graham White argues, partially on the basis of Sraffianism, that the policy of increased labor market flexibility, including the reduction of minimum wages, does not have an &quot;intellectually coherent&quot; argument in economic theory.

Gary Fields, Professor of Labor Economics and Economics at Cornell University, argues that the standard textbook model for the minimum wage is ambiguous, and that the standard theoretical arguments incorrectly measure only a one-sector market. Fields says a two-sector market, where &quot;the self-employed, service workers, and farm workers are typically excluded from minimum-wage coverage ... [and with] one sector with minimum-wage coverage and the other without it [and possible mobility between the two],&quot; is the basis for better analysis. Through this model, Fields shows the typical theoretical argument to be ambiguous and says &quot;the predictions derived from the textbook model definitely do not carry over to the two-sector case. Therefore, since a non-covered sector exists nearly everywhere, the predictions of the textbook model simply cannot be relied on.&quot;

An alternate view of the labor market has low-wage labor markets characterized as monopsonistic competition wherein buyers (employers) have significantly more market power than do sellers (workers). This monopsony could be a result of intentional collusion between employers, or naturalistic factors such as segmented markets, search costs, information costs, imperfect mobility and the personal element of labor markets. Such a case is a type of market failure and results in workers being paid less than their marginal value. Under the monopsonistic assumption, an appropriately set minimum wage could increase both wages and employment, with the optimal level being equal to the marginal product of labor. This view emphasizes the role of minimum wages as a market regulation policy akin to antitrust policies, as opposed to an illusory &quot;free lunch&quot; for low-wage workers.

Another reason minimum wage may not affect employment in certain industries is that the demand for the product the employees produce is highly inelastic. For example, if management is forced to increase wages, management can pass on the increase in wage to consumers in the form of higher prices. Since demand for the product is highly inelastic, consumers continue to buy the product at the higher price and so the manager is not forced to lay off workers. Economist Paul Krugman argues this explanation neglects to explain why the firm was not charging this higher price absent the minimum wage.

Three other possible reasons minimum wages do not affect employment were suggested by Alan Blinder: higher wages may reduce turnover, and hence training costs; raising the minimum wage may &quot;render moot&quot; the potential problem of recruiting workers at a higher wage than current workers; and minimum wage workers might represent such a small proportion of a business&#x27; cost that the increase is too small to matter. He admits that he does not know if these are correct, but argues that &quot;the list demonstrates that one can accept the new empirical findings and still be a card-carrying economist.&quot;

=== Mathematical models of the minimum wage and frictional labor markets ===
The following mathematical models are more quantitative in orientation, and highlight some of the difficulties in determining the impact of the minimum wage on labor market outcomes. Specifically, these models focus on labor markets with frictions and may result in positive or negative outcomes from raising the minimum wage, depending on the circumstances.

==== Welfare and labor market participation ====

Assume that the decision to participate in the labor market results from a trade-off between being an unemployed job seeker and not participating at all. All individuals whose expected utility outside the labor market is less than the expected utility of an unemployed person formula_1 decide to participate in the labor market. In the basic search and matching model, the expected utility of unemployed persons formula_1 and that of employed persons formula_3 are defined by:

formula_4Let formula_5 be the wage, formula_6 the interest rate, formula_7 the instantaneous income of unemployed persons, formula_8 the exogenous job destruction rate, formula_9 the labor market tightness, and formula_10 the job finding rate. The profits formula_11 and formula_12 expected from a filled job and a vacant one are:formula_13where formula_14 is the cost of a vacant job and formula_15 is the productivity. When the &quot;free entry condition&quot; formula_16 is satisfied, these two equalities yield the following relationship between the wage formula_5 and labor market tightness formula_9:

formula_19If formula_5 represents a minimum wage that applies to all workers, this equation completely determines the equilibrium value of the labor market tightness formula_9. There are two conditions associated with the matching function:formula_22This implies that formula_9 is a decreasing function of the minimum wage formula_5, and so is the job finding rate formula_25. A hike in the minimum wage degrades the profitability of a job, so firms post fewer vacancies and the job finding rate falls off. Now let&#x27;s rewrite formula_26 to be:formula_27Using the relationship between the wage and labor market tightness to eliminate the wage from the last equation gives us:
formula_28 By maximizing formula_26 in this equation, with respect to the labor market tightness, it follows that:formula_30where formula_31 is the elasticity of the matching function:formula_32This result shows that the expected utility of unemployed workers is maximized when the minimum wage is set at a level that corresponds to the wage level of the decentralized economy in which the bargaining power parameter is equal to the elasticity formula_31.  The level of the negotiated wage is formula_34.

If formula_35, then an increase in the minimum wage increases participation &quot;and&quot; the unemployment rate, with an ambiguous impact on employment. When the bargaining power of workers is less than formula_31, an increase in the minimum wage improves the welfare of the unemployed – this suggests that minimum wage hikes can improve labor market efficiency, at least up to the point when bargaining power equals formula_31. On the other hand, if formula_38, any increases in the minimum wage entails a decline in labor market participation and an increase in unemployment.

==== Job search effort ====

In the model just presented, the minimum wage always increases unemployment. This result does not necessarily hold when the search effort of workers is endogenous.

Consider a model where the intensity of the job search is designated by the scalar formula_39, which can be interpreted as the amount of time and/or intensity of the effort devoted to search. Assume that the arrival rate of job offers is formula_40 and that the wage distribution is degenerated to a single wage formula_5. Denote formula_42 to be the cost arising from the search effort, with formula_43. Then the discounted utilities are given by:formula_44Therefore, the optimal search effort is such that the marginal cost of performing the search is equation to the marginal return:formula_45This implies that the optimal search effort increases as the difference between the expected utility of the job holder and the expected utility of the job seeker grows. In fact, this difference actually grows with the wage. To see this, take the difference of the two discounted utilities to find:formula_46Then differentiating with respect to formula_5 and rearranging gives us:formula_48where formula_49 is the optimal search effort. This implies that a wage increase drives up job search effort and, therefore, the job finding rate. Additionally, the unemployment rate formula_50 at equilibrium is given by:formula_51A hike in the wage, which increases the search effort and the job finding rate, decreases the unemployment rate. So it is possible that a hike in the minimum wage &quot;may&quot;, by boosting the search effort of job seekers, boost employment. Taken in sum with the previous section, the minimum wage in labor markets with frictions can improve employment and decrease the unemployment rate when it is sufficiently low. However, a high minimum wage is detrimental to employment and increases the unemployment rate.

==Empirical studies==

Economists disagree as to the measurable impact of minimum wages in practice. This disagreement usually takes the form of competing empirical tests of the elasticities of supply and demand in labor markets and the degree to which markets differ from the efficiency that models of perfect competition predict.

Economists have done empirical studies on different aspects of the minimum wage, including:
* Employment effects, the most frequently studied aspect
* Effects on the distribution of wages and earnings among low-paid and higher-paid workers
* Effects on the distribution of incomes among low-income and higher-income families
* Effects on the skills of workers through job training and the deferring of work to acquire education
* Effects on prices and profits
* Effects on on-the-job training
Until the mid-1990s, a general consensus existed among economists–both conservative and liberal–that the minimum wage reduced employment, especially among younger and low-skill workers. In addition to the basic supply-demand intuition, there were a number of empirical studies that supported this view. For example, Edward Gramlich in 1976 found that many of the benefits went to higher income families, and that teenagers were made worse off by the unemployment associated with the minimum wage.

Brown et al. (1983) noted that time series studies to that point had found that for a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage, there was a decrease in teenage employment of 1–3 percent. However, the studies found wider variation, from 0 to over 3 percent, in their estimates for the effect on teenage unemployment (teenagers without a job and looking for one). In contrast to the simple supply and demand diagram, it was commonly found that teenagers withdrew from the labor force in response to the minimum wage, which produced the possibility of equal reductions in the supply as well as the demand for labor at a higher minimum wage and hence no impact on the unemployment rate. Using a variety of specifications of the employment and unemployment equations (using ordinary least squares vs. generalized least squares regression procedures, and linear vs. logarithmic specifications), they found that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage caused a 1 percent decrease in teenage employment, and no change in the teenage unemployment rate. The study also found a small, but statistically significant, increase in unemployment for adults aged 20–24.

Wellington (1991) updated Brown et al.&#x27;s research with data through 1986 to provide new estimates encompassing a period when the real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) value of the minimum wage was declining, because it had not increased since 1981. She found that a 10% increase in the minimum wage decreased the absolute teenage employment by 0.6%, with no effect on the teen or young adult unemployment rates.

Some research suggests that the unemployment effects of small minimum wage increases are dominated by other factors. In Florida, where voters approved an increase in 2004, a follow-up comprehensive study after the increase confirmed a strong economy with increased employment above previous years in Florida and better than in the US as a whole. When it comes to on-the-job training, some believe the increase in wages is taken out of training expenses. A 2001 empirical study found that there is &quot;no evidence that minimum wages reduce training, and little evidence that they tend to increase training.&quot;

&quot;The Economist&quot; wrote in December 2013: &quot;A minimum wage, providing it is not set too high, could thus boost pay with no ill effects on jobs...America&#x27;s federal minimum wage, at 38% of median income, is one of the rich world&#x27;s lowest. Some studies find no harm to employment from federal or state minimum wages, others see a small one, but none finds any serious damage. ... High minimum wages, however, particularly in rigid labour markets, do appear to hit employment. France has the rich world&#x27;s highest wage floor, at more than 60% of the median for adults and a far bigger fraction of the typical wage for the young. This helps explain why France also has shockingly high rates of youth unemployment: 26% for 15- to 24-year-olds.&quot;

A 2019 study in the &quot;Quarterly Journal of Economics&quot; found that minimum wage increases did not have an impact on the overall number of low-wage jobs in the five years subsequent to the wage increase. However, it did find disemployment in &#x27;tradable&#x27; sectors, defined as those sectors most reliant on entry-level or low-skilled labor.

A 2018 study published by the university of California agrees with the study in the &quot;Quarterly Journal of Economics&quot; and discusses how minimum wages actually cause fewer jobs for low-skilled workers. Within the article it discusses a trade-off for low- to high-skilled workers that when the minimum wage is increased GDP is more highly redistributed to high academia jobs.

In another study, which shared authors with the above, published in the &quot;American Economic Review&quot; found that a large and persistent increase in the minimum wage in Hungary produced some disemployment, with the large majority of additional cost being passed on to consumers. The authors also found that firms began substituting capital for labor over time.

A 2013 study published in the &quot;Science Direct&quot; journal agrees with the studies above as it describes that there is not a significant employment change due to increases in minimum wage. The study illustrates that there is not a-lot of national generalisability for minimum wage effects, studies done on one country often get generalised to others. Effect on employment can be low from minimum-wage policies, but these policies can also benefit welfare and poverty.

===David Card and Alan Krueger===
In 1992, the minimum wage in New Jersey increased from $4.25 to $5.05 per hour (an 18.8% increase), while in the adjacent state of Pennsylvania it remained at $4.25. David Card and Alan Krueger gathered information on fast food restaurants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania in an attempt to see what effect this increase had on employment within New Jersey via a Difference in differences model. A basic supply and demand model predicts that relative employment should have decreased in New Jersey. Card and Krueger surveyed employers before the April 1992 New Jersey increase, and again in November–December 1992, asking managers for data on the full-time equivalent staff level of their restaurants both times. Based on data from the employers&#x27; responses, the authors concluded that the increase in the minimum wage slightly increased employment in the New Jersey restaurants.

Card and Krueger expanded on this initial article in their 1995 book &quot;Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage&quot;. They argued that the negative employment effects of minimum wage laws are minimal if not non-existent. For example, they look at the 1992 increase in New Jersey&#x27;s minimum wage, the 1988 rise in California&#x27;s minimum wage, and the 1990–91 increases in the federal minimum wage. In addition to their own findings, they reanalyzed earlier studies with updated data, generally finding that the older results of a negative employment effect did not hold up in the larger datasets. This had major implications on policy, challenging long-held economic views that increasing minimum wage led to deadweight loss.

===Research after Card&#x27;s and Krueger&#x27;s work===

In 1996, David Neumark and William Wascher reexamined Card and Krueger&#x27;s results using payroll records from large fast-food chains, reporting that minimum wage increases led to decreases in employment. Their initial findings did not contradict Card and Krueger, but a later version showed a four percent decrease in employment, with statistically significant disemployment effects in some cases. Card and Krueger rebutted these conclusions in a 2000 paper.

A 2011 paper reconciled differences between datasets, showing positive employment effects for small restaurants but negative effects for large fast-food chains. A 2014 analysis found that minimum wage reduces employment among teenagers.

Further studies using Card and Krueger&#x27;s methodology supported their original findings, showing no negative effects on low-wage employment.

A 2011 study by Baskaya and Rubinstein found that federal minimum wage increases negatively impacted employment, particularly among teenagers. Other studies, including a 2012 study by Sabia, Hansen, and Burkhauser, found substantial adverse effects on low-skilled employment, particularly among young workers.

A 2019 paper in the Quarterly Journal of Economics argued that job losses in studies like those of Meer and West are driven by unrealistic assumptions and that minimum wage effects are more complex. Another 2013 study by Fang and Lin found significant adverse effects on employment in China, particularly among women, young adults, and low-skilled workers.

A 2017 study in Seattle found that increasing the minimum wage to $13 per hour led to reduced income for low-wage workers due to decreased hours worked, as businesses adjusted to higher labor costs. A 2019 study in Arizona suggested that smaller minimum wage increases might lead to slight economic growth without significantly distorting labor markets.

In 2019, economists from Georgia Tech found that minimum wage increases could harm small businesses by increasing bankruptcy rates and reducing hiring, with significant impacts on minority-owned businesses.

The Congressional Budget Office&#x27;s 2019 report on a proposed $15 federal minimum wage predicted modest improvements in take-home pay for those who retained employment but warned of potential job losses, reduced hours, and increased costs of goods and services. Similarly, a 2019 study found that increasing the minimum wage could lead to increased crime among young adults.

Studies from Denmark and Spain further highlighted that significant minimum wage increases could lead to substantial job losses, particularly among young workers. A 2021 study on Germany&#x27;s minimum wage found that while wages increased without reducing employment, there were significant structural shifts in the economy, including reduced competition and increased commuting times for workers.

A 2010 study on the UK minimum wage found that it did not cause immediate price increases but led to faster price rises in sectors with many low-wage workers over the long term. A 2012 UK study (1997-2007) found the minimum wage reduced wage inequality and had neutral to positive effects on employment. Another 2012 UK study found no &quot;spill-over&quot; effects from the minimum wage on higher-earning brackets. A 2016 US study associated the minimum wage with reduced wage inequality and possible spill-over effects, though these might be due to measurement error.

===Meta-analyses===
*A 2013 meta-analysis of 16 UK studies found no significant employment effects from the minimum wage.
*A 2007 meta-analysis by Neumark found a consistent, though not always significant, negative effect on employment.
*A 2019 meta-analysis of developed countries reported minimal employment effects and significant earnings increases for low-paid workers.

In 1995, Card and Krueger noted evidence of publication bias in time-series studies on minimum wages, which favored studies showing negative employment effects. A 2005 study by T.D. Stanley confirmed this bias and suggested no clear link between the minimum wage and unemployment. A 2008 meta-analysis by Doucouliagos and Stanley supported Card and Krueger&#x27;s findings, showing little to no negative association between minimum wages and employment after correcting for publication bias.

==Debate over consequences==

Minimum wage laws affect workers in most low-paid fields of employment and have usually been judged against the criterion of reducing poverty. Minimum wage laws receive less support from economists than from the general public. Despite decades of experience and economic research, debates about the costs and benefits of minimum wages continue today.

Various groups have great ideological, political, financial, and emotional investments in issues surrounding minimum wage laws. For example, agencies that administer the laws have a vested interest in showing that &quot;their&quot; laws do not create unemployment, as do labor unions whose members&#x27; finances are protected by minimum wage laws. On the other side of the issue, low-wage employers such as restaurants finance the Employment Policies Institute, which has released numerous studies opposing the minimum wage. The presence of these powerful groups and factors means that the debate on the issue is not always based on dispassionate analysis. Additionally, it is extraordinarily difficult to separate the effects of minimum wage from all the other variables that affect employment.

Studies have found that minimum wages have the following positive effects: 
* Improves functioning of the low-wage labor market which may be characterized by employer-side market power (monopsony).
*Raises family incomes at the bottom of the income distribution, and lowers poverty.
*Positive impact on small business owners and industry.
* Encourages education, resulting in better paying jobs.
* Increases incentives to take jobs, as opposed to other methods of transferring income to the poor that are not tied to employment (such as food subsidies for the poor or welfare payments for the unemployed).
* Increased job growth and creation.
* Encourages efficiency and automation of industry.
* Removes low paying jobs, forcing workers to train for, and move to, higher paying jobs.
* Increases technological development. Costly technology that increases business efficiency is more appealing as the price of labor increases.
* Encourages people to join the workforce rather than pursuing money through illegal means, e.g., selling illegal drugs

Studies have found the following negative effects:
* Minimum wage alone is not effective at alleviating poverty, and in fact produces a net increase in poverty due to disemployment effects.
* As a labor market analogue of political-economic protectionism, it excludes low cost competitors from labor markets and hampers firms in reducing wage costs during trade downturns. This generates various industrial-economic inefficiencies.
* Reduces quantity demanded of workers, either through a reduction in the number of hours worked by individuals, or through a reduction in the number of jobs.
* Wage/price spiral
* Encourages employers to replace low-skilled workers with computers, such as self-checkout machines.
* Increases property crime and misery in poor communities by decreasing legal markets of production and consumption in those communities;
* Can result in the exclusion of certain groups (ethnic, gender etc.) from the labor force.
* Is less effective than other methods (e.g. the Earned Income Tax Credit) at reducing poverty, and is more damaging to businesses than those other methods.
* Discourages further education among the poor by enticing people to enter the job market.
* Discriminates against, through pricing out, less qualified workers (including newcomers to the labor market, e.g. young workers) by keeping them from accumulating work experience and qualifications, hence potentially graduating to higher wages later.
* Slows growth in the creation of low-skilled jobs
* Results in jobs moving to other areas or countries which allow lower-cost labor.
* Results in higher long-term unemployment.
* Results in higher prices for consumers, where products and services are produced by minimum-wage workers (though non-labor costs represent a greater proportion of costs to consumers in industries like fast food and discount retail)

A widely circulated argument that the minimum wage was ineffective at reducing poverty was provided by George Stigler in 1949:
* Employment may fall more than in proportion to the wage increase, thereby reducing overall earnings;
* As uncovered sectors of the economy absorb workers released from the covered sectors, the decrease in wages in the uncovered sectors may exceed the increase in wages in the covered ones;
* The impact of the minimum wage on family income distribution may be negative unless the fewer but better jobs are allocated to members of needy families rather than to, for example, teenagers from families not in poverty;
* Forbidding employers to pay less than a legal minimum is equivalent to forbidding workers to sell their labor for less than the minimum wage. The legal restriction that employers cannot pay less than a legislated wage is equivalent to the legal restriction that workers cannot work at all in the protected sector unless they can find employers willing to hire them at that wage. That may be seen as a legal violation of human right to work in its most basic interpretation as &quot;a right to engage in productive employment, and not to be prevented from doing so&quot;.
In 2006, the International Labour Organization (ILO) argued that the minimum wage could not be directly linked to unemployment in countries that have suffered job losses. In April 2010, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) released a report arguing that countries could alleviate teen unemployment by &quot;lowering the cost of employing low-skilled youth&quot; through a sub-minimum training wage. A study of U.S. states showed that businesses&#x27; annual and average payrolls grow faster and employment grew at a faster rate in states with a minimum wage. The study showed a correlation, but did not claim to prove causation.

Although strongly opposed by both the business community and the Conservative Party when introduced in the UK in 1999, the Conservatives reversed their opposition in 2000. Accounts differ as to the effects of the minimum wage. The Centre for Economic Performance found no discernible impact on employment levels from the wage increases, while the Low Pay Commission found that employers had reduced their rate of hiring and employee hours employed, and found ways to cause current workers to be more productive (especially service companies). The Institute for the Study of Labor found prices in minimum wage sectors rose faster than other sectors, especially in the four years after its introduction. Neither trade unions nor employer organizations contest the minimum wage, although the latter had especially done so heavily until 1999.

In 2014, supporters of minimum wage cited a study that found that job creation within the United States is faster in states that raised their minimum wages. In 2014, supporters of minimum wage cited news organizations who reported the state with the highest minimum-wage garnered more job creation than the rest of the United States.

In 2014, in Seattle, Washington, liberal and progressive business owners who had supported the city&#x27;s new $15 minimum wage said they might hold off on expanding their businesses and thus creating new jobs, due to the uncertain timescale of the wage increase implementation. However, subsequently at least two of the business owners quoted did expand.

With regard to the economic effects of introducing minimum wage legislation in Germany in January 2015, recent developments have shown that the feared increase in unemployment has not materialized, however, in some economic sectors and regions of the country, it came to a decline in job opportunities particularly for temporary and part-time workers, and some low-wage jobs have disappeared entirely. Because of this overall positive development, the Deutsche Bundesbank revised its opinion, and ascertained that &quot;the impact of the introduction of the minimum wage on the total volume of work appears to be very limited in the present business cycle&quot;.

A 2019 study published in the &quot;American Journal of Preventive Medicine&quot; showed that in the United States, those states that have implemented a higher minimum wage saw a decline in the growth of suicide rates. The researchers say that for every one dollar increase, the annual suicide growth rate fell by 1.9%. The study covers all 50 states for the years 2006 to 2016.

According to a 2020 US study, the cost of 10% minimum wage increases for grocery store workers was fully passed through to consumers as 0.4% higher grocery prices. Similarly, a 2021 study that covered 10,000 McDonald&#x27;s restaurants in the US found that between 2016 and 2020, the cost of 10% minimum wage increases for McDonald&#x27;s workers were passed through to customers as 1.4% increases in the price of a Big Mac. This results in minimum wage workers getting a lesser increase in their &quot;real wage&quot; than in their nominal wage, because any goods and services they purchase made with minimum-wage labor have now increased in cost, analogous to an increase in the sales tax.

According to a 2019 review of the academic literature by Arindrajit Dube, &quot;overall, the most up to date body of research from US, UK and other developed countries points to a very muted effect of minimum wages on employment, while significantly increasing the earnings of low paid workers.&quot;

According to a 2021 study &quot;The Minimum Wage, EITC, and Criminal Recidivism&quot; a minimum wage increase of $0.50 reduces the probability an ex-incarcerated individual returns to prison within 3 years by 2.15%; these reductions come mainly from recidivism of property and drug crimes.

==Surveys of economists==
There used to be agreement among economists that the minimum wage adversely affected employment, but that consensus shifted in the early 1990s due to new research findings. According to one 2021 assessment, &quot;there is no consensus on the employment effects of the minimum wage.&quot;

According to a 1978 article in the &quot;American Economic Review&quot;, 90% of the economists surveyed agreed that the minimum wage increases unemployment among low-skilled workers. By 1992 the survey found 79% of economists in agreement with that statement, and by 2000, 46% were in full agreement with the statement and 28% agreed with provisos (74% total). The authors of the 2000 study also reweighted data from a 1990 sample to show that at that time 62% of academic economists agreed with the statement above, while 20% agreed with provisos and 18% disagreed. They state that the reduction on consensus on this question is &quot;likely&quot; due to the Card and Krueger research and subsequent debate.

A similar survey in 2006 by Robert Whaples polled PhD members of the American Economic Association (AEA). Whaples found that 47% respondents wanted the minimum wage eliminated, 38% supported an increase, 14% wanted it kept at the current level, and 1% wanted it decreased. Another survey in 2007 conducted by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center found that 73% of labor economists surveyed in the United States believed 150% of the then-current minimum wage would result in employment losses and 68% believed a mandated minimum wage would cause an increase in hiring of workers with greater skills. 31% felt that no hiring changes would result.

Surveys of labor economists have found a sharp split on the minimum wage. Fuchs et al. (1998) polled labor economists at the top 40 research universities in the United States on a variety of questions in the summer of 1996. Their 65 respondents were nearly evenly divided when asked if the minimum wage should be increased. They argued that the different policy views were not related to views on whether raising the minimum wage would reduce teen employment (the median economist said there would be a reduction of 1%), but on value differences such as income redistribution. Daniel B. Klein and Stewart Dompe conclude, on the basis of previous surveys, &quot;the average level of support for the minimum wage is somewhat higher among labor economists than among AEA members.&quot;

In 2007, Klein and Dompe conducted a non-anonymous survey of supporters of the minimum wage who had signed the &quot;Raise the Minimum Wage&quot; statement published by the Economic Policy Institute. 95 of the 605 signatories responded. They found that a majority signed on the grounds that it transferred income from employers to workers, or equalized bargaining power between them in the labor market. In addition, a majority considered disemployment to be a moderate potential drawback to the increase they supported.

In 2013, a diverse group of 37 economics professors was surveyed on their view of the minimum wage&#x27;s impact on employment. 34% of respondents agreed with the statement, &quot;Raising the federal minimum wage to $9 per hour would make it noticeably harder for low-skilled workers to find employment.&quot; 32% disagreed and the remaining respondents were uncertain or had no opinion on the question. 47% agreed with the statement, &quot;The distortionary costs of raising the federal minimum wage to $9 per hour and indexing it to inflation are sufficiently small compared with the benefits to low-skilled workers who can find employment that this would be a desirable policy&quot;, while 11% disagreed.

==Alternatives==
Economists and other political commentators have proposed alternatives to the minimum wage. They argue that these alternatives may address the issue of poverty better than a minimum wage, as it would benefit a broader population of low wage earners, not cause any unemployment, and distribute the costs widely rather than concentrating it on employers of low wage workers.

===Basic income===

A basic income (or negative income tax – NIT) is a system of social security that periodically provides each citizen with a sum of money that is sufficient to live on frugally. Supporters of the basic-income idea argue that recipients of the basic income would have considerably more bargaining power when negotiating a wage with an employer, as there would be no risk of destitution for not taking the employment. As a result, jobseekers could spend more time looking for a more appropriate or satisfying job, or they could wait until a higher-paying job appeared. Alternatively, they could spend more time increasing their skills (via education and training), which would make them more suitable for higher-paying jobs, as well as provide numerous other benefits. Experiments on Basic Income and NIT in Canada and the United States show that people spent more time studying while the program was running.

Proponents argue that a basic income that is based on a broad tax base would be more economically efficient than a minimum wage, as the minimum wage effectively imposes a high marginal tax on employers, causing losses in efficiency.

===Guaranteed minimum income===
A guaranteed minimum income is another proposed system of social welfare provision. It is similar to a basic income or negative income tax system, except that it is normally conditional and subject to a means test. Some proposals also stipulate a willingness to participate in the labor market, or a willingness to perform community services.

===Refundable tax credit===
A refundable tax credit is a mechanism whereby the tax system can reduce the tax owed by a household to below zero, and result in a net payment to the taxpayer beyond their own payments into the tax system. Examples of refundable tax credits include the earned income tax credit and the additional child tax credit in the US, and working tax credits and child tax credits in the UK. Such a system is slightly different from a negative income tax, in that the refundable tax credit is usually only paid to households that have earned at least some income. This policy is more targeted against poverty than the minimum wage, because it avoids subsidizing low-income workers who are supported by high-income households (for example, teenagers still living with their parents).

In the United States, earned income tax credit rates, also known as EITC or EIC, vary by state—some are refundable while other states do not allow a refundable tax credit. The federal EITC program has been expanded by a number of presidents including Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and Bill Clinton. In 1986, President Reagan described the EITC as &quot;the best anti-poverty, the best pro-family, the best job creation measure to come out of Congress.&quot; The ability of the earned income tax credit to deliver larger monetary benefits to the poor workers than an increase in the minimum wage and at a lower cost to society was documented in a 2007 report by the Congressional Budget Office.

The Adam Smith Institute prefers cutting taxes on the poor and middle class instead of raising wages as an alternative to the minimum wage.

===Collective bargaining===
Italy, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Denmark are developed nations where legislation stipulates no minimum wage. Instead, minimum wage standards in different sectors are set by collective bargaining. Particularly the Scandinavian countries have very high union participation rates.

=== Wage subsidies ===
Some economists such as Scott Sumner and Edmund Phelps advocate a wage subsidy program. A wage subsidy is a payment made by a government for work people do. It is based either on an hourly basis or by income earned. Wage subsidies lack political support from either major political party in the United States.

===Education and training===

Providing education or funding apprenticeships or technical training can provide a bridge for low skilled workers to move into wages above a minimum wage. For example, Germany has adopted a state funded apprenticeship program that combines on-the-job and classroom training. Having more skills makes workers more valuable and more productive, but having a high minimum wage for low-skill jobs reduces the incentive to seek education and training. Moving some workers to higher-paying jobs will decrease the supply of workers willing to accept low-skill jobs, increasing the market wage for those low skilled jobs (assuming a stable labor market). However, in that solution the wage will still not increase above the marginal return for the role and will likely promote automation or business closure.

== By country ==
=== Armenia ===
The concept of the national minimum wage emerged in Armenia in 1995. Since then, it has been increasing, on average, every couple of years. The longest unchanged streak of the national minimum wage was between 1999 and 2003, when it was set at 5,000 AMD, and between 2015 and 2019 where it was set at 55,000 AMD. In November 2022, the national minimum wage was subject to the latest increase. It was set at 75,000 AMD.

===Lebanon===

After two years of constant financial meltdown, Lebanon as of 2021 is ranking as one of the 10 countries in the world with the lowest minimum wages because of the collapse of the local pound following the Lebanese financial crisis that started in August 2019.

The minimum monthly wage set at LBP 675,000, which valued USD 450 prior to the crisis, is barely reaching USD 30 nowadays. The currency has lost nearly 90% of its value and drove three quarters of residents into poverty.

Article 44 of the Lebanese Code of Labor states that, “the minimum pay must be sufficient to meet the essential needs of the wage-earner or salary-earner and his family,” and according to Article 46, “the minimum pay assessed shall be rectified whenever economic circumstances render such review necessary.”

===Republic of Ireland===

The national minimum wage was introduced in the Republic of Ireland in April 2000. Prior to this, minimum wages were set by industry-specific Joint Labour Committees. However, coverage for workers was low and the agreements were poorly enforced and moreover, those who were covered by agreements received low wages.

As of April 2000, the government introduced a national minimum wage of €5.58 per hour. The minimum wage increased regularly in the period from 2000 to 2007 and reached €8.65 per hour in July 2007. As the global economic downturn hit the country in 2008, there was no further wage increases until 2016 when the minimum wage was increased to 9.15.

Before the 2019, there existed specific categories of employees that earned sub-minimum wage rates, expressed as a percentage of the full rate of pay. Employees under the age of 18 were eligible to earn 70 per cent of the minimum wage, employees in the first year of employment were eligible to earn 80 per cent, employees in the second year of full employment were eligible to earn 90 per cent and employees in structured training during working hours were eligible to earn 75, 80 or 90 per cent depending on their level of progression. This framework has since been abolished in place of a framework based on the age of the employee.

As of 1 January 2022, the minimum wage is €10.50. Those aged 20 and over are eligible to receive 100 percent of the minimum wage. Those under the age of 18 are eligible to receive 70 percent of the minimum wage, those aged 18 are eligible to receive 80 percent of the minimum wage and those aged 19 are eligible receive 90 percent of the minimum wage.

===South Korea===
=== Spain ===
The Spanish government sets the &quot;Interprofessional Minimum Wage&quot; (SMI) annually, after consulting with the most representative trade unions and business associations, for both permanent and temporary workers, as well as for domestic employees. It takes into account the consumer price index, national average productivity, the increase in labor&#x27;s share in national income, and the general economic situation.

The SMI can be revised semi-annually if the government&#x27;s predictions about the consumer price index are not met. The amount set is a minimum wage, so it can be exceeded by a collective agreement or individual agreement with the company. The revision of the SMI does not affect the structure or amount of professional salaries being paid to workers when they are superior to the established minimum wage. Finally, the amount of the SMI is non-seizable.

The minimum wage was introduced in Spain in 1963 through Decree 55/1963, proposed by Jesús Romeo Gorría, the Minister of Labor during Francisco Franco&#x27;s IX Government. The purpose was to ensure fair remuneration for all workers, adjusting wages to labor and economic conditions and advocating for salary equity. It was set at 1,800 pesetas/month (25,200 pesetas/year, 12 monthly payments plus 2 extra payments, as its customary in Spain as to this day), equivalent to 10.80 euros at the time but only 400 euros in today&#x27;s prices.

In the years following Franco&#x27;s death in 1975, the minimum wage gradually increased, reaching 50.49 euros (8,400 pesetas) that year, which is equivalent to 657.23 euros in today&#x27;s currency. Over the years, the minimum wage continued to rise, with several revisions along the way. In 2022, the Spanish government set the minimum wage at 33.33 euros per day or 1,000 euros per month, effective from January 1. This represents a 47% increase from the previous minimum wage set in 2018 at 735.90 euros.

There are several debates around the minimum wage in Spain, which focus on its impact on employment and inflation. While some argue that increasing the minimum wage can be a useful tool to increase the incomes of low-income families and reduce poverty, others have doubts about its effectiveness in achieving these goals.

For instance, an analysis conducted by BCE (Central Bank of Spain, by its initials in spanish) in 2019 on the impact of the 2017 increase in the minimum wage showed a negative effect on the probability of maintaining employment among affected workers, which was particularly significant for older workers.

Additionally, the 2022 raise of the minimum wage revived the debate about the relationship between inflation and the SMI, with some arguing that the increase in the minimum wage could potentially contribute to inflation. The debate centres on whether it&#x27;s a useful tool to help maintain the purchasing power of those who retain their jobs, or it&#x27;s not effective because it adds pressure to the growth of prices and increase the likelihood of inflation becoming entrenched.

===United Kingdom===
===United States===

=== Australia ===
In Australia, the Fair Work Commission (FWC) is responsible for determining and setting a national minimum wage as well as the minimum wages in awards setting wage rates for particular occupations and industries. &quot;The Fair Work Act 2009&quot; establishes an Expert panel tasked with providing and maintaining a safety net of a fair minimum wage. The Expert panel is made up of the president of the panel, three full time commission members, and three part time commission members. All members must have experience in workplace relations, economics, social policy or business, industry and commerce and can inform its decision making through commissioning a range of economic and social research.

The legislative framework requires that, in setting minimum wages, the Expert Panel is required to take into account the current state of the economy, including inflation, business competitiveness, productivity and employment growth. In addition, the Expert panel must also consider the social goals of the promotion of social inclusion, the standard of living of the low paid, equal remuneration for work of equal or comparable value and reasonable wages for junior employees, employees whose jobs have training requirements and employees with disability. See Fair Work Act 2009 for more information.

The Expert panel conducts yearly wage reviews, to determine if the minimum wage needs to be adjusted based on the economy&#x27;s current and projected performance. The annual minimum wage review decisions in 2016–17 found, based on research tendered and submissions to the review, that moderate increases to minimum wages do not inhibit workplace participation or result in disemployment. This position was carried over to the 2017–18 and 2018–19 decisions and informed the decisions including the 2018–19 decision which delivered a minimum wage increase of 3% when the corresponding headline rate of inflation was 1.3%. In the annual minimum wage review decisions of 2019–20 and 2020–21, the FWC was considerably more constrained in setting minimum wages due to uncertain economic conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2020–21 decision noted the uncertainty of the impact of increases in the minimum wages for youth employment.

==Minimum to median wage ratio==


==See also==


* Average worker&#x27;s wage
* Cost of living
* Economic inequality
* Employee benefits
* Family wage
* &quot;Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority&quot;
* Labor law
* Living wage
* Minimum Wage Fixing Convention 1970
* Negative and positive rights
* List of countries by minimum wage
* Price controls
* Salary cap
* &quot;Scratch Beginnings&quot;
* Thomas Sowell
* Universal basic income
* Walter E. Williams
* Working poor
==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==
* Burkhauser, R. V. (2014). &quot;Why minimum wage increases are a poor way to help the working poor&quot; (No. 86). IZA Policy Paper, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
* Komlos, J. (2023). &quot;Foundations of Real-World Economics&quot; 3rd edition, Abingdon-on-Thames, UK: Routledge. Sections 9.1 and 9.3.
* Osnos, Evan, &quot;Ruling-Class Rules: How to thrive in the power elite – while declaring it your enemy&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, 29 January 2024

==External links==


*Resource Guide on Minimum Wages from the International Labour Organization (a UN agency)
*The National Minimum Wage (U.K.) from official UK government website
*Find It! By Topic: Wages: Minimum Wage U.S. Department of Labor
*Characteristics of Minimum Wage Workers: 2009 U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics
*History of Changes to the Minimum Wage Law U.S. Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division
*The Effects of a Minimum-wage Increase on Employment and Family Income Congressional Budget Office
*Inflation and the Real Minimum Wage: A Fact Sheet Congressional Research Service
*Minimum Wages in Central and Eastern Europe Database Central Europe
*Prices and Wages – research guide at the University of Missouri libraries

Support
*Issues about Minimum Wage from the AFL–CIO
*Issue Guide on the Minimum Wage from the Economic Policy Institute
*A $15 U.S. Minimum Wage: How the Fast-Food Industry Could Adjust Without Shedding Jobs from the Political Economy Research Institute, January 2015.

Opposed
*Reporting the Minimum Wage from The Cato Institute
*The Economic Effects of Minimum Wages from Show-Me Institute
*Economics in One Lesson: The Lesson Applied, Chapter 19: Minimum Wage Laws by Henry Hazlitt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="2" end="14" title="Minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742093" start="29" end="41" title="remuneration" label="remuneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936477" start="93" end="104" title="price floor" label="price floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153034" start="153" end="195" title="List of countries by minimum wage" label="Most countries had introduced minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="275" end="288" title="cost of labor" label="cost of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q96619693" start="346" end="356" title="gig worker" label="gig worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="435" end="459" title="Automation" label="automating job functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415635" start="872" end="881" title="sweatshop" label="sweatshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865499" start="1197" end="1213" title="minimum wage law" label="minimum wage law"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="1681" end="1698" title="Supply and demand" label="Supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q319808" start="1844" end="1853" title="monopsony" label="monopsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="2008" end="2026" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824165" start="2039" end="2054" title="poverty reduction" label="reduces poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2167" end="2179" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355455" start="2374" end="2396" title="Ordinance of Labourers 1349" label="Ordinance of Labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="2417" end="2423" title="decree" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="2427" end="2442" title="Edward III of England" label="King Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106776" start="2460" end="2472" title="maximum wage" label="maximum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="2495" end="2511" title="medieval England" label="medieval England"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="2584" end="2589" title="serfs" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="2635" end="2647" title="Black Plague" label="Black Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413849" start="2850" end="2870" title="Statute of Labourers 1351" label="Statute of Labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q543406" start="3050" end="3061" title="living wage" label="living wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="3178" end="3198" title="Justice of the Peace" label="Justice of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="3387" end="3399" title="James VI and I" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183163" start="3524" end="3551" title="History of capitalism" label="capitalistic United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="3567" end="3580" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806089" start="3711" end="3723" title="Timeline of labor issues and events" label="labor unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="3759" end="3771" title="trade unions" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q163887" start="3846" end="3866" title="collective agreement" label="collective agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415635" start="4081" end="4090" title="sweatshop" label="sweatshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102213" start="4655" end="4672" title="Eugenics in the United States" label="eugenics movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374469" start="4731" end="4743" title="Royal Meeker" label="Royal Meeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727661" start="4748" end="4767" title="Henry Rogers Seager" label="Henry Rogers Seager"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847463" start="5415" end="5434" title="Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1894" label="New Zealand in 1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q279376" start="5448" end="5465" title="Australian labour movement" label="Australia in 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831930" start="5474" end="5496" title="Trade Boards Act 1909" label="United Kingdom in 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064514" start="5566" end="5584" title="Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938" label="nationally in 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974345" start="5633" end="5655" title="National Minimum Wage Act 1998" label="United Kingdom in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="5693" end="5714" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034480" start="6337" end="6356" title="Tipped wage in the United States" label="tipped minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="6396" end="6406" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7057" end="7062" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751563" start="7118" end="7137" title="Minimum Wages Act 1948" label="minimum wage policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="7240" end="7246" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="7647" end="7670" title="multinational companies" label="multinational companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="7678" end="7689" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="8413" end="8429" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="8746" end="8761" title="knock-on effect" label="knock-on effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="9058" end="9074" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355320" start="10863" end="10878" title="Labour demand" label="demand of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717283" start="10999" end="11014" title="Labour supply" label="supply of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="11218" end="11229" title="economic equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936477" start="11313" end="11324" title="price floor" label="price floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q268617" start="11498" end="11505" title="Economic surplus" label="surplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319808" start="13128" end="13137" title="monopsony" label="monopsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="13444" end="13456" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q319808" start="13893" end="13906" title="Monopsony" label="monopsonistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="13932" end="13953" title="Inequality of bargaining power" label="lack bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801078" start="14008" end="14034" title="effective aggregate demand" label="effective aggregate demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746797" start="14260" end="14280" title="Pierangelo Garegnani" label="Pierangelo Garegnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655637" start="14325" end="14337" title="Ian Steedman" label="Ian Steedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q370468" start="14363" end="14375" title="Piero Sraffa" label="Piero Sraffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595694" start="14484" end="14496" title="Wynne Godley" label="Wynne Godley"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="14622" end="14640" title="Falsifiability" label="falsifiable theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q520878" start="14797" end="14821" title="labor market flexibility" label="labor market flexibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="15007" end="15025" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q319808" start="15916" end="15941" title="monopsonistic competition" label="monopsonistic competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="15993" end="16005" title="market power" label="market power"/>
<link wikidata="Q701521" start="16081" end="16090" title="collusion" label="collusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467216" start="16142" end="16159" title="Labor market segmentation" label="segmented markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q841666" start="16161" end="16172" title="search cost" label="search cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q431965" start="16175" end="16192" title="Information asymmetry" label="information costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q204671" start="16194" end="16212" title="Geographic mobility" label="imperfect mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q622657" start="16281" end="16295" title="market failure" label="market failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="16452" end="16457" title="wages" label="wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545827" start="16516" end="16541" title="marginal product of labour" label="marginal product of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309637" start="16595" end="16612" title="regulated market" label="market regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="16628" end="16637" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500257" start="16680" end="16690" title="free lunch" label="free lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="16863" end="16872" title="Price elasticity of demand" label="inelastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="17188" end="17200" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711499" start="17405" end="17417" title="Alan Blinder" label="Alan Blinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910318" start="17443" end="17451" title="turnover (employment)" label="turnover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957065" start="18779" end="18793" title="Matching theory (economics)" label="matching model"/>
<link wikidata="Q223639" start="20339" end="20349" title="Elasticity (economics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340706" start="21459" end="21469" title="Endogeneity (econometrics)" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="23359" end="23368" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q223639" start="23382" end="23394" title="Elasticity (economics)" label="elasticities"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="23398" end="23415" title="supply and demand" label="supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="23419" end="23432" title="Labour economics" label="labor markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="23457" end="23464" title="Market (economics)" label="markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180497" start="23497" end="23503" title="Economic model" label="models"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="23507" end="23526" title="perfect competition" label="perfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="23703" end="23737" title="Income distribution" label="distribution of wages and earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q849415" start="24010" end="24029" title="on-the-job training" label="on-the-job training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271531" start="24346" end="24361" title="Edward Gramlich" label="Edward Gramlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912993" start="25296" end="25318" title="ordinary least squares" label="ordinary least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246261" start="25323" end="25348" title="generalized least squares" label="generalized least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="25349" end="25370" title="Regression analysis" label="regression procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="26716" end="26729" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="26914" end="26927" title="median income" label="median income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173928" start="29262" end="29272" title="David Card" label="David Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q931129" start="29277" end="29289" title="Alan Krueger" label="Alan Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275276" start="29464" end="29489" title="Difference in differences" label="Difference in differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q358063" start="30725" end="30740" title="deadweight loss" label="deadweight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237978" start="30810" end="30823" title="David Neumark" label="David Neumark"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="36950" end="36960" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q277622" start="37921" end="37938" title="Wage/price spiral" label="Wage/price spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="37998" end="38007" title="Automation" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568124" start="38017" end="38030" title="self-checkout" label="self-checkout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="38320" end="38344" title="Earned Income Tax Credit" label="Earned Income Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="39288" end="39302" title="George Stigler" label="George Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q514404" start="40250" end="40269" title="Right to work" label="human right to work"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="40414" end="40447" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="40591" end="40645" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="41125" end="41143" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128135" start="41407" end="41425" title="Low Pay Commission" label="Low Pay Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q317269" start="41607" end="41639" title="Institute for the Study of Labor" label="Institute for the Study of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162222" start="43044" end="43063" title="Deutsche Bundesbank" label="Deutsche Bundesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744265" start="43292" end="43331" title="American Journal of Preventive Medicine" label="American Journal of Preventive Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635391" start="43460" end="43467" title="Suicide in the United States" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="43844" end="43859" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q65948515" start="44386" end="44401" title="Arindrajit Dube" label="Arindrajit Dube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740221" start="45278" end="45302" title="American Economic Review" label="American Economic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q464096" start="46016" end="46045" title="American Economic Association" label="American Economic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216454" start="47179" end="47194" title="Daniel B. Klein" label="Daniel B. Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282092" start="47559" end="47584" title="Economic Policy Institute" label="Economic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="49030" end="49042" title="basic income" label="basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q641399" start="49047" end="49066" title="negative income tax" label="negative income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="49089" end="49104" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q358063" start="50147" end="50167" title="deadweight loss" label="losses in efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334593" start="50204" end="50229" title="guaranteed minimum income" label="guaranteed minimum income"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="50260" end="50284" title="social welfare provision" label="social welfare provision"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="50483" end="50495" title="labor market" label="labor market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="50525" end="50543" title="community services" label="community services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="50576" end="50597" title="refundable tax credit" label="refundable tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="50828" end="50852" title="earned income tax credit" label="earned income tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736924" start="50872" end="50888" title="child tax credit" label="child tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034986" start="50904" end="50922" title="working tax credit" label="working tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736924" start="50928" end="50944" title="child tax credit" label="child tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q641399" start="51000" end="51019" title="negative income tax" label="negative income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="52031" end="52058" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q350927" start="52065" end="52085" title="Adam Smith Institute" label="Adam Smith Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="52406" end="52427" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427046" start="52559" end="52571" title="Scott Sumner" label="Scott Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192566" start="52576" end="52589" title="Edmund Phelps" label="Edmund Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q81665" start="52807" end="52822" title="political parties in the United States" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="53079" end="53093" title="apprenticeship" label="apprenticeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="53763" end="53770" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130498" start="53961" end="53964" title="Armenian Dram" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="55013" end="55032" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="56788" end="56799" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q180687" start="56931" end="56951" title="consumer price index" label="consumer price index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057397" start="57022" end="57037" title="national income" label="national income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="57578" end="57582" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="57591" end="57597" title="Decree" label="Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930627" start="57619" end="57637" title="Jesús Romeo Gorría" label="Jesús Romeo Gorría"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303322" start="57643" end="57660" title="Minister of Labor" label="Minister of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="57668" end="57684" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="58674" end="58684" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="58689" end="58698" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q789966" start="58947" end="58950" title="Bank of Spain" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="59511" end="59527" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873277" start="61022" end="61040" title="Fair Work Act 2009" label="Fair Work Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="61868" end="61885" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910834" start="62056" end="62082" title="Average worker&amp;#x27;s wage" label="Average worker&amp;#x27;s wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="62085" end="62099" title="Cost of living" label="Cost of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="62102" end="62121" title="Economic inequality" label="Economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q678774" start="62124" end="62141" title="Employee benefits" label="Employee benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433411" start="62144" end="62155" title="Family wage" label="Family wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522099" start="62164" end="62216" title="Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority" label="Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="62225" end="62234" title="Labor law" label="Labor law"/>
<link wikidata="Q543406" start="62237" end="62248" title="Living wage" label="Living wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865423" start="62251" end="62286" title="Minimum Wage Fixing Convention 1970" label="Minimum Wage Fixing Convention 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519619" start="62289" end="62317" title="Negative and positive rights" label="Negative and positive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153034" start="62320" end="62353" title="List of countries by minimum wage" label="List of countries by minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="62356" end="62370" title="Price controls" label="Price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369344" start="62373" end="62383" title="Salary cap" label="Salary cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475630" start="62392" end="62410" title="Scratch Beginnings" label="Scratch Beginnings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62419" end="62432" title="Thomas Sowell#Higher education and early career" label="Thomas Sowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="62435" end="62457" title="Universal basic income" label="Universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62460" end="62478" title="Walter E. Williams#Economic and political views" label="Walter E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q649011" start="62481" end="62493" title="Working poor" label="Working poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668889" start="62718" end="62728" title="John Komlos" label="Komlos, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q5415510" start="62857" end="62868" title="Evan Osnos" label="Osnos, Evan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="62974" end="62988" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="63076" end="63109" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="63524" end="63551" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="63603" end="63633" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="63823" end="63830" title="AFL–CIO" label="AFL–CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282092" start="63873" end="63898" title="Economic Policy Institute" label="Economic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210199" start="63996" end="64032" title="Political Economy Research Institute" label="Political Economy Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="64090" end="64108" title="The Cato Institute" label="The Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502890" start="64153" end="64170" title="Show-Me Institute" label="Show-Me Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q685787" start="64250" end="64263" title="Henry Hazlitt" label="Henry Hazlitt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18864" wikidata="Q3867024" url="?curid=18864" title="Mullet">
<text>Mullet, mullets, The Mullet or The Mullets may refer to:
== Fish ==
* Mullet (fish), or &quot;grey mullet&quot;, of the family Mugilidae
**Flathead grey mullet, or striped mullet, &quot;Mugil cephalus&quot;, a food fish species in the family Mugilidae
* Goatfish, or &quot;red mullet&quot;, of the family Mullidae; in particular, red mullet of the genus &quot;Mullus&quot;
* Malagasy mountain mullet, &quot;Acentrogobius therezieni&quot;, a species of fish in the family Gobiidae endemic to Madagascar
* Pearl mullet, &quot;Chalcalburnus tarichi&quot;, a species of ray-finned fish in the family Cyprinidae native to Turkey
* Shorthead redhorse, &quot;Moxostoma macrolepidotum&quot;, a freshwater fish of North America, also known as common mullet, mullet, redhorse mullet

== Hairstyle ==
* Mullet (haircut), a hairstyle that is short in the front, top, and sides, but long in the back

==Media==
* &quot;Mullet&quot; (film), a 2001 Australian film
* &quot;The Mullets&quot;, a UPN TV sitcom
*Mullets (comic strip), a short-lived comic strip

== Places ==
* Mullet, Albania, a village in Tirana District, Albania
* Mullet Creek, a stream in the Falkland Islands
* Mullet Peninsula, aka &quot;The Mullet&quot;, in the barony of Erris, County Mayo, Ireland
* Mullet River, a river in Wisconsin

== Other ==
* Land Mullet, &quot;Egernia major&quot;, one of the largest members of the skink family (Scincidae) native to Australia
* Mullet, a type of star in heraldry
* Mullet, a person born in Arundel, Sussex, England, due to the presence of mullet fish in the local river
* Mullet Festival, annual event held in Niceville, Florida
* Norman Mullet, the chief superintendent in the British television show &quot;A Touch of Frost (TV series)&quot;

== See also ==
* &quot;American Mullet&quot;, a 2001 documentary film directed by Jennifer Arnold
* Mullet Key, a historic island near Crystal River, Florida
* &quot;Mullet Fever&quot;, the fifth album by Canadian grindcore band Fuck the Facts (2001)
* Mormons vs. Mullets, 2020 BYU vs. Coastal Carolina football game
* Mullett (disambiguation)
* Mulet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3867024" start="0" end="6" title="Mullet" label="Mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867024" start="8" end="15" title="Mullet" label="mullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867024" start="17" end="27" title="Mullet" label="The Mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867024" start="31" end="42" title="Mullet" label="The Mullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q42237" start="70" end="83" title="Mullet (fish)" label="Mullet (fish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q234014" start="139" end="159" title="Flathead grey mullet" label="Flathead grey mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q470850" start="254" end="262" title="Goatfish" label="Goatfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240173" start="375" end="399" title="Malagasy mountain mullet" label="Malagasy mountain mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q612453" start="504" end="516" title="Pearl mullet" label="Pearl mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609042" start="626" end="644" title="Shorthead redhorse" label="Shorthead redhorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410374" start="792" end="808" title="Mullet (haircut)" label="Mullet (haircut)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934200" start="900" end="925" title="Mullet (film)" label="&amp;quot;Mullet&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752617" start="958" end="969" title="The Mullets" label="The Mullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934213" start="994" end="1015" title="Mullets (comic strip)" label="Mullets (comic strip)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934197" start="1059" end="1074" title="Mullet, Albania" label="Mullet, Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934202" start="1116" end="1128" title="Mullet Creek" label="Mullet Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q693128" start="1165" end="1181" title="Mullet Peninsula" label="Mullet Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934212" start="1258" end="1270" title="Mullet River" label="Mullet River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228370" start="1308" end="1319" title="Land Mullet" label="Land Mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q662639" start="1447" end="1451" title="star (heraldry)" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q716658" start="1491" end="1498" title="Arundel" label="Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937604" start="1573" end="1588" title="Mullet Festival" label="Mullet Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q462650" start="1709" end="1737" title="A Touch of Frost (TV series)" label="A Touch of Frost (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744469" start="1768" end="1783" title="American Mullet" label="American Mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260210" start="1845" end="1855" title="Mullet Key" label="Mullet Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934209" start="1911" end="1923" title="Mullet Fever" label="Mullet Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q104058016" start="1998" end="2017" title="2020 BYU vs. Coastal Carolina football game" label="Mormons vs. Mullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934215" start="2065" end="2089" title="Mullett (disambiguation)" label="Mullett (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q716503" start="2092" end="2097" title="Mulet" label="Mulet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18866" wikidata="Q130283" url="?curid=18866" title="Macbeth">
<text>The Tragedy of Macbeth, often shortened to Macbeth (), is a tragedy by William Shakespeare, estimated to have been first performed in 1606. It dramatises the physically violent and damaging psychological effects of political ambitions and power. It was first published in the Folio of 1623, possibly from a prompt book, and is Shakespeare&#x27;s shortest tragedy. Scholars believe &quot;Macbeth&quot;, of all the plays that Shakespeare wrote during the reign of King James I, contains the most allusions to James, patron of Shakespeare&#x27;s acting company.

In the play, a brave Scottish general named Macbeth receives a prophecy from a trio of witches that one day he will become King of Scotland. Consumed by ambition and spurred to violence by his wife, Macbeth murders the king and takes the Scottish throne for himself. Then, racked with guilt and paranoia, he commits further violent murders to protect himself from enmity and suspicion, soon becoming a tyrannical ruler. The bloodbath swiftly leads to insanity and finally death for the powerhungry couple.

Shakespeare&#x27;s source for the story is the account of Macbeth, King of Scotland, Macduff, and Duncan in &quot;Holinshed&#x27;s Chronicles&quot; (1587), a history of England, Scotland, and Ireland familiar to Shakespeare and his contemporaries, although the events in the play differ extensively from the history of the real Macbeth. The events of the tragedy have been associated with the execution of Henry Garnet for complicity in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605.

In the backstage world of theatre, some believe that the play is cursed and will not mention its title aloud, referring to it instead as &quot;The Scottish Play&quot;. The play has attracted some of the most renowned actors to the roles of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth and has been adapted to film, television, opera, novels, comics, and other media.

==Plot==
===Act I===
Amid thunder and lightning, three witches decide that their next meeting will be with Macbeth, the Thane (Lord) of Glamis. In the following scene, soldiers report to King Duncan of Scotland that his generals Banquo and Macbeth have just defeated a rebellion allied with forces from Norway and Ireland and led by the traitorous Thane of Cawdor. Duncan praises his kinsmen for their bravery and fighting prowess, announcing that the title of Thane of Cawdor shall be transferred to Macbeth.

Wandering on a heath, Macbeth and Banquo are puzzled when the three witches appear, prophetically hailing Macbeth as &quot;Thane of Glamis&quot; and &quot;Thane of Cawdor&quot;, next saying he shall &quot;be king hereafter&quot;. When Banquo asks of his own fortunes, the witches respond that he will father a line of kings, though he himself will not be one. The witches vanish, and the Thane of Ross arrives, informing Macbeth of his newly bestowed title: Thane of Cawdor. The witches&#x27; first prophecy is thus fulfilled, and Macbeth immediately begins to harbour nervous ambitions of becoming king. King Duncan himself soon welcomes and praises Macbeth and Banquo, declaring they will all spend the night at Macbeth&#x27;s castle in Inverness; also, Duncan&#x27;s son Malcolm is announced as his official heir. Macbeth sends a letter about the witches ahead to his wife, Lady Macbeth, who is resolute that she and her husband should murder Duncan in order to obtain the crown. When Macbeth arrives in Inverness, she persuades him to kill the king that very night. They plan to get Duncan&#x27;s two chamber attendants drunk so that they will black out; thus, the next morning they can frame the attendants for the murder.

===Act II===
That night, despite his doubts and a number of supernatural omens, including a hallucination of a blood-smeared dagger, Macbeth goes offstage and stabs the sleeping Duncan to death. Returning, he is so shaken that Lady Macbeth finds him still holding the bloody daggers, which she scolds him for, reminding him they must be left on Duncan&#x27;s sleeping servants. She takes the knives and places them back in Duncan&#x27;s chamber. When the couple hears knocking at the castle gate, they hurry to bed.

A drunken porter opens the gate, admitting a nobleman named Lennox and Macduff, the Thane of Fife. They wish to visit the king; Macbeth, greeting them, leads them to Duncan&#x27;s chamber into which Macduff exits and reenters, announcing with shock Duncan&#x27;s murder. Macbeth and Lennox rush into the chamber where, offstage, Macbeth impulsively kills Duncan&#x27;s servants to prevent them from professing their innocence. He reappears and confesses to the other nobles that he killed the servants, but lies that his intentions were to avenge Duncan&#x27;s murder. Duncan&#x27;s two sons flee the country, including Malcolm fleeing to England, fearing that they will be killed next. Macduff explains that their flight makes them the main suspects in the king&#x27;s death, and Macbeth, as Duncan&#x27;s next of kin, assumes the throne offstage as the new King of Scotland. Banquo remembers the witches&#x27; prophecy about how his own descendants would inherit the throne, and he is suspicious that Macbeth might be Duncan&#x27;s true killer.

===Act III===
Despite Macbeth&#x27;s success, he remains uneasy about Banquo&#x27;s role in the prophecy. Inviting Banquo to a royal banquet, Macbeth discovers that Banquo and his young son Fleance will be riding out that night. Macbeth rapidly arranges to have Banquo and Fleance killed, hiring two men and later adding a third murderer to the plan. During the ambush, the murderers succeed in killing Banquo, but Fleance escapes. Macbeth is furious that an heir of Banquo remains alive.

At the banquet, Macbeth has invited his lords and Lady Macbeth to a night of drinking and merriment, though Macduff has refused to come. Banquo&#x27;s ghost enters and sits in Macbeth&#x27;s place. Macbeth raves fearfully, startling his guests, as the ghost is visible only to him. The others panic at the sight of Macbeth raging at an empty chair, until a desperate Lady Macbeth lies that her husband is merely afflicted with a harmless lifelong illness. The ghost departs and returns once more, causing the same riotous anger and fear in Macbeth. This time, Lady Macbeth demands that the visitors leave. Elsewhere, Hecate, queen of witchcraft, scolds the three witches for communicating with Macbeth without consulting her. Hecate instructs the witches to next give Macbeth a false sense of safety and overconfidence about his new position. Through verbal irony, Lennox reveals to another lord his suspicions that Macbeth is a murdering tyrant and they discuss how Macduff, refusing to attend Macbeth&#x27;s banquet, has gone to England to find allies who will help take back the Scottish throne.

===Act IV===
Macbeth visits the three witches and asks them to reveal the truth of their prophecies to him. They summon horrible apparitions, each of which offers further supernatural pronouncements. First, they conjure an armoured head, which tells him to beware of Macduff (IV.i.72). Second, a bloody child tells him that no one born of a woman will be able to harm him. Thirdly, a crowned child holding a tree states that Macbeth will be safe until Great Birnam Wood comes to Dunsinane Hill. Macbeth is relieved because he knows that all his enemies are born of women and a forest cannot possibly travel across the land. However, the witches also conjure a procession of eight crowned kings, the last carrying a mirror that reflects even more kings, and finally the ghost of Banquo pointing to the procession. Macbeth realises nervously that these are all Banquo&#x27;s descendants who will acquire kingships in numerous countries.

In light of the latest prophecies, Macbeth orders the disobedient Macduff&#x27;s castle seized and sends assassins to slaughter all its inhabitants, including Macduff&#x27;s wife and young son. Meanwhile, Macduff himself is in England meeting with Prince Malcolm to discuss Macbeth&#x27;s tyrannical regime. Malcolm, who must be cautious for any traps, confesses that he would be a terrible leader if the crown were handed to him, but this is merely a lie to see how Macduff will react. Macduff shows that he is more loyal to Scotland than any particular leader, impressing Malcolm, who now reveals the lie and says Macduff has won his trust. The Thane of Ross arrives to deliver the horrible news to Macduff that his &quot;castle is surprised, your wife and babes / Savagely slaughter&#x27;d&quot; (IV.iii.204–205). With this news of his family&#x27;s murders, Macduff is stricken with grief, but he is quickly provoked to vengeance by Malcolm who explains that he has raised an army with the help of the English King Edward. Together, they can defeat Macbeth and take back the Scottish throne.

===Act V===
At night, in the royal palace at Dunsinane, a doctor and a gentlewoman discuss Lady Macbeth&#x27;s sudden frightening habit of sleepwalking. Lady Macbeth enters in a trance, bemoaning the recent murders and trying to wash off imaginary bloodstains from her hands. Her observers marvel at her guilt-ridden confessions. Meanwhile, Prince Malcolm&#x27;s allied forces plan to join up at Birnam Wood, additionally supported by Macduff and defecting Scottish thanes alarmed by Macbeth&#x27;s recent barbarities. While encamped in Birnam Wood, Malcolm orders his soldiers to cut down and carry tree boughs to camouflage their numbers.

As Macbeth readies for the attack, he receives news that his wife has suddenly died, causing him to deliver a despairing &quot;Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow&quot; soliloquy (V.v.17–28). Still, he is emboldened by the witches&#x27; seeming guarantee of his invincibility against any &quot;man of woman born&quot;, until a servant reports that Malcolm&#x27;s army is advancing on Dunsinane in the form of moving trees. As the invaders take his castle, Macbeth is confronted by Macduff. Macbeth tells him that he cannot be defeated by &quot;one of woman born&quot;, but Macduff reveals that he was born by Caesarean section and thus did not have a natural childbirth. In the ensuing duel with Macduff, Macbeth is killed offstage. Macduff reenters with Macbeth&#x27;s severed head, and Malcolm discusses how order has been restored. He implies that Lady Macbeth&#x27;s death was a suicide, declares his benevolent intentions for the country, promotes his thanes to earls, and invites all to see him crowned at Scone.

==Characters==

* Duncanking of Scotland
* MalcolmDuncan&#x27;s elder son
* DonalbainDuncan&#x27;s younger son
* Macbetha general in the army of King Duncan; originally Thane of Glamis, then Thane of Cawdor, and later king of Scotland
* Lady MacbethMacbeth&#x27;s wife, and later queen of Scotland
* BanquoMacbeth&#x27;s friend and a general in the army of King Duncan
* FleanceBanquo&#x27;s son
* MacduffThane of Fife
* Lady MacduffMacduff&#x27;s wife
* Macduff&#x27;s sona young boy
* Ross, Lennox, Angus, Menteith, CaithnessScottish thanes
* Siwardgeneral of the English forces
* Young SiwardSiward&#x27;s son
* SeytonMacbeth&#x27;s armourer and chief servant
* Hecatequeen of the witches
* Three Witchesthree mysterious women who approach Macbeth and prophesy his fate
* Captainin the Scottish army
* Murderersemployed by Macbeth
** First and Second Murderers
** Third Murderersent by Macbeth to assist the first two murderers
* Portergatekeeper at Macbeth&#x27;s home
* DoctorLady Macbeth&#x27;s doctor
* Doctorat the English court
* GentlewomanLady Macbeth&#x27;s caretaker
* Lordopposed to Macbeth
* First Apparitionarmed head
* Second Apparitionbloody child
* Third Apparitioncrowned child
* Attendants, Messengers, Servants, Soldiers
== Sources for the play ==


A principal source comes from the &quot;Daemonologie&quot; of King James published in 1597 which included a news pamphlet titled &quot;Newes from Scotland&quot; that detailed the famous North Berwick witch trials of 1590. The publication of &quot;Daemonologie&quot; came just a few years before the tragedy of &quot;Macbeth&quot; with the themes and setting in a direct and comparative contrast with King James&#x27; personal obsessions with witchcraft, which developed following his conclusion that the stormy weather that threatened his passage from Denmark to Scotland was a targeted attack. Not only did the subsequent trials take place in Scotland, the women accused were recorded, under torture, of having conducted rituals with the same mannerisms as the three witches. One of the evidenced passages is referenced when the women under trial confessed to attempt the use of witchcraft to raise a tempest and sabotage the boat King James and his queen were on board during their return trip from Denmark. The three witches discuss the raising of winds at sea in the opening lines of Act 1 Scene 3.

&quot;Macbeth&quot; has been compared to Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Antony and Cleopatra.&quot; As characters, both Antony and Macbeth seek a new world, even at the cost of the old one. Both fight for a throne and have a &#x27;nemesis&#x27; to face to achieve that throne. For Antony, the nemesis is Octavius; for Macbeth, it is Banquo. At one point Macbeth even compares himself to Antony, saying &quot;under Banquo / My Genius is rebuk&#x27;d, as it is said / Mark Antony&#x27;s was by Caesar.&quot; Lastly, both plays contain powerful and manipulative female figures: Cleopatra and Lady Macbeth.

Shakespeare borrowed the story from several tales in &quot;Holinshed&#x27;s Chronicles&quot;, a popular history of the British Isles well known to Shakespeare and his contemporaries. In &quot;Chronicles&quot;, a man named Donwald finds several of his family put to death by his king, Duff, for dealing with witches. After being pressured by his wife, he and four of his servants kill the king in his own house. In &quot;Chronicles&quot;, Macbeth is portrayed as struggling to support the kingdom in the face of King Duncan&#x27;s ineptitude. He and Banquo meet the three witches, who make exactly the same prophecies as in Shakespeare&#x27;s version. Macbeth and Banquo then together plot the murder of Duncan, at Lady Macbeth&#x27;s urging. Macbeth has a long, ten-year reign before eventually being overthrown by Macduff and Malcolm. The parallels between the two versions are clear. However, some scholars think that George Buchanan&#x27;s &quot;Rerum Scoticarum Historia&quot; matches Shakespeare&#x27;s version more closely. Buchanan&#x27;s work was available in Latin in Shakespeare&#x27;s day.

No medieval account of the reign of Macbeth mentions the Weird Sisters, Banquo, or Lady Macbeth, and with the exception of the latter none actually existed. The characters of Banquo, the Weird Sisters, and Lady Macbeth were first mentioned in 1527 by a Scottish historian Hector Boece in his book &quot;Historia Gentis Scotorum&quot; (&quot;History of the Scottish People&quot;) who wanted to denigrate Macbeth in order to strengthen the claim of the House of Stewart to the Scottish throne. Boece portrayed Banquo as an ancestor of the Stewart kings of Scotland, adding in a &quot;prophecy&quot; that the descendants of Banquo would be the rightful kings of Scotland while the Weird Sisters served to give a picture of King Macbeth as gaining the throne via dark supernatural forces. Macbeth did have a wife, but it is not clear if she was as power-hungry and ambitious as Boece portrayed her, which served his purpose of having even Macbeth realise he lacked a proper claim to the throne, and only took it at the urging of his wife. Holinshed accepted Boece&#x27;s version of Macbeth&#x27;s reign at face value and included it in his &quot;Chronicles&quot;. Shakespeare saw the dramatic possibilities in the story as related by Holinshed, and used it as the basis for the play.

No other version of the story has Macbeth kill the king in Macbeth&#x27;s own castle. Scholars have seen this change of Shakespeare&#x27;s as adding to the darkness of Macbeth&#x27;s crime as the worst violation of hospitality. Versions of the story that were common at the time had Duncan being killed in an ambush at Inverness, not in a castle. Shakespeare conflated the story of Donwald and King Duff in what was a significant change to the story.

Shakespeare made another important change. In &quot;Chronicles&quot;, Banquo is an accomplice in Macbeth&#x27;s murder of King Duncan, and plays an important part in ensuring that Macbeth, not Malcolm, takes the throne in the coup that follows. In Shakespeare&#x27;s day, Banquo was thought to be an ancestor of the Stuart King James I. (In the 19th century it was established that Banquo is an unhistorical character; the Stuarts are actually descended from a Breton family which migrated to Scotland slightly later than Macbeth&#x27;s time.) The Banquo portrayed in earlier sources is significantly different from the Banquo created by Shakespeare. Critics have proposed several reasons for this change. First, to portray the king&#x27;s ancestor as a murderer would have been risky. Other authors of the time who wrote about Banquo, such as Jean de Schelandre in his &quot;Stuartide&quot;, also changed history by portraying Banquo as a noble man, not a murderer, probably for the same reasons. Second, Shakespeare may have altered Banquo&#x27;s character simply because there was no dramatic need for another accomplice to the murder; there was, however, a need to give a dramatic contrast to Macbeth—a role which many scholars argue is filled by Banquo.

Other scholars maintain that a strong argument can be made for associating the tragedy with the Gunpowder Plot of 1605. As presented by Harold Bloom in 2008: &quot;[S]cholars cite the existence of several topical references in &quot;Macbeth&quot; to the events of that year, namely the execution of the Father Henry Garnet for his alleged complicity in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605, as referenced in the porter&#x27;s scene.&quot; Those arrested for their role in the Gunpowder Plot refused to give direct answers to the questions posed to them by their interrogators, which reflected the influence of the Jesuit practice of equivocation. Shakespeare, by having Macbeth say that demons &quot;palter...in a double sense&quot; and &quot;keep the promise to our ear/And break it to our hope&quot;, confirmed James&#x27;s belief that equivocation was a &quot;wicked&quot; practice, which reflected in turn the &quot;wickedness&quot; of the Catholic Church. Garnet had in his possession &quot;A Treatise on Equivocation&quot;, and in the play the Weird Sisters often engage in equivocation, for instance telling Macbeth that he could never be overthrown until &quot;Great Birnan wood to high Dunsinane hill/Shall Come&quot;. Macbeth interprets the prophecy as meaning never, but in fact, the Three Sisters refer only to branches of the trees of Great Birnam coming to Dunsinane hill. The inspiration for this prophecy may have originated with the Battle of Droizy; both that battle and &quot;Macbeth&quot; may have, in turn, inspired J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s tree herders, the Ents in his novels &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;.

==Date and text==
&quot;Macbeth&quot; cannot be dated precisely, but it is usually taken to be contemporaneous to the other canonical tragedies: &quot;Hamlet&quot;, &quot;Othello&quot;, and &quot;King Lear&quot;. While some scholars have placed the original writing of the play as early as 1599, most believe that the play is unlikely to have been composed earlier than 1603 as the play is widely seen to celebrate King James&#x27; ancestors and the Stuart accession to the throne in 1603 (James believed himself to be descended from Banquo), suggesting that the parade of eight kings—which the witches show Macbeth in a vision in Act IV—is a compliment to King James. Many scholars think the play was written in 1606 in the aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot, citing possible internal allusions to the 1605 plot and its ensuing trials. In fact, there are a great number of allusions and possible pieces of evidence alluding to the Plot, and, for this reason, a great many critics agree that &quot;Macbeth&quot; was written in the year 1606. Lady Macbeth&#x27;s instructions to her husband, &quot;Look like the innocent flower, but be the serpent under&#x27;t&quot; (1.5.74–75), may be an allusion to a medal that was struck in 1605 to commemorate King James&#x27; escape that depicted a serpent hiding among lilies and roses.

Particularly, the Porter&#x27;s speech (2.3.1–21) in which he welcomes an &quot;equivocator&quot;, a farmer, and a tailor to hell (2.3.8–13), has been argued to be an allusion to the 28 March 1606 trial and execution on 3 May 1606 of the Jesuit Henry Garnet, who used the alias &quot;Farmer&quot;, with &quot;equivocator&quot; referring to Garnet&#x27;s defence of &quot;equivocation&quot;. The porter says that the equivocator &quot;committed treason enough for God&#x27;s sake&quot; (2.3.9–10), which specifically connects equivocation and treason and ties it to the Jesuit belief that equivocation was only lawful when used &quot;for God&#x27;s sake&quot;, strengthening the allusion to Garnet. The porter goes on to say that the equivocator &quot;yet could not equivocate to heaven&quot; (2.3.10–11), echoing grim jokes that were current on the eve of Garnet&#x27;s execution: i.e. that Garnet would be &quot;hanged without equivocation&quot; and at his execution he was asked &quot;not to equivocate with his last breath&quot;. The &quot;English tailor&quot; the porter admits to hell (2.3.13), has been seen as an allusion to Hugh Griffin, a tailor who was questioned by the Archbishop of Canterbury on 27 November and 3 December 1607 for the part he played in Garnet&#x27;s &quot;miraculous straw&quot;, an infamous head of straw that was stained with Garnet&#x27;s blood that had congealed into a form resembling Garnet&#x27;s portrait, which was hailed by Catholics as a miracle. The tailor Griffin became notorious and the subject of verses published with his portrait on the title page.

When James became king of England, a feeling of uncertainty settled over the nation. James was a Scottish king and the son of Mary, Queen of Scots, a staunch Catholic and English traitor. In the words of critic Robert Crawford, &quot;&quot;Macbeth&quot; was a play for a post-Elizabethan England facing up to what it might mean to have a Scottish king. England seems comparatively benign, while its northern neighbour is mired in a bloody, monarch-killing past. ... &quot;Macbeth&quot; may have been set in medieval Scotland, but it was filled with material of interest to England and England&#x27;s ruler.&quot; Critics argue that the content of the play is clearly a message to James, the new Scottish King of England. Likewise, the critic Andrew Hadfield noted the contrast the play draws between the saintly King Edward the Confessor of England who has the power of the royal touch to cure scrofula and whose realm is portrayed as peaceful and prosperous versus the bloody chaos of Scotland. James in his 1598 book &quot;The Trew Law of Free Monarchies&quot; had asserted that kings are always right, if not just, and his subjects owe him total loyalty at all times, writing that even if a king is a tyrant, his subjects must never rebel and just endure his tyranny for their own good. James had argued that the tyranny was preferable to the problems caused by rebellion which were even worse; Shakespeare by contrast in &quot;Macbeth&quot; argued for the right of the subjects to overthrow a tyrant king, in what appeared to be an implied criticism of James&#x27;s theories if applied to England. Hadfield also noted a curious aspect of the play in that it implies that primogeniture is the norm in Scotland, but Duncan has to nominate his son Malcolm to be his successor while Macbeth is accepted without protest by the Scottish lords (thanes) as their king despite being an usurper. Hadfield argued this aspect of the play with the thanes apparently choosing their king was a reference to the Stuart claim to the English throne, and the attempts of the English Parliament to block the succession of James&#x27;s Catholic mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, from succeeding to the English throne. Hadfield argued that Shakespeare implied that James was indeed the rightful king of England, but owed his throne not to divine favour as James would have it, but rather due to the willingness of the English Parliament to accept the Protestant son of the Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots, as their king.

Garry Wills provides further evidence that &quot;Macbeth&quot; is a Gunpowder Play (a type of play that emerged immediately following the events of the Gunpowder Plot). He points out that every Gunpowder Play contains &quot;a necromancy scene, regicide attempted or completed, references to equivocation, scenes that test loyalty by use of deceptive language, and a character who sees through plots—along with a vocabulary similar to the Plot in its immediate aftermath (words like &quot;train, blow, vault&quot;) and an ironic recoil of the Plot upon the Plotters (who fall into the pit they dug).&quot;

The play utilizes a few key words that the audience at the time would recognize as allusions to the Plot. In one sermon in 1605, Lancelot Andrewes stated, regarding the failure of the Plotters on God&#x27;s day, &quot;Be they fair or foul, glad or sad (as the poet calleth Him) the great Diespiter, &#x27;the Father of days&#x27; hath made them both.&quot; Shakespeare begins the play by using the words &quot;fair&quot; and &quot;foul&quot; in the first speeches of the witches and Macbeth. In the words of Jonathan Gil Harris, the play expresses the &quot;horror unleashed by a supposedly loyal subject who seeks to kill a king and the treasonous role of equivocation. The play even echoes certain keywords from the scandal—the &#x27;vault&#x27; beneath the House of Parliament in which Guy Fawkes stored thirty kegs of gunpowder and the &#x27;blow&#x27; about which one of the conspirators had secretly warned a relative who planned to attend the House of Parliament on 5 November...Even though the Plot is never alluded to directly, its presence is everywhere in the play, like a pervasive odor.&quot;

Scholars also cite an entertainment seen by King James at Oxford in the summer of 1605 that featured three &quot;sibyls&quot; like the weird sisters; Kermode surmises that Shakespeare could have heard about this and alluded to it with the weird sisters. However, A. R. Braunmuller in the New Cambridge edition finds the 1605–06 arguments inconclusive, and argues only for an earliest date of 1603.

One suggested allusion supporting a date in late 1606 is the first witch&#x27;s dialogue about a sailor&#x27;s wife: &quot;&#x27;Aroint thee, witch!&#x27; the rump-fed ronyon cries./Her husband&#x27;s to Aleppo gone, master o&#x27; the &quot;Tiger&quot;&quot; (1.3.6–7). This has been thought to allude to the &quot;Tiger&quot;, a ship that returned to England 27 June 1606 after a disastrous voyage in which many of the crew were killed by pirates. A few lines later the witch speaks of the sailor, &quot;He shall live a man forbid:/Weary se&#x27;nnights nine times nine&quot; (1.3.21–22). The real ship was at sea 567 days, the product of 7x9x9, which has been taken as a confirmation of the allusion, which if correct, confirms that the witch scenes were either written or amended later than July 1606.

The play is not considered to have been written any later than 1607, since, as Kermode notes, there are &quot;fairly clear allusions to the play in 1607&quot;. One notable reference is in Francis Beaumont&#x27;s &quot;Knight of the Burning Pestle&quot;, first performed in 1607. The following lines (Act V, Scene 1, 24–30) are, according to scholars, a clear allusion to the scene in which Banquo&#x27;s ghost haunts Macbeth at the dinner table:

&quot;Macbeth&quot; was first printed in the First Folio of 1623 and the Folio is the only source for the text. Some scholars contend that the Folio text was abridged and rearranged from an earlier manuscript or prompt book. Often cited as interpolation are stage cues for two songs, whose lyrics are not included in the Folio but are included in Thomas Middleton&#x27;s play &quot;The Witch&quot;, which was written between the accepted date for &quot;Macbeth&quot; (1606) and the printing of the Folio. Many scholars believe these songs were editorially inserted into the Folio, though whether they were Middleton&#x27;s songs or preexisting songs is not certain. It is also widely believed that the character of Hecate, as well as some lines of the First Witch (4.1 124–131), were not part of Shakespeare&#x27;s original play but were added by the Folio editors and possibly written by Middleton, though &quot;there is no completely objective proof&quot; of such interpolation.

==Themes and motifs==
&quot;Macbeth&quot; is an anomaly among Shakespeare&#x27;s tragedies in certain critical ways. It is short: more than a thousand lines shorter than &quot;Othello&quot; and &quot;King Lear&quot;, and only slightly more than half as long as &quot;Hamlet&quot;. This brevity has suggested to many critics that the received version is based on a heavily cut source, perhaps a prompt-book for a particular performance. This would reflect other Shakespeare plays existing in both Quarto and the Folio, where the Quarto versions are usually longer than the Folio versions. &quot;Macbeth&quot; was first printed in the First Folio, but has no Quarto version – if there were a Quarto, it would probably be longer than the Folio version. That brevity has also been connected to other unusual features: the fast pace of the first act, which has seemed to be &quot;stripped for action&quot;; and the comparative flatness of the characters other than Macbeth. A. C. Bradley, in considering this question, concluded the play &quot;always was an extremely short one&quot;, noting the witch scenes and battle scenes would have taken up some time in performance, remarking, &quot;I do not think that, in reading, we &quot;feel&quot; &quot;Macbeth&quot; to be short: certainly we are astonished when we hear it is about half as long as &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Perhaps in the Shakespearean theatre too it seemed to occupy a longer time than the clock recorded.&quot;

===As a tragedy of character===
At least since the days of Samuel Johnson, analysis of the play has centred on the question of Macbeth&#x27;s ambition, commonly seen as so dominant a trait that it defines the character. Johnson asserted that Macbeth, though esteemed for his military bravery, is wholly reviled.

This opinion recurs in critical literature, and, according to Caroline Spurgeon, is supported by Shakespeare himself, who apparently intended to degrade his hero by vesting him with clothes unsuited to him and to make Macbeth look ridiculous by several exaggerations he applies: his garments seem either too big or too small for him – as his ambition is too big and his character too small for his new and unrightful role as king. After Macbeth is unexpectedly greeted with his new title as Thane of Cawdor as prophesied by the witches, Banquo comments:

And, at the end, when the tyrant is at bay at Dunsinane, Caithness sees him as a man trying in vain to fasten a large garment on him with too small a belt:

while Angus sums up what everybody thinks ever since Macbeth&#x27;s accession to power:

Like Richard III, but without that character&#x27;s perversely appealing exuberance, Macbeth wades through blood until his inevitable fall. As Kenneth Muir writes, &quot;Macbeth has not a predisposition to murder; he has merely an inordinate ambition that makes murder itself seem to be a lesser evil than failure to achieve the crown.&quot; Some critics, such as E. E. Stoll, explain this characterisation as a holdover from Senecan or medieval tradition. Shakespeare&#x27;s audience, in this view, expected villains to be wholly bad, and Senecan style, far from prohibiting a villainous protagonist, all but demanded it.

Yet for other critics, it has not been so easy to resolve the question of Macbeth&#x27;s motivation. Robert Bridges, for instance, perceived a paradox: a character able to express such convincing horror before Duncan&#x27;s murder would likely be incapable of committing the crime. For many critics, Macbeth&#x27;s motivations in the first act appear vague and insufficient. John Dover Wilson hypothesised that Shakespeare&#x27;s original text had an extra scene or scenes where husband and wife discussed their plans. This interpretation is not fully provable; however, the motivating role of ambition for Macbeth is universally recognised. The evil actions motivated by his ambition seem to trap him in a cycle of increasing evil, as Macbeth himself recognises:

While working on Russian translations of Shakespeare&#x27;s works, Boris Pasternak compared Macbeth to Raskolnikov, the protagonist of &quot;Crime and Punishment&quot; by Fyodor Dostoevsky. Pasternak argues that &quot;neither Macbeth or Raskolnikov is a born criminal or a villain by nature. They are turned into criminals by faulty rationalizations, by deductions from false premises.&quot; He goes on to argue that Lady Macbeth is &quot;feminine ... one of those active, insistent wives&quot; who becomes her husband&#x27;s &quot;executive, more resolute and consistent than he is himself&quot;. According to Pasternak, she is only helping Macbeth carry out his own wishes, to her own detriment.

===As a tragedy of moral order===
The disastrous consequences of Macbeth&#x27;s ambition are not limited to him. Almost from the moment of the murder, the play depicts Scotland as a land shaken by inversions of the natural order. Shakespeare may have intended a reference to the great chain of being, although the play&#x27;s images of disorder are mostly not specific enough to support detailed intellectual readings. He may also have intended an elaborate compliment to James&#x27;s belief in the divine right of kings, although this hypothesis, outlined at greatest length by Henry N. Paul, is not universally accepted. As in &quot;Julius Caesar&quot;, though, perturbations in the political sphere are echoed and even amplified by events in the material world. Among the most often depicted of the inversions of the natural order is sleep. Macbeth&#x27;s announcement that he has &quot;murdered sleep&quot; is figuratively mirrored in Lady Macbeth&#x27;s sleepwalking.

&quot;Macbeth&quot;″s generally accepted indebtedness to medieval tragedy is often seen as significant in the play&#x27;s treatment of moral order. Glynne Wickham connects the play, through the Porter, to a mystery play on the harrowing of hell. Howard Felperin argues that the play has a more complex attitude toward &quot;orthodox Christian tragedy&quot; than is often admitted; he sees a kinship between the play and the tyrant plays within the medieval liturgical drama.

The theme of androgyny is often seen as a special aspect of the theme of disorder. Inversion of normative gender roles is most famously associated with the witches and with Lady Macbeth as she appears in the first act. Whatever Shakespeare&#x27;s degree of sympathy with such inversions, the play ends with a thorough return to normative gender values. Some feminist psychoanalytic critics, such as Janet Adelman, have connected the play&#x27;s treatment of gender roles to its larger theme of inverted natural order. In this light, Macbeth is punished for his violation of the moral order by being removed from the cycles of nature (which are figured as female); nature itself (as embodied in the movement of Birnam Wood) is part of the restoration of moral order.

===As a poetic tragedy===
Critics in the early twentieth century reacted against what they saw as an excessive dependence on the study of character in criticism of the play. This dependence, though most closely associated with A. C. Bradley, is clear as early as the time of Mary Cowden Clarke, who offered precise, if fanciful, accounts of the predramatic lives of Shakespeare&#x27;s female leads. She suggested, for instance, that the child Lady Macbeth refers to in the first act died during a foolish military action.

===Witchcraft and evil===
In the play, the Three Witches represent darkness, chaos, and conflict, while their role is as agents and witnesses. Their presence communicates treason and impending doom. During Shakespeare&#x27;s day, witches were seen as worse than rebels, &quot;the most notorious traytor and rebell that can be&quot;. They were not only political traitors, but spiritual traitors as well. Much of the confusion that springs from them comes from their ability to straddle the play&#x27;s borders between reality and the supernatural. They are so deeply entrenched in both worlds that it is unclear whether they control fate, or whether they are merely its agents. They defy logic, not being subject to the rules of the real world. The witches&#x27; lines in the first act: &quot;Fair is foul, and foul is fair: Hover through the fog and filthy air&quot; are often said to set the tone for the rest of the play by establishing a sense of confusion. Indeed, the play is filled with situations where evil is depicted as good, while good is rendered evil. The line &quot;Double, double toil and trouble,&quot; communicates the witches&#x27; intent clearly: they seek only trouble for the mortals around them. The witches&#x27; spells are remarkably similar to the spells of the witch Medusa in Anthony Munday&#x27;s play &quot;Fidele and Fortunio&quot; published in 1584, and Shakespeare may have been influenced by these.

While the witches do not tell Macbeth directly to kill King Duncan, they use a subtle form of temptation when they tell Macbeth that he is destined to be king. By placing this thought in his mind, they effectively guide him on the path to his own destruction. This follows the pattern of temptation used at the time of Shakespeare. First, they argued, a thought is put in a man&#x27;s mind, then the person may either indulge in the thought or reject it. Macbeth indulges in it, while Banquo rejects.

According to J. A. Bryant Jr., &quot;Macbeth&quot; also makes use of Biblical parallels, notably between King Duncan&#x27;s murder and the murder of Christ:

==Superstition and &quot;The Scottish Play&quot;==
While many today would say that any misfortune surrounding a production is mere coincidence, actors and others in the theatre industry often consider it bad luck to mention &quot;Macbeth&quot; by name while inside a theatre, and sometimes refer to it indirectly, for example as &quot;The Scottish Play&quot;, or &quot;MacBee&quot;, or when referring to the characters and not the play, &quot;Mr. and Mrs. M&quot;, or &quot;The Scottish King&quot;.

This is because Shakespeare (or the play&#x27;s revisers) is said to have used the spells of real witches in his text, purportedly angering the witches and causing them to curse the play. Thus, to say the name of the play inside a theatre is believed to doom the production to failure, and perhaps cause physical injury or death to cast members. There are stories of accidents, misfortunes and even deaths taking place during runs of &quot;Macbeth&quot;.

According to the actor Sir Donald Sinden, in his Sky Arts TV series &quot;Great West End Theatres&quot;

Several methods exist to dispel the curse, depending on the actor. One, attributed to Michael York, is to immediately leave the building the stage is in with the person who uttered the name, walk around it three times, spit over their left shoulders, say an obscenity then wait to be invited back into the building. A related practice is to spin around three times as fast as possible on the spot, sometimes accompanied by spitting over their shoulder, and uttering an obscenity. Another popular &quot;ritual&quot; is to leave the room, knock three times, be invited in, and then quote a line from &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Yet another is to recite lines from &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, thought to be a lucky play.

Sir Patrick Stewart, on the radio program &quot;Ask Me Another&quot;, asserted &quot;if you have played the role of the Scottish thane, then you are allowed to say the title, any time anywhere&quot;.

==Performance history==
===Shakespeare&#x27;s day to the Interregnum===
The only eyewitness account of &quot;Macbeth&quot; in Shakespeare&#x27;s lifetime was recorded by Simon Forman, who saw a performance at the Globe on 20 April 1610. Scholars have noted discrepancies between Forman&#x27;s account and the play as it appears in the Folio. For example, he makes no mention of the apparition scene, or of Hecate, of the man not of woman born, or of Birnam Wood. However, Clark observes that Forman&#x27;s accounts were often inaccurate and incomplete (for instance omitting the statue scene from &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot;) and his interest did not seem to be in &quot;giving full accounts of the productions&quot;.

As mentioned above, the Folio text is thought by some to be an alteration of the original play. This has led to the theory that the play in the Folio was an adaptation for indoor performance at the Blackfriars Theatre (which was operated by the King&#x27;s Men from 1608) – and even speculation that it represents a specific performance before King James. The play contains more musical cues than any other play in the canon as well as a significant use of sound effects.

===Restoration and eighteenth century===
All theatres were closed down by the Puritan government on 6 September 1642. Upon the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, two patent companies (the King&#x27;s Company and the Duke&#x27;s Company) were established, and the existing theatrical repertoire divided between them. Sir William Davenant, founder of the Duke&#x27;s Company, adapted Shakespeare&#x27;s play to the tastes of the new era, and his version would dominate on stage for around eighty years. Among the changes he made were the expansion of the role of the witches, introducing new songs, dances and &#x27;flying&#x27;, and the expansion of the role of Lady Macduff as a foil to Lady Macbeth. There were, however, performances outside the patent companies: among the evasions of the Duke&#x27;s Company&#x27;s monopoly was a puppet version of &quot;Macbeth&quot;.

&quot;Macbeth&quot; was a favourite of the seventeenth-century diarist Samuel Pepys, who saw the play on 5 November 1664 (&quot;admirably acted&quot;), 28 December 1666 (&quot;most excellently acted&quot;), ten days later on 7 January 1667 (&quot;though I saw it lately, yet [it] appears a most excellent play in all respects&quot;), on 19 April 1667 (&quot;one of the best plays for a stage ... that ever I saw&quot;), again on 16 October 1667 (&quot;was vexed to see Young, who is but a bad actor at best, act Macbeth in the room of Betterton, who, poor man! is sick&quot;), and again three weeks later on 6 November 1667 (&quot;[at] &quot;Macbeth&quot;, which we still like mightily&quot;), yet again on 12 August 1668 (&quot;saw &quot;Macbeth&quot;, to our great content&quot;), and finally on 21 December 1668, on which date the king and court were also present in the audience.

The first professional performances of &quot;Macbeth&quot; in North America were probably those of The Hallam Company.

In 1744, David Garrick revived the play, abandoning Davenant&#x27;s version and instead advertising it &quot;as written by Shakespeare&quot;. In fact this claim was largely false: he retained much of Davenant&#x27;s more popular business for the witches, and himself wrote a lengthy death speech for Macbeth. And he cut more than 10% of Shakespeare&#x27;s play, including the drunken porter, the murder of Lady Macduff&#x27;s son, and Malcolm&#x27;s testing of Macduff. Hannah Pritchard was his greatest stage partner, having her premiere as his Lady Macbeth in 1747. He would later drop the play from his repertoire upon her retirement from the stage. Mrs. Pritchard was the first actress to achieve acclaim in the role of Lady Macbeth – at least partly due to the removal of Davenant&#x27;s material, which made irrelevant moral contrasts with Lady Macduff. Garrick&#x27;s portrayal focused on the inner life of the character, endowing him with an innocence vacillating between good and evil, and betrayed by outside influences. He portrayed a man capable of observing himself, as if a part of him remained untouched by what he had done, the play moulding him into a man of sensibility, rather than him descending into a tyrant.

John Philip Kemble first played Macbeth in 1778. Although usually regarded as the antithesis of Garrick, Kemble nevertheless refined aspects of Garrick&#x27;s portrayal into his own. However it was the &quot;towering and majestic&quot; Sarah Siddons (Kemble&#x27;s sister) who became a legend in the role of Lady Macbeth. In contrast to Hannah Pritchard&#x27;s savage, demonic portrayal, Siddons&#x27; Lady Macbeth, while terrifying, was nevertheless – in the scenes in which she expresses her regret and remorse – tenderly human. And in portraying her actions as done out of love for her husband, Siddons deflected from him some of the moral responsibility for the play&#x27;s carnage. Audiences seem to have found the sleepwalking scene particularly mesmerising: Hazlitt said of it that &quot;all her gestures were involuntary and mechanical ... She glided on and off the stage almost like an apparition.&quot;

In 1794, Kemble dispensed with the ghost of Banquo altogether, allowing the audience to see Macbeth&#x27;s reaction as his wife and guests see it, and relying upon the fact that the play was so well known that his audience would already be aware that a ghost enters at that point.

Ferdinand Fleck, notable as the first German actor to present Shakespeare&#x27;s tragic roles in their fullness, played Macbeth at the Berlin National Theatre from 1787. Unlike his English counterparts, he portrayed the character as achieving his stature after the murder of Duncan, growing in presence and confidence: thereby enabling stark contrasts, such as in the banquet scene, which he ended babbling like a child.

===Nineteenth century===
Performances outside the patent theatres were instrumental in bringing the monopoly to an end. Robert Elliston, for example, produced a popular adaptation of &quot;Macbeth&quot; in 1809 at the Royal Circus described in its publicity as &quot;this matchless piece of pantomimic and choral performance&quot;, which circumvented the illegality of speaking Shakespeare&#x27;s words through mimed action, singing, and doggerel verse written by J. C. Cross.


In 1809, in an unsuccessful attempt to take Covent Garden upmarket, Kemble installed private boxes, increasing admission prices to pay for the improvements. The inaugural run at the newly renovated theatre was &quot;Macbeth&quot;, which was disrupted for over two months with cries of &quot;Old prices!&quot; and &quot;No private boxes!&quot; until Kemble capitulated to the protestors&#x27; demands.

Edmund Kean at Drury Lane gave a psychological portrayal of the central character, with a common touch, but was ultimately unsuccessful in the role. However he did pave the way for the most acclaimed performance of the nineteenth century, that of William Charles Macready. Macready played the role over a 30-year period, firstly at Covent Garden in 1820 and finally in his retirement performance. Although his playing evolved over the years, it was noted throughout for the tension between the idealistic aspects and the weaker, venal aspects of Macbeth&#x27;s character. His staging was full of spectacle, including several elaborate royal processions.

In 1843 the Theatres Regulation Act finally brought the patent companies&#x27; monopoly to an end. From that time until the end of the Victorian era, London theatre was dominated by the actor-managers, and the style of presentation was &quot;pictorial&quot; – proscenium stages filled with spectacular stage-pictures, often featuring complex scenery, large casts in elaborate costumes, and frequent use of tableaux vivant. Charles Kean (son of Edmund), at London&#x27;s Princess&#x27;s Theatre from 1850 to 1859, took an antiquarian view of Shakespeare performance, setting his &quot;Macbeth&quot; in a historically accurate eleventh-century Scotland. His leading lady, Ellen Tree, created a sense of the character&#x27;s inner life: &quot;The Times&quot;″ critic saying &quot;The countenance which she assumed ... when luring on Macbeth in his course of crime, was actually appalling in intensity, as if it denoted a hunger after guilt.&quot; At the same time, special effects were becoming popular: for example in Samuel Phelps&#x27; &quot;Macbeth&quot; the witches performed behind green gauze, enabling them to appear and disappear using stage lighting.

In 1849, rival performances of the play sparked the Astor Place riot in Manhattan. The popular American actor Edwin Forrest, whose Macbeth was said to be like &quot;the ferocious chief of a barbarous tribe&quot; played the central role at the Broadway Theatre to popular acclaim, while the &quot;cerebral and patrician&quot; English actor Macready, playing the same role at the Astor Place Opera House, suffered constant heckling. The existing enmity between the two men (Forrest had openly hissed Macready at a recent performance of &quot;Hamlet&quot; in Britain) was taken up by Forrest&#x27;s supporters – formed from the working class and lower middle class and anti-British agitators, keen to attack the upper-class pro-British patrons of the Opera House and the colonially-minded Macready. Nevertheless, Macready performed the role again three days later to a packed house while an angry mob gathered outside. The militia tasked with controlling the situation fired into the mob. In total, 31 rioters were killed and over 100 injured.

Charlotte Cushman is unique among nineteenth century interpreters of Shakespeare in achieving stardom in roles of both genders. Her New York debut was as Lady Macbeth in 1836, and she would later be admired in London in the same role in the mid-1840s. Helen Faucit was considered the embodiment of early-Victorian notions of femininity. But for this reason she largely failed when she eventually played Lady Macbeth in 1864: her serious attempt to embody the coarser aspects of Lady Macbeth&#x27;s character jarred harshly with her public image. Adelaide Ristori, the great Italian actress, brought her Lady Macbeth to London in 1863 in Italian, and again in 1873 in an English translation cut in such a way as to be, in effect, Lady Macbeth&#x27;s tragedy.

Henry Irving was the most successful of the late-Victorian actor-managers, but his &quot;Macbeth&quot; failed to curry favour with audiences. His desire for psychological credibility reduced certain aspects of the role: He described Macbeth as a brave soldier but a moral coward, and played him untroubled by conscience – clearly already contemplating the murder of Duncan before his encounter with the witches. Irving&#x27;s leading lady was Ellen Terry, but her Lady Macbeth was unsuccessful with the public, for whom a century of performances influenced by Sarah Siddons had created expectations at odds with Terry&#x27;s conception of the role.

Late nineteenth-century European Macbeths aimed for heroic stature, but at the expense of subtlety: Tommaso Salvini in Italy and Adalbert Matkowsky in Germany were said to inspire awe, but elicited little pity.

===20th century to present===
Two developments changed the nature of &quot;Macbeth&quot; performance in the 20th century: first, developments in the craft of acting itself, especially the ideas of Stanislavski and Brecht; and second, the rise of the dictator as a political icon. The latter has not always assisted the performance: it is difficult to sympathise with a Macbeth based on Hitler, Stalin, or Idi Amin.

Barry Jackson, at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre in 1923, was the first of the 20th-century directors to costume &quot;Macbeth&quot; in modern dress.

In 1936, a decade before his film adaptation of the play, Orson Welles directed &quot;Macbeth&quot; for the Negro Theatre Unit of the Federal Theatre Project at the Lafayette Theatre in Harlem, using black actors and setting the action in Haiti: with drums and Voodoo rites to establish the Witches scenes. The production, dubbed &quot;The Voodoo Macbeth&quot;, proved inflammatory in the aftermath of the Harlem riots, accused of making fun of black culture and as &quot;a campaign to burlesque negroes&quot; until Welles persuaded crowds that his use of black actors and voodoo made important cultural statements.

A performance which is frequently referenced as an example of the play&#x27;s curse was the outdoor production directed by Burgess Meredith in 1953 in the British colony of Bermuda, starring Charlton Heston. Using the imposing spectacle of Fort St. Catherine as a key element of the set, the production was plagued by a host of mishaps, including Charlton Heston being burned when his tights caught fire.

Some critics contend there were three great Macbeths on the English-speaking stage in the 20th century, all of them commencing at Stratford-upon-Avon: Laurence Olivier in 1955, Ian McKellen in 1976 and Antony Sher in 1999. Olivier&#x27;s portrayal (directed by Glen Byam Shaw, with Vivien Leigh as Lady Macbeth) was immediately hailed as a masterpiece. Kenneth Tynan said it succeeded because Olivier built the role to a climax at the end of the play, whereas most actors spend all they have in the first two acts.

The play caused difficulties for the Royal Shakespeare Company, especially at the (then) Shakespeare Memorial Theatre. Peter Hall&#x27;s 1967 production was (in Michael Billington&#x27;s words) &quot;an acknowledged disaster&quot; with the use of real leaves from Birnham Wood getting first-night laughs, and Trevor Nunn&#x27;s 1974 production was (Billington again) &quot;an over-elaborate religious spectacle&quot;.

But Nunn achieved success for the RSC in his 1976 production at the intimate Other Place, with Ian McKellen and Judi Dench in the central roles. A small cast worked within a simple circle, and McKellen&#x27;s Macbeth had nothing noble or likeable about him, being a manipulator in a world of manipulative characters. They were a young couple, physically passionate, &quot;not monsters but recognisable human beings&quot;, but their relationship atrophied as the action progressed.

The RSC again achieved critical success in Gregory Doran&#x27;s 1999 production at The Swan, with Antony Sher and Harriet Walter in the central roles, once again demonstrating the suitability of the play for smaller venues. Doran&#x27;s witches spoke their lines to a theatre in absolute darkness, and the opening visual image was the entrance of Macbeth and Banquo in the berets and fatigues of modern warfare, carried on the shoulders of triumphant troops. In contrast to Nunn, Doran presented a world in which king Duncan and his soldiers were ultimately benign and honest, heightening the deviance of Macbeth (who seems genuinely surprised by the witches&#x27; prophecies) and Lady Macbeth in plotting to kill the king. The play said little about politics, instead powerfully presenting its central characters&#x27; psychological collapse.

&quot;Macbeth&quot; returned to the RSC in 2018, when Christopher Eccleston played the title role, with Niamh Cusack as his wife, Lady Macbeth. The play later transferred to the Barbican in London.

In Soviet-controlled Prague in 1977, faced with the illegality of working in theatres, Pavel Kohout adapted &quot;Macbeth&quot; into a 75-minute abridgement for five actors, suitable for &quot;bringing a show in a suitcase to people&#x27;s homes&quot;.

Spectacle was unfashionable in Western theatre throughout the 20th century. In East Asia, however, spectacular productions have achieved great success, including Yukio Ninagawa&#x27;s 1980 production with Masane Tsukayama as Macbeth, set in the 16th century Japanese Civil War. The same director&#x27;s tour of London in 1987 was widely praised by critics, even though (like most of their audience) they were unable to understand the significance of Macbeth&#x27;s gestures, the huge Buddhist altar dominating the set, or the petals falling from the cherry trees.

Xu Xiaozhong&#x27;s 1980 Central Academy of Drama production in Beijing made every effort to be unpolitical (necessary in the aftermath of the Cultural Revolution): yet audiences still perceived correspondences between the central character (whom the director had actually modelled on Louis Napoleon) and Mao Zedong. Shakespeare has often been adapted to indigenous theatre traditions, for example the &quot;Kunju Macbeth&quot; of Huang Zuolin performed at the inaugural Chinese Shakespeare Festival of 1986. Similarly, B. V. Karanth&#x27;s &quot;Barnam Vana&quot; of 1979 had adapted &quot;Macbeth&quot; to the Yakshagana tradition of Karnataka, India. In 1997, Lokendra Arambam created &quot;Stage of Blood&quot;, merging a range of martial arts, dance and gymnastic styles from Manipur, performed in Imphal and in England. The stage was literally a raft on a lake.

&quot;Throne of Blood&quot; (蜘蛛巣城 Kumonosu-jō, &quot;Spider Web Castle&quot;) is a 1957 Japanese samurai film co-written and directed by Akira Kurosawa. The film transposes &quot;Macbeth&quot; from Medieval Scotland to feudal Japan, with stylistic elements drawn from Noh drama. Kurosawa was a fan of the play and planned his own adaptation for several years, postponing it after learning of Orson Welles&#x27; &quot;Macbeth&quot; (1948). The film won two Mainichi Film Awards.

The play has been translated and performed in various languages in different parts of the world, and &quot;Media Artists&quot; was the first to stage its Punjabi adaptation in India. The adaptation by Balram and the play directed by Samuel John have been universally acknowledged as a milestone in Punjabi theatre. The unique attempt involved trained theatre experts and the actors taken from a rural background in Punjab. Punjabi folk music imbued the play with the native ethos as the Scottish setting of Shakespeare&#x27;s play was transposed into a Punjabi milieu.

In 2021, Saoirse Ronan starred in &quot;The Tragedy of Macbeth&quot; at the Almeida Theatre in London. The following year a revival production opened on Broadway with Daniel Craig and Ruth Negga to middling reviews.

A new production starring David Tennant and Cush Jumbo ran at London&#x27;s Donmar Warehouse from 8 December 2023 to 10 February 2024. Max Webster directed the production. The show received 3 Laurence Olivier Award nominations, including Best Revival. It transferred to the Harold Pinter Theatre in the West End from 1 October 2024 for a limited run.

=== Operas ===
&quot;Macbeth&quot; was adapted into an Italian opera (&quot;Macbeth&quot;) by composer Giuseppe Verdi and librettist Francesco Maria Piave in 1847 (revised in French in 1865). An English opera adaptation of the play was created by Lawrance Collingwood in 1927.

Contemporary opera adaptations include Luke Styles&#x27; &quot;Macbeth&quot; (2015) and Pascal Dusapin&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth Underworld&quot; (2019).

An indirect adaptation is Dmitri Shostakovich&#x27;s &quot;Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk&quot; (1934), based on the novella of the same name by Nikolai Leskov.

==See also==
* Cultural references to &quot;Macbeth&quot;
* List of idioms attributed to Shakespeare

==Notes and references==
== References ==

All references to &quot;Macbeth&quot;, unless otherwise specified, are taken from the Arden Shakespeare, second series edition edited by Kenneth Muir. Under their referencing system, III.I.55 means act 3, scene 1, line 55. All references to other Shakespeare plays are to The Oxford Shakespeare &quot;Complete Works of Shakespeare&quot; edited by Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor.

==Sources==
===Editions of &quot;Macbeth&quot;===
*
*
*
*
===Secondary sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
*
*


==External links==


* &quot;Macbeth&quot;, eds. Barbara Mowat, Paul Werstine, Michael Poston, and Rebecca Niles. Folger Shakespeare Library.
* Performances and Photographs from London and Stratford performances of &quot;Macbeth&quot; 1960–2000 – From the Designing Shakespeare resource
* &quot;Macbeth&quot; at the British Library
* &quot;Macbeth&quot; on Film
* PBS Video directed by Rupert Goold starring Sir Patrick Stewart
* Annotated Text at The Shakespeare Project – annotated HTML version of &quot;Macbeth.&quot;
* &quot;Macbeth&quot; Navigator – searchable, annotated HTML version of &quot;Macbeth.&quot;
* &quot;Macbeth&quot; Analysis and Textual Notes
* Annotated Bibliography of &quot;Macbeth&quot; Criticism
* &quot;Shakespeare and the Uses of Power&quot; by Steven Greenblatt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2724880" start="60" end="67" title="Shakespearean tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="71" end="90" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738472" start="134" end="138" title="1606 in literature" label="1606"/>
<link wikidata="Q833645" start="276" end="289" title="First Folio" label="Folio of 1623"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249895" start="307" end="318" title="prompt book" label="prompt book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559155" start="453" end="458" title="Jacobean era" label="reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="462" end="474" title="James VI and I" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="494" end="502" title="allusion" label="allusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715005" start="543" end="557" title="King&amp;#x27;s Men (playing company)" label="acting company"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322723" start="604" end="611" title="Macbeth (character)" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698345" start="639" end="654" title="Three Witches" label="trio of witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="683" end="699" title="King of Scotland" label="King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="749" end="757" title="Lady Macbeth" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="855" end="863" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="962" end="978" title="Tyrant" label="tyrannical ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q244403" start="1125" end="1150" title="Macbeth, King of Scotland" label="Macbeth, King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842048" start="1152" end="1159" title="Macduff (Macbeth)" label="Macduff"/>
<link wikidata="Q26326" start="1165" end="1171" title="Duncan I of Scotland" label="Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q690389" start="1181" end="1208" title="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q329988" start="1473" end="1485" title="Henry Garnet" label="Henry Garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="1508" end="1522" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762642" start="1676" end="1693" title="The Scottish Play" label="The Scottish Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451020" start="2001" end="2006" title="Thane (Scotland)" label="Thane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026782" start="2017" end="2023" title="Glamis" label="Glamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028188" start="2238" end="2244" title="Cawdor" label="Cawdor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="2407" end="2412" title="heath" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="2476" end="2489" title="prophecy" label="prophetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="3131" end="3140" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120735" start="3694" end="3698" title="omen" label="omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="5319" end="5326" title="banquet" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474842" start="5509" end="5523" title="Third Murderer" label="third murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="5827" end="5832" title="Ghosts in European culture" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="6293" end="6299" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="6527" end="6539" title="verbal irony" label="verbal irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087058" start="7228" end="7245" title="Birnam, Perth and Kinross" label="Great Birnam Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q68340" start="7255" end="7269" title="Dunsinane Hill" label="Dunsinane Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470383" start="7871" end="7890" title="Lady Macduff" label="Macduff&amp;#x27;s wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723008" start="7895" end="7904" title="Macduff&amp;#x27;s son" label="young son"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="8718" end="8737" title="Edward the Confessor" label="English King Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539953" start="8975" end="8993" title="Sleepwalking scene" label="enters in a trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820294" start="9578" end="9614" title="Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow" label="Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q184528" start="9621" end="9630" title="soliloquy" label="soliloquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="10061" end="10078" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="10419" end="10423" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q852883" start="10464" end="10469" title="Scone, Scotland" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698348" start="10490" end="10496" title="King Duncan" label="Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203840" start="10515" end="10522" title="Malcolm (Macbeth)" label="Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293903" start="10548" end="10557" title="Donalbain (Macbeth)" label="Donalbain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322723" start="10585" end="10592" title="Macbeth (character)" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451020" start="10641" end="10646" title="Thane (Scotland)" label="Thane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026782" start="10650" end="10656" title="Glamis" label="Glamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028188" start="10672" end="10678" title="Cawdor" label="Cawdor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="10709" end="10721" title="Lady Macbeth" label="Lady Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q806945" start="10772" end="10778" title="Banquo" label="Banquo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429667" start="10843" end="10850" title="Fleance" label="Fleance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842048" start="10870" end="10877" title="Macduff (Macbeth)" label="Macduff"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="10886" end="10890" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470383" start="10893" end="10905" title="Lady Macduff" label="Lady Macduff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723008" start="10927" end="10945" title="Macduff&amp;#x27;s son" label="Macduff&amp;#x27;s son"/>
<link wikidata="Q68366" start="11017" end="11023" title="Siward, Earl of Northumbria" label="Siward"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205679" start="11055" end="11067" title="Young Siward" label="Young Siward"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="11137" end="11143" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698345" start="11166" end="11179" title="Three Witches" label="Three Witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474842" start="11339" end="11353" title="Third Murderer" label="Third Murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011799" start="11784" end="11796" title="Daemonologie" label="Daemonologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14181512" start="11879" end="11898" title="Newes from Scotland" label="Newes from Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491168" start="11930" end="11956" title="North Berwick witch trials" label="North Berwick witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="12914" end="12934" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q690389" start="13505" end="13532" title="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q363154" start="13730" end="13734" title="Dub, King of Scotland" label="Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q715169" start="14366" end="14381" title="George Buchanan" label="George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q652097" start="14820" end="14832" title="Hector Boece" label="Hector Boece"/>
<link wikidata="Q652097" start="14851" end="14875" title="Historia Gentis Scotorum" label="Historia Gentis Scotorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q815825" start="16044" end="16055" title="hospitality" label="hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="16148" end="16157" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="16597" end="16603" title="House of Stuart" label="Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175704" start="17125" end="17143" title="Jean de Schelandre" label="Jean de Schelandre"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="17637" end="17651" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q896495" start="18164" end="18176" title="Mental reservation" label="equivocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110589009" start="18981" end="18997" title="Battle of Droizy" label="Battle of Droizy"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="19068" end="19084" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667893" start="19110" end="19113" title="Ent" label="Ent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="19135" end="19156" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="19316" end="19322" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="19336" end="19343" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="19361" end="19370" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q806945" start="19699" end="19705" title="Banquo" label="Banquo"/>
<link wikidata="Q329988" start="20735" end="20747" title="Henry Garnet" label="Henry Garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q896495" start="20855" end="20879" title="Mental reservation" label="&amp;quot;equivocation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="21671" end="21695" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="22100" end="22122" title="Union of the Crowns" label="became king of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="22215" end="22235" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343182" start="22300" end="22315" title="Robert Crawford (Scottish poet)" label="Robert Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801816" start="25322" end="25339" title="Lancelot Andrewes" label="Lancelot Andrewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="26358" end="26364" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="26413" end="26418" title="sibyl" label="sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q313932" start="27694" end="27710" title="Francis Beaumont" label="Francis Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744852" start="27724" end="27752" title="Knight of the Burning Pestle" label="Knight of the Burning Pestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q833645" start="27998" end="28009" title="First Folio" label="First Folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249895" start="28165" end="28176" title="prompt book" label="prompt book"/>
<link wikidata="Q344865" start="28300" end="28316" title="Thomas Middleton" label="Thomas Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775263" start="28335" end="28344" title="The Witch (play)" label="The Witch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28668" end="28674" title="Hecate#Hecate in literature" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818917" start="29904" end="29917" title="A. C. Bradley" label="A. C. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="30461" end="30475" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044567" start="30777" end="30794" title="Caroline Spurgeon" label="Caroline Spurgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="31521" end="31532" title="Richard III (play)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q925991" start="32241" end="32255" title="Robert Bridges" label="Robert Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105422" start="32515" end="32532" title="John Dover Wilson" label="John Dover Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41223" start="32972" end="32987" title="Boris Pasternak" label="Boris Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q934089" start="33008" end="33019" title="Raskolnikov" label="Raskolnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q165318" start="33046" end="33066" title="Crime and Punishment" label="Crime and Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="33076" end="33093" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049050" start="33883" end="33903" title="great chain of being" label="great chain of being"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="34103" end="34124" title="divine right of kings" label="divine right of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q215750" start="34239" end="34252" title="Julius Caesar (play)" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="34785" end="34797" title="mystery play" label="mystery play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540642" start="34805" end="34822" title="harrowing of hell" label="harrowing of hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="35002" end="35014" title="Herod the Great" label="tyrant plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495027" start="35412" end="35420" title="feminist literary criticism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395875" start="35421" end="35435" title="psychoanalytic literary criticism" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818917" start="36048" end="36061" title="A. C. Bradley" label="A. C. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222976" start="36096" end="36114" title="Mary Cowden Clarke" label="Mary Cowden Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201376" start="37681" end="37700" title="Fidele and Fortunio" label="Fidele and Fortunio"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="38429" end="38435" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762642" start="38773" end="38790" title="The Scottish Play" label="The Scottish Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q432316" start="39421" end="39434" title="Donald Sinden" label="Donald Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q899487" start="39443" end="39451" title="Sky Arts" label="Sky Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600164" start="39468" end="39491" title="Great West End Theatres" label="Great West End Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q298777" start="39585" end="39597" title="Michael York" label="Michael York"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="40159" end="40181" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="40222" end="40237" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437136" start="40589" end="40601" title="Simon Forman" label="Simon Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q272434" start="40628" end="40637" title="Globe Theatre" label="the Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q743194" start="41022" end="41044" title="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q880830" start="41343" end="41362" title="Blackfriars Theatre" label="Blackfriars Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297486" start="41532" end="41536" title="Cue (theatrical)" label="cues"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="41602" end="41614" title="sound effect" label="sound effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="41696" end="41703" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="41745" end="41756" title="English Restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q381395" start="41786" end="41802" title="patent theatre" label="patent companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197437" start="41808" end="41827" title="King&amp;#x27;s Company" label="King&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041073" start="41836" end="41855" title="Duke&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Duke&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q450199" start="41936" end="41956" title="William Davenant" label="Sir William Davenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="42564" end="42576" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511187" start="43028" end="43037" title="Thomas Betterton" label="Betterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="43327" end="43331" title="Charles II of England" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614050" start="43477" end="43495" title="Old American Company" label="The Hallam Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q222390" start="43507" end="43520" title="David Garrick" label="David Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9001976" start="43968" end="43984" title="Hannah Pritchard" label="Hannah Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701422" start="44730" end="44748" title="John Philip Kemble" label="John Philip Kemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q234746" start="44966" end="44979" title="Sarah Siddons" label="Sarah Siddons"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="45495" end="45502" title="William Hazlitt" label="Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432748" start="46468" end="46483" title="Robert William Elliston" label="Robert Elliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900939" start="46566" end="46578" title="Surrey Theatre" label="Royal Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="46871" end="46884" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701422" start="46895" end="46901" title="John Philip Kemble" label="Kemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q704385" start="47229" end="47240" title="Edmund Kean" label="Edmund Kean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="47244" end="47254" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777548" start="47896" end="47919" title="Theatres Act 1843" label="Theatres Regulation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="48019" end="48032" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677709" start="48070" end="48083" title="actor-manager" label="actor-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="48144" end="48154" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q546808" start="48290" end="48305" title="Tableau vivant" label="tableaux vivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q725355" start="48307" end="48319" title="Charles Kean" label="Charles Kean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244491" start="48354" end="48377" title="Princess&amp;#x27;s Theatre, London" label="Princess&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331895" start="48554" end="48564" title="Ellen Kean" label="Ellen Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="48624" end="48633" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412397" start="48900" end="48913" title="Samuel Phelps" label="Samuel Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q618710" start="48975" end="48980" title="gauze" label="gauze"/>
<link wikidata="Q750138" start="49095" end="49111" title="Astor Place riot" label="Astor Place riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="49115" end="49124" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294570" start="49153" end="49166" title="Edwin Forrest" label="Edwin Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q637374" start="49382" end="49390" title="William Macready" label="Macready"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811071" start="49421" end="49444" title="Astor Opera House" label="Astor Place Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="49583" end="49589" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q448890" start="50085" end="50102" title="Charlotte Cushman" label="Charlotte Cushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749164" start="50337" end="50349" title="Helena Faucit" label="Helen Faucit"/>
<link wikidata="Q354003" start="50631" end="50647" title="Adelaide Ristori" label="Adelaide Ristori"/>
<link wikidata="Q32505" start="50844" end="50856" title="Henry Irving" label="Henry Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677709" start="50903" end="50916" title="actor-manager" label="actor-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q241966" start="51287" end="51298" title="Ellen Terry" label="Ellen Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q719180" start="51594" end="51609" title="Tommaso Salvini" label="Tommaso Salvini"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="51903" end="51915" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="51920" end="51926" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864345" start="52122" end="52135" title="Barry Jackson (director)" label="Barry Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916786" start="52144" end="52172" title="Birmingham Repertory Theatre" label="Birmingham Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888974" start="52260" end="52272" title="modern dress" label="modern dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="52333" end="52345" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52383" end="52401" title="Federal Theatre Project#African-American theatre" label="Negro Theatre Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440463" start="52409" end="52432" title="Federal Theatre Project" label="Federal Theatre Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471542" start="52440" end="52457" title="Lafayette Theatre (Harlem)" label="Lafayette Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="52536" end="52542" title="Haitian Vodou" label="Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941656" start="52615" end="52629" title="Voodoo Macbeth" label="Voodoo Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658575" start="52681" end="52693" title="Harlem Riot of 1935" label="Harlem riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q343633" start="53015" end="53031" title="Burgess Meredith" label="Burgess Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="53047" end="53061" title="British Overseas Territory" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="53065" end="53072" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="53083" end="53098" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564779" start="53132" end="53150" title="Fort St. Catherine" label="Fort St. Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="53428" end="53447" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="53449" end="53465" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="53475" end="53487" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q432362" start="53500" end="53511" title="Antony Sher" label="Antony Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567611" start="53559" end="53573" title="Glen Byam Shaw" label="Glen Byam Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="53580" end="53592" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q374900" start="53651" end="53664" title="Kenneth Tynan" label="Kenneth Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="53851" end="53876" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375404" start="53903" end="53931" title="Royal Shakespeare Theatre" label="Shakespeare Memorial Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q769414" start="53933" end="53943" title="Peter Hall (director)" label="Peter Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334509" start="54123" end="54134" title="Trevor Nunn" label="Trevor Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755513" start="54310" end="54321" title="The Other Place (theatre)" label="Other Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="54328" end="54340" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="54345" end="54355" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="54719" end="54722" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="RSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q630876" start="54758" end="54771" title="Gregory Doran" label="Gregory Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q653334" start="54798" end="54806" title="Swan Theatre (Stratford)" label="The Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432362" start="54813" end="54824" title="Antony Sher" label="Antony Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q271177" start="54829" end="54843" title="Harriet Walter" label="Harriet Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312380" start="55614" end="55635" title="Christopher Eccleston" label="Christopher Eccleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411986" start="55664" end="55676" title="Niamh Cusack" label="Niamh Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q163557" start="55846" end="55858" title="Pavel Kohout" label="Pavel Kohout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060755" start="56175" end="56189" title="Yukio Ninagawa" label="Yukio Ninagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297162" start="56218" end="56234" title="Masane Tsukayama" label="Masane Tsukayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="56271" end="56289" title="Sengoku period" label="Japanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822274" start="56603" end="56627" title="Central Academy of Drama" label="Central Academy of Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="56721" end="56740" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="56863" end="56877" title="Napoleon III" label="Louis Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="56883" end="56893" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q674493" start="56986" end="56991" title="Kunqu" label="Kunju"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925839" start="57009" end="57021" title="Huang Zuolin" label="Huang Zuolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595279" start="57098" end="57111" title="B. V. Karanth" label="B. V. Karanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584013" start="57190" end="57200" title="Yakshagana" label="Yakshagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="57214" end="57223" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="57359" end="57366" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208097" start="57381" end="57387" title="Imphal" label="Imphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q257818" start="57453" end="57468" title="Throne of Blood" label="Throne of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="57584" end="57598" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="58080" end="58087" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985266" start="58159" end="58170" title="Samuel John" label="Samuel John"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="58341" end="58347" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571836" start="58487" end="58493" title="milieu" label="milieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q228603" start="58505" end="58518" title="Saoirse Ronan" label="Saoirse Ronan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839111" start="58572" end="58587" title="Almeida Theatre" label="Almeida Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="58663" end="58675" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453629" start="58680" end="58690" title="Ruth Negga" label="Ruth Negga"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="58739" end="58752" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q517935" start="58757" end="58767" title="Cush Jumbo" label="Cush Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296262" start="58789" end="58805" title="Donmar Warehouse" label="Donmar Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="58905" end="58927" title="Laurence Olivier Awards" label="Laurence Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="58987" end="59008" title="Harold Pinter Theatre" label="Harold Pinter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="59016" end="59024" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="59128" end="59133" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q320363" start="59141" end="59148" title="Macbeth (Verdi)" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="59168" end="59182" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334205" start="59198" end="59219" title="Francesco Maria Piave" label="Francesco Maria Piave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503732" start="59312" end="59332" title="Lawrance Collingwood" label="Lawrance Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q516845" start="59431" end="59445" title="Pascal Dusapin" label="Pascal Dusapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="59519" end="59538" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48614" start="59552" end="59575" title="Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk (opera)" label="Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985609" start="59599" end="59627" title="Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District (novella)" label="the novella of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q209004" start="59631" end="59645" title="Nikolai Leskov" label="Nikolai Leskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682709" start="59663" end="59705" title="Cultural references to Macbeth" label="Cultural references to &amp;quot;Macbeth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59708" end="59748" title="List of idioms attributed to Shakespeare" label="List of idioms attributed to Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787941" start="59879" end="59896" title="Arden Shakespeare" label="Arden Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390507" start="59930" end="59942" title="Kenneth Muir (scholar)" label="Kenneth Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755811" start="60065" end="60087" title="The Oxford Shakespeare" label="The Oxford Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156493" start="60094" end="60123" title="Complete Works of Shakespeare" label="Complete Works of Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600035" start="60140" end="60153" title="Stanley Wells" label="Stanley Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526047" start="60158" end="60169" title="Gary Taylor (scholar)" label="Gary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q728116" start="60450" end="60476" title="Folger Shakespeare Library" label="Folger Shakespeare Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380291" start="60722" end="60734" title="Rupert Goold" label="Rupert Goold"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="60748" end="60763" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18870" wikidata="Q81509" url="?curid=18870" title="Minor Threat">
<text>Minor Threat was an American hardcore punk band, formed in 1980 in Washington, D.C., by vocalist Ian MacKaye and drummer Jeff Nelson. MacKaye and Nelson had played in several other bands together, and recruited bassist Brian Baker and guitarist Lyle Preslar to form Minor Threat. They added a fifth member, Steve Hansgen, in 1982, playing bass, while Baker switched to second guitar.

The band was relatively short-lived, disbanding after only three years together, but had a strong influence in the emerging American hardcore punk scene, both stylistically and in helping to further establish the &quot;do it yourself&quot; ethic for music distribution and concert promotion. Minor Threat&#x27;s song &quot;Straight Edge&quot; was the basis of the straight edge movement, which emphasized a lifestyle without alcohol or other drugs, or promiscuous sex. AllMusic described Minor Threat&#x27;s music as &quot;iconic&quot; and noted that their groundbreaking music &quot;has held up better than [that of] most of their contemporaries.&quot;

Along with the fellow Washington, D.C. hardcore band Bad Brains and California band Black Flag, Minor Threat set the standard for many hardcore punk bands in the 1980s and 1990s. All of Minor Threat&#x27;s recordings were released on MacKaye&#x27;s and Nelson&#x27;s own label, Dischord Records. The &quot;Minor Threat&quot; EP and &quot;Out of Step&quot; EP have received a number of accolades and are cited as landmarks of the hardcore punk genre.

==History==

===Formation and early years===

Prior to forming Minor Threat in 1980, vocalist Ian MacKaye and drummer Jeff Nelson had played bass and drums respectively in the Teen Idles while attending what was then Wilson High School. During their two-year career within the flourishing Washington D.C. hardcore punk scene, the Teen Idles had gained a following of around one hundred fans (a sizable amount at the time), and were seen as only second within the scene to the contemporary Bad Brains. MacKaye and Nelson were strong believers in the DIY mentality and an independent, underground music scene. After the breakup of the Teen Idles, they used the money earned through the band to create Dischord Records, an independent record label that would host the releases of the Teen Idles, Minor Threat, and numerous other D.C. punk bands.

Eager to start a new band after the Teen Idles, MacKaye and Nelson recruited guitarist Lyle Preslar and bassist Brian Baker. They played their first performance in December 1980 to fifty people in a basement, opening for Bad Brains, The Untouchables, Black Market Baby and S.O.A., all D.C. bands.

The band&#x27;s first 7-inch EPs, &quot;Minor Threat&quot; and &quot;In My Eyes&quot;, were released in 1981. The group became popular regionally and toured the east coast and Midwest.

&quot;Straight Edge,&quot; a song from the band&#x27;s first EP, helped to inspire the straight edge movement. The lyrics of the song relay MacKaye&#x27;s first-person perspective of his personal choice of abstinence from alcohol and other drugs, contrary to most rock musicians at the time. Although the original song was not written as a manifesto or a &quot;set of rules,&quot; according to the band members, many later bands inspired by the idea used it as such. Minor Threat band members stated they never intended or viewed &quot;Straight Edge&quot; as a &quot;movement&quot;.

&quot;Out of Step&quot;, a Minor Threat song from their second EP, further demonstrates the said belief: &quot;Don&#x27;t smoke/Don&#x27;t drink/Don&#x27;t fuck/At least I can fucking think/I can&#x27;t keep up/I&#x27;m out of step with the world.&quot; The &quot;I&quot; in the lyrics was usually only implied, mainly because it did not quite fit the rhythm of the song. Some of the other members of Minor Threat, Jeff Nelson in particular, took exception to what they saw as MacKaye&#x27;s attitude on the song. The line &quot;Don&#x27;t fuck&quot; sparked widespread debate, to which Ian clarified that the intent was commentary on society&#x27;s attitude towards predatory or casual sex, not on the act itself.

Minor Threat&#x27;s song &quot;Guilty of Being White&quot; led some critics to accuse the band of racism, but MacKaye has strongly denied such intentions and said that some listeners misinterpreted his words. He claims that his experiences attending Wilson High School, whose student population was 70 percent Black, inspired the song. There, many students bullied MacKaye and his friends. In an interview, MacKaye stated that he was offended that some perceived racist overtones in the lyrics, saying, &quot;To me, at the time and now, it seemed clear it&#x27;s an anti-racist song. Of course, it didn&#x27;t occur to me at the time I wrote it that anybody outside of my twenty or thirty friends who I was singing to would ever have to actually ponder the lyrics or even consider them.&quot; Thrash metal band Slayer later covered the song, with the last iteration of the lyric &quot;guilty of being white&quot; changed to &quot;guilty of being right.&quot;

===Hiatus===
In the time between the release of the band&#x27;s second seven-inch EP and the &quot;Out of Step&quot; record, the band briefly split when guitarist Lyle Preslar moved to Illinois to attend college for a semester at Northwestern University. Preslar was a member of Big Black for a few tempestuous rehearsals. During that period, MacKaye and Nelson put together a studio-only project called Skewbald/Grand Union; in a reflection of the slowly increasing disagreements between the two musicians, they were unable to decide on one name. The group recorded three untitled songs, which would be released posthumously as Dischord&#x27;s 50th release. During Minor Threat&#x27;s inactive period, Brian Baker also briefly played guitar for Government Issue and appeared on the &quot;Make an Effort&quot; EP.

In March 1982, at the urging of Bad Brains&#x27; H.R., Preslar left college to reform Minor Threat. The reunited band featured an expanded lineup: Steve Hansgen joined as the band&#x27;s bassist and Baker switched to second guitar.

When the &quot;Out of Step&quot; was re-recorded for the LP &quot;Out of Step,&quot; MacKaye clearly sang &quot;I don&#x27;t drink/smoke/fuck&quot;, as was the intent of his words all along, in response to what many saw as his imperious attitude on the song. The band also inserted an overdubbed spoken section into the instrumental break before the last chorus with MacKaye stating, &quot;This is not a set of rules, I&#x27;m not telling you what to do...&quot; Recording engineer Don Zientara had inadvertently recorded an argument between drummer Nelson and lyricist/singer MacKaye that captured the message perfectly, so this was used. According to Mark Andersen and Mark Jenkins&#x27; &quot;Dance of Days: Two Decades of Punk in the Nation&#x27;s Capital&quot;, this argument was over exactly what would be said in the message that Nelson wanted MacKaye to record, stating essentially what he said without knowing it was being recorded.

===Breakup===
Minor Threat broke up in 1983. According to Baker, a major point of contention was the band&#x27;s musical direction:&quot;Did we all want to develop Minor Threat’s sound to be more melodic, but Ian MacKaye didn’t? Yes, Ian was right, and we were wrong. What Ian was doing was not just a band, Ian was building a community. He was so far ahead of his time and was thinking about the idea of Dischord and several bands and having this kind of reciprocating relationship with other artists. He was so big picture. But I was like: ‘I want to play bigger shows, I want to tour more. Minor Threat is a great little punk band, but have you heard the &quot;Boy&quot; album…?’   

I was dumb! And he wasn’t. So Minor Threat fortunately stopped exactly when it did.&quot;MacKaye was skipping rehearsal sessions towards the end of the band&#x27;s career, and he wrote the lyrics to the songs on the &quot;Salad Days&quot; EP in the studio. That was quite a contrast with the earlier recordings, as he had written and co-written the music for much of the band&#x27;s early material. Minor Threat, which had returned to being a four-piece group with the departure of Hansgen, played its final show on September 23, 1983, at the Lansburgh Cultural Center in Washington, D.C., sharing the bill with go-go band Trouble Funk, and Austin, Texas punk funk act the Big Boys. In a meaningful way, Minor Threat ended their final set with &quot;Last Song&quot;, a tune whose name was also the original title of the band&#x27;s song &quot;Salad Days&quot;.

Following the breakup, MacKaye stated that he did not &quot;check out&quot; on hardcore, but in fact hardcore &quot;checked out&quot;. Explaining this, he stated that at a 1984 Minutemen show, a fan struck MacKaye&#x27;s younger brother Alec in the face, and he punched the fan back, then realizing that the violence was &quot;stupid,&quot; and that he saw his role in the stupidity. MacKaye claimed that immediately after this he decided to leave the hardcore scene.

===Subsequent activities===
In March 1984, six months after the band broke up, the EPs &quot;Minor Threat&quot; and &quot;In My Eyes&quot; were compiled together and re-released as the &quot;Minor Threat&quot; album. The &quot;Complete Discography&quot; archival compilation would follow in 1989, with the additional release of &quot;First Demo Tape&quot; in 2003. Two previously unreleased songs were featured on the &quot;20 Years of Dischord&quot; compilation in 2002.

MacKaye went on to found Embrace with former members of the Faith, Egg Hunt with Jeff Nelson, and later Fugazi, the Evens, and Coriky, as well as collaborating on Pailhead.

Baker went on to play in Junkyard, the Meatmen, Dag Nasty and Government Issue. Since 1994, Baker has been a member of Bad Religion.

Preslar was briefly a member of Glenn Danzig&#x27;s Samhain, and his playing appears on a few songs on the band&#x27;s first record. He joined The Meatmen in 1984, along with fellow Minor Threat member Brian Baker. He later ran Caroline Records, signing and working with (among others) Peter Gabriel, Ben Folds, Chemical Brothers, and Idaho, and ran marketing for Sire Records. He graduated from Rutgers University School of Law and lives in New Jersey.

Nelson played less-frantic alternative rock with Three and The High-Back Chairs before retiring from live performance. He runs the record label Adult Swim Records (distributed by Dischord) and Pedestrian Press, as well as being a political activist. He resides in Toledo, Ohio. 

The band&#x27;s own Dischord Records released material by many bands from the Washington, D.C., area, such as Government Issue, Void, Scream, Fugazi, Artificial Peace, Rites of Spring, Gray Matter, and Dag Nasty, and became a respected independent record label.

Hansgen formed Second Wind with Rich Moore, a former Minor Threat roadie and drummer for the Untouchables. In 1992, he worked as a producer on the first Tool EP &quot;Opiate&quot;.

==Copyright issues==

===&quot;Major Threat&quot;===
In 2005, a mock-up of the cover of Minor Threat&#x27;s first EP (also used on the &quot;Minor Threat&quot; LP and &quot;Complete Discography&quot; CD) was copied by athletic footwear manufacturer Nike for use on a promotional poster for a skateboarding tour called &quot;Major Threat&quot;. Nike also altered Minor Threat&#x27;s logo (designed by Jeff Nelson) for the same campaign, as well as featuring Nike shoes in the new picture, rather than the combat boots worn by Ian MacKaye&#x27;s younger brother Alec on the original.

MacKaye issued a press statement condemning Nike&#x27;s actions and said that he would discuss legal options with the other members of the band. Meanwhile, fans, at the encouragement of Dischord, organized a letter-writing campaign protesting Nike&#x27;s infringement. On June 27, 2005, Nike issued a statement apologizing to Minor Threat, Dischord Records, and their fans for the &quot;Major Threat&quot; campaign and said that all promotional artwork (print and digital) that they could acquire was destroyed.

===&quot;Salad Days&quot;===
On October 29, 2005, Fox played the first few seconds of Minor Threat&#x27;s &quot;Salad Days&quot; during an NFL broadcast. Use of the song was not cleared by Dischord Records or any of the members of Minor Threat. Fox claimed that the clip was too short to have violated any copyrights.

===Wheelhouse Pickles===
In 2007, Brooklyn-based company Wheelhouse Pickles marketed a pepper sauce named &quot;Minor Threat Sauce&quot;. Requesting only that the original label design (which was based on the &quot;Bottled Violence&quot; artwork) be amended, Ian MacKaye gave the product his endorsement. A small mention of this was made, where MacKaye commented, &quot;I don&#x27;t have an occasion to eat a lot of hot sauce, but I also thought the Minor Threat stuff was nice.&quot;

=== Urban Outfitters ===
In 2013, Minor Threat shirts began appearing in Urban Outfitters stores. Ian MacKaye confirmed that the shirts were officially licensed. Having spent what he described as &quot;a complete waste of time&quot; trying to track down bootlegged Minor Threat merchandise, MacKaye and Dischord made arrangements with a merchandise company in California to manage licensing of the band&#x27;s shirts, as well as working to ensure that bootleg manufacturers of the shirts were curtailed. In comments that appeared in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, MacKaye called it &quot;absurd&quot; for the shirts to be sold for $28 but concluded that &quot;my time is better spent doing other things&quot; than dealing with shirts. Dischord had previously taken action against Forever 21 in 2009 for marketing unlicensed Minor Threat shirts.

==Members==
* Ian MacKaye – lead vocals (1980–1983)
* Lyle Preslar – guitars (1980–1983)
* Brian Baker – bass (1980–1982, 1983), guitars (1982–1983)
* Jeff Nelson – drums (1980–1983)
* Steve Hansgen – bass (1982–1983)

==Discography==

===Original material===
* &quot;Minor Threat&quot; 7&quot; (1981)
* &quot;In My Eyes&quot; 7&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Out of Step&quot; 12&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Salad Days&quot; 7&quot; (1985)

===Compilation albums===
* &quot;Minor Threat&quot; LP (1984)
* &quot;Complete Discography&quot; CD (1989)
* &quot;First Demo Tape&quot; CD/7&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Out of Step Out Takes&quot; 7&quot; (2023)

===Compilation appearances===
* &quot;Flex Your Head&quot; (1982) – &quot;Stand Up&quot;, &quot;12XU&quot;
* &quot;Dischord 1981: The Year in Seven Inches&quot; (1995) contains the first two EPs
* &quot;20 Years of Dischord&quot; (2002) – &quot;Screaming at a Wall&quot;, &quot;Straight Edge&quot; (live), &quot;Understand&quot;, &quot;Asshole Dub&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Andersen, Mark; Jenkins, Mark (Soft Skull Press, 2001). &quot;Dance of Days: Two Decades of Punk in the Nation&#x27;s Capital&quot;. Fourth ed., 2009. Brooklyn, New York: Akashic Books. .
* Azerrad, Michael (2001), &quot;Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes From the American Indie Underground, 1981–1991&quot;, Boston, MA: Little Brown, .
* Connolly, Cynthia; Clague, Leslie &amp; Cheslow, Sharon (1988), &quot;Banned in DC: Photos and Anecdotes from the DC Punk Underground 1979-85&quot;, Washington, D.C.: Sun Dog Propaganda, .

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Washington Post Express&quot; interview with Brian Baker, 2007
* from &quot;If This Goes On&quot; by Sharon Cheslow and Colin Sears</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="0" end="12" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="29" end="42" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="67" end="83" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q455545" start="97" end="108" title="Ian MacKaye" label="Ian MacKaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807789" start="121" end="132" title="Jeff Nelson (musician)" label="Jeff Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q911812" start="219" end="230" title="Brian Baker (musician)" label="Brian Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841005" start="245" end="257" title="Lyle Preslar" label="Lyle Preslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973342" start="307" end="320" title="Steve Hansgen" label="Steve Hansgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="604" end="618" title="do it yourself" label="do it yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521435" start="708" end="721" title="Straight Edge (song)" label="Straight Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215" start="749" end="762" title="straight edge" label="straight edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="854" end="862" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q824948" start="1062" end="1087" title="Washington, D.C. hardcore" label="Washington, D.C. hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="1093" end="1103" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="1124" end="1134" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228431" start="1318" end="1334" title="Dischord Records" label="Dischord Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="1346" end="1358" title="Minor Threat (album)" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040730" start="1378" end="1389" title="Out of Step (EP)" label="Out of Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q455545" start="1585" end="1596" title="Ian MacKaye" label="Ian MacKaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807789" start="1609" end="1620" title="Jeff Nelson (musician)" label="Jeff Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416624" start="1663" end="1677" title="the Teen Idles" label="the Teen Idles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033204" start="1708" end="1726" title="Jackson-Reed High School" label="Wilson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q824948" start="1780" end="1815" title="Washington, D.C. hardcore" label="Washington D.C. hardcore punk scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="1980" end="1990" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="2040" end="2043" title="Do It Yourself" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228431" start="2190" end="2206" title="Dischord Records" label="Dischord Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841005" start="2422" end="2434" title="Lyle Preslar" label="Lyle Preslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q911812" start="2447" end="2458" title="Brian Baker (musician)" label="Brian Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866707" start="2534" end="2542" title="Basement show" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="2556" end="2566" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418521" start="2608" end="2614" title="State of Alert" label="S.O.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="2702" end="2712" title="In My Eyes (EP)" label="In My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521435" start="2825" end="2838" title="Straight Edge (song)" label="Straight Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215" start="2906" end="2928" title="straight edge" label="straight edge movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="3041" end="3048" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="3059" end="3064" title="recreational drug use" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q442358" start="4083" end="4093" title="casual sex" label="casual sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="4217" end="4223" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q582965" start="4685" end="4696" title="anti-racist" label="anti-racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="4930" end="4936" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="4943" end="4950" title="cover version" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040730" start="5178" end="5189" title="Out of Step (album)" label="Out of Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="5309" end="5332" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q572821" start="5358" end="5367" title="Big Black" label="Big Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534811" start="5483" end="5503" title="Skewbald/Grand Union (band)" label="Skewbald/Grand Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534811" start="5708" end="5736" title="Skewbald/Grand Union (EP)" label="Dischord&amp;#x27;s 50th release"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476234" start="5825" end="5841" title="Government Issue" label="Government Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394511" start="5943" end="5947" title="H.R. (musician)" label="H.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q3973342" start="6041" end="6054" title="Steve Hansgen" label="Steve Hansgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207662" start="7728" end="7743" title="Boy (album)" label="&amp;quot;Boy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81532" start="7979" end="7989" title="Salad Days (EP)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659034" start="8300" end="8325" title="Harman Center for the Arts" label="Lansburgh Cultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697917" start="8369" end="8374" title="go-go" label="go-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q281888" start="8380" end="8392" title="Trouble Funk" label="Trouble Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643549" start="8412" end="8421" title="Dance punk" label="punk funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902163" start="8430" end="8438" title="Big Boys (band)" label="Big Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="8698" end="8706" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364766" start="8796" end="8805" title="Minutemen (band)" label="Minutemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640616" start="8856" end="8860" title="Alec MacKaye" label="Alec"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="9279" end="9291" title="Minor Threat (album)" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81559" start="9315" end="9335" title="Complete Discography" label="Complete Discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419327" start="9422" end="9437" title="First Demo Tape" label="First Demo Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598077" start="9512" end="9532" title="20 Years of Dischord" label="20 Years of Dischord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335095" start="9586" end="9593" title="Embrace (American band)" label="Embrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291238" start="9617" end="9626" title="the Faith (American band)" label="the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347815" start="9628" end="9636" title="Egg Hunt" label="Egg Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q277865" start="9665" end="9671" title="Fugazi (band)" label="Fugazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088576" start="9673" end="9682" title="the Evens" label="the Evens"/>
<link wikidata="Q85203963" start="9688" end="9694" title="Coriky" label="Coriky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124771" start="9724" end="9732" title="Pailhead" label="Pailhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q595624" start="9760" end="9768" title="Junkyard (band)" label="Junkyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988274" start="9770" end="9781" title="the Meatmen" label="the Meatmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q747112" start="9783" end="9792" title="Dag Nasty" label="Dag Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476234" start="9797" end="9813" title="Government Issue" label="Government Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="9854" end="9866" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q354654" start="9901" end="9913" title="Glenn Danzig" label="Glenn Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164812" start="9921" end="9928" title="Samhain (band)" label="Samhain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988274" start="10012" end="10023" title="The Meatmen" label="The Meatmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q264137" start="10097" end="10113" title="Caroline Records" label="Caroline Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="10155" end="10168" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="10170" end="10179" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q208507" start="10181" end="10198" title="Chemical Brothers" label="Chemical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535392" start="10204" end="10209" title="Idaho (band)" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="10233" end="10245" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882407" start="10265" end="10297" title="Rutgers School of Law–Newark" label="Rutgers University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="10311" end="10321" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797322" start="10373" end="10378" title="Three (band)" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="10588" end="10600" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q651398" start="10732" end="10736" title="Void (band)" label="Void"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030697" start="10738" end="10744" title="Scream (band)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q943982" start="10772" end="10787" title="Rites of Spring" label="Rites of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172137" start="10789" end="10800" title="Gray Matter (band)" label="Gray Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642897" start="10960" end="10972" title="Untouchables (punk band)" label="Untouchables"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="11020" end="11024" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503756" start="11034" end="11040" title="Opiate (EP)" label="Opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81559" start="11222" end="11242" title="Complete Discography (Minor Threat album)" label="Complete Discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="11298" end="11302" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640616" start="11609" end="11613" title="Alec MacKaye" label="Alec"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="12195" end="12198" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228431" start="12334" end="12350" title="Dischord Records" label="Dischord Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q117421395" start="12551" end="12563" title="pepper sauce" label="pepper sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552193" start="13023" end="13039" title="Urban Outfitters" label="Urban Outfitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="13204" end="13214" title="Counterfeit" label="bootlegged"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13489" end="13502" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060537" start="13726" end="13736" title="Forever 21" label="Forever 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q455545" start="13806" end="13817" title="Ian MacKaye" label="Ian MacKaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841005" start="13846" end="13858" title="Lyle Preslar" label="Lyle Preslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q911812" start="13883" end="13894" title="Brian Baker (musician)" label="Brian Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807789" start="13943" end="13954" title="Jeff Nelson (musician)" label="Jeff Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973342" start="13977" end="13990" title="Steve Hansgen" label="Steve Hansgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="14060" end="14072" title="Minor Threat (EP)" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="14102" end="14112" title="In My Eyes (EP)" label="In My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040730" start="14142" end="14153" title="Out of Step (EP)" label="Out of Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q81532" start="14184" end="14194" title="Salad Days (EP)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="14250" end="14262" title="Minor Threat (album)" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81559" start="14287" end="14307" title="Complete Discography" label="Complete Discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419327" start="14332" end="14347" title="First Demo Tape" label="First Demo Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428248" start="14462" end="14476" title="Flex Your Head" label="Flex Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598077" start="14627" end="14647" title="20 Years of Dischord" label="20 Years of Dischord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766538" start="14816" end="14830" title="Mark Andersen" label="Andersen, Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177011" start="14847" end="14863" title="Soft Skull Press" label="Soft Skull Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033640" start="14987" end="15000" title="Akashic Books" label="Akashic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="15006" end="15022" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Azerrad, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234341" start="15037" end="15119" title="Our Band Could Be Your Life" label="Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes From the American Indie Underground, 1981–1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200032" start="15157" end="15174" title="Cynthia Connolly" label="Connolly, Cynthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490017" start="15197" end="15212" title="Sharon Cheslow" label="Cheslow, Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490017" start="15478" end="15492" title="Sharon Cheslow" label="Sharon Cheslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145553" start="15497" end="15508" title="Colin Sears" label="Colin Sears"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18875" wikidata="Q6817455" url="?curid=18875" title="Mental event">
<text>A mental event is any event that happens within the mind of a conscious individual. Examples include thoughts, feelings, decisions, dreams, and realizations. These events often make up the conscious life that are associated with cognitive function.

Some believe that mental events are not limited to human thought but can be associated with animals and artificial intelligence as well. Whether mental events are identical to complex physical events, or whether such an identity even makes sense, is central to the mind–body problem.

== Relation to mind–body problem ==
Some state that the mental and the physical are the very same property which cause any event(s). This view is known as substance monism. An opposing view is substance dualism, which claims that the mental and physical are fundamentally different and can exist independently. A third approach is Donald Davidson&#x27;s &quot;anomalous monism&quot;. The Philosophy of Action states that every action is caused by prior thoughts or feelings, and understanding those mental events would in turn explain behavior.

Physicalism, a form of substance monism, states that everything that exists is either physical or depends on that which is physical. The existence of mental events has been used by philosophers as an argument against physicalism. For example, in his 1974 paper &quot;What Is it Like to Be a Bat?&quot;, Thomas Nagel argues that physicalist theories of mind cannot explain an organism&#x27;s subjective experience because they cannot account for its mental events.

Epiphenomenalism, according to Stanford, &quot;Is the view that mental events are caused by physical events in the brain, but have no effect upon any physical events.&quot; This stance then brings up the idea of introspection. According to David Lieberman, introspection is the ability for a person to observe his or her own mental state or events. Mental events can happen consciously and subconsciously at any given point. All mental events take place due to external stimuli. Which then must be processed via working memory.

==Mental Events and Working Memory==
Mental events must occur in the working memory of short term-store. Both working memory and short-term memory are essential to mental events and cognition. According to Lieberman (2021), Baddeley and Hitch (1974) proposed that working memory consists of three distinct subsystems: what are called a phonological loop, a visuo-spatial sketchpad, and central executive. 

The phenological loop is responsible for holding speech-based sounds while the visuo-spatial sketchpad holds visual concepts in the mind. Both work independent of each other. Whereas the central executive is responsible for controlling both systems. The central executive is also responsible for aiding in tasks such as reasoning and understanding language. 

In order for mental events to occur, in Homo sapiens, situations and events must be processed through working memory in order to be perceived as a mental event. Without this system of memory, situations cannot be stored as mental events. All thoughts, feelings, decisions, dreams, and realizations must cycle through this process indefinitely.

==Examples==
* Mary is walking through a park and she sees and recognizes City Hall. This instance of seeing and recognizing City Hall is an instance of perception—something that happens in Mary&#x27;s mind. That instance of perception is a mental event. It is an &quot;event&quot; because it is something that happens, and it is &quot;mental&quot; because it happens in Mary&#x27;s mind. 
* Mary feels happy after doing well on an exam and she smiles. This thought is a mental event. The smile is a physical event.
* An orca recognized a feeling of hunger. It eats a fish. The recognition of the feeling of hunger is a mental event. Eating the fish is the physical event.
* Mary is listening to her friend talk while admiring a painting she is looking at. Her visuo-spatial sketchpad is allowing her to think about the painting she likes, creating a mental event. Simultaneously, her phonological loop is allowing her to understand the conversation. Both systems are being operated by the central executive. 

==See also==
* Mental function
* Mental operations
* Mental rotation
* Functional neuroimaging
* Noumenon
* Psychedelic experience
* Synchronicity
* Working memory
* Vertiginous question

==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;The Mental Life of Plants and Worms, Among Others&quot; Oliver Sacks April 24, 2014 issue New York Review of Books</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6817455" start="2" end="14" title="Mental event" label="mental event"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="52" end="56" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="62" end="71" title="Consciousness" label="conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="101" end="108" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="132" end="137" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="354" end="377" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="515" end="532" title="mind–body problem" label="mind–body problem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="690" end="706" title="Monism#Types" label="substance monism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="728" end="745" title="Dualism (philosophy of mind)#Substance or Cartesian dualism" label="substance dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311772" start="866" end="881" title="Donald Davidson (philosopher)" label="Donald Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q567546" start="895" end="911" title="anomalous monism" label="anomalous monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175661" start="923" end="943" title="Philosophy of Action" label="Philosophy of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="1081" end="1092" title="Physicalism" label="Physicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703462" start="1348" end="1376" title="What Is it Like to Be a Bat?" label="What Is it Like to Be a Bat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="1421" end="1437" title="Theory of mind" label="theories of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q112812" start="1546" end="1562" title="Epiphenomenalism" label="Epiphenomenalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="1758" end="1771" title="introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="1803" end="1816" title="introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="2058" end="2072" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="2144" end="2158" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599" start="2204" end="2221" title="short-term memory" label="short-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="2257" end="2266" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q220986" start="2411" end="2428" title="phonological loop" label="phonological loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q220986" start="2432" end="2455" title="Visuospatial sketchpad" label="visuo-spatial sketchpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q220986" start="2461" end="2478" title="central executive" label="central executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2882" end="2894" title="Human" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="3228" end="3232" title="park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="3241" end="3245" title="visual perception" label="sees"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="3261" end="3270" title="City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="3340" end="3350" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q487" start="3632" end="3637" title="smile" label="smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="3708" end="3712" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q220986" start="3948" end="3971" title="Visuospatial sketchpad" label="visuo-spatial sketchpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q220986" start="4072" end="4089" title="phonological loop" label="phonological loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q220986" start="4177" end="4194" title="central executive" label="central executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="4213" end="4228" title="Mental function" label="Mental function"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817483" start="4231" end="4248" title="Mental operations" label="Mental operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q257360" start="4251" end="4266" title="Mental rotation" label="Mental rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="4269" end="4292" title="Functional neuroimaging" label="Functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q239581" start="4295" end="4303" title="Noumenon" label="Noumenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076521" start="4306" end="4328" title="Psychedelic experience" label="Psychedelic experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121101" start="4331" end="4344" title="Synchronicity" label="Synchronicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="4347" end="4361" title="Working memory" label="Working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455813" start="4364" end="4384" title="Vertiginous question" label="Vertiginous question"/>
<link wikidata="Q258662" start="4484" end="4496" title="Oliver Sacks" label="Oliver Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="4518" end="4542" title="New York Review of Books" label="New York Review of Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="18878" wikidata="Q43637" url="?curid=18878" title="Monopoly">
<text>A monopoly (from Greek and ) is a market in which one person or company is the only supplier of a particular good or service. A monopoly is characterized by a lack of economic competition to produce a particular thing, a lack of viable substitute goods, and the possibility of a high monopoly price well above the seller&#x27;s marginal cost that leads to a high monopoly profit. The verb &quot;monopolise&quot; or &quot;monopolize&quot; refers to the &quot;process&quot; by which a company gains the ability to raise prices or exclude competitors. In economics, a monopoly is a single seller. In law, a monopoly is a business entity that has significant market power, that is, the power to charge overly high prices, which is associated with unfair price raises. Although monopolies may be big businesses, size is not a characteristic of a monopoly. A small business may still have the power to raise prices in a small industry (or market).

A monopoly may also have monopsony control of a sector of a market. A monopsony is a market situation in which there is only one buyer. Likewise, a monopoly should be distinguished from a cartel (a form of oligopoly), in which several providers act together to coordinate services, prices or sale of goods. Monopolies, monopsonies and oligopolies are all situations in which one or a few entities have market power and therefore interact with their customers (monopoly or oligopoly), or suppliers (monopsony) in ways that distort the market.

Monopolies can be formed by mergers and integrations, form naturally, or be established by a government. In many jurisdictions, competition laws restrict monopolies due to government concerns over potential adverse effects. Holding a dominant position or a monopoly in a market is often not illegal in itself; however, certain categories of behavior can be considered abusive and therefore incur legal sanctions when business is dominant. A government-granted monopoly or &quot;legal monopoly&quot;, by contrast, is sanctioned by the state, often to provide an incentive to invest in a risky venture or enrich a domestic interest group. Patents, copyrights, and trademarks are sometimes used as examples of government-granted monopolies. The government may also reserve the venture for itself, thus forming a government monopoly, for example with a state-owned company.

Monopolies may be naturally occurring due to limited competition because the industry is resource intensive and requires substantial costs to operate (e.g., certain railroad systems).

== Market structures ==

Market structure is determined by following factors:
* &quot;Barriers to entry&quot;: Competition within the market will determine the firm&#x27;s future profits, and future profits will determine the entry and exit barriers to the market. Estimating entry, exit and profits are decided by three factors: the intensity of competition in short-term prices, the magnitude of sunk costs of entry faced by potential entrants, and the magnitude of fixed costs faced by incumbents.
* &quot;The number of companies in the market&quot;: If the number of firms in the market increases, the value of firms remaining and entering the market will decrease, leading to a high probability of exit and a reduced likelihood of entry.
* &quot;Product substitutability&quot;: Product substitution is the phenomenon where customers can choose one over another. This is the main way to distinguish a monopolistic competition market from a perfect competition market.

In economics, the idea of monopolies is important in the study of management structures, which directly concerns normative aspects of economic competition, and provides the basis for topics such as industrial organization and economics of regulation. There are four basic types of market structures in traditional economic analysis: perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly. A monopoly is a structure in which a single supplier produces and sells a given product or service. If there is a single seller in a certain market and there are no close substitutes for the product, then the market structure is that of a &quot;pure monopoly&quot;. Sometimes, there are many sellers in an industry or there exist many close substitutes for the goods being produced, but nevertheless, companies retain some market power. This is termed &quot;monopolistic competition&quot;, whereas in an oligopoly, the companies interact strategically.

In general, the main results from this theory compare the price-fixing methods across market structures, analyze the effect of a certain structure on welfare, and vary technological or demand assumptions in order to assess the consequences for an abstract model of society. Most economic textbooks follow the practice of carefully explaining the &quot;perfect competition&quot; model, mainly because this helps to understand departures from it (the so-called &quot;imperfect competition&quot; models).

The boundaries of what constitutes a market and what does not are relevant distinctions to make in economic analysis. In a general equilibrium context, a good is a specific concept including geographical and time-related characteristics. Most studies of market structure relax a little their definition of a good, allowing for more flexibility in the identification of substitute goods.

== Characteristics ==

A monopoly has at least one of these five characteristics:
* &quot;Profit maximizer&quot;: monopolists will choose the price or output to maximise profits at where MC=MR.This output will be somewhere over the price range, where demand is price elastic. If the total revenue is higher than total costs, the monopolists will make abnormal profits.
* &quot;Price maker&quot;: Decides the price of the good or product to be sold, but does so by determining the quantity in order to demand the price desired by the firm.
* &quot;High barriers to entry&quot;: Other sellers are unable to enter the market of the monopoly.
* &quot;Single seller&quot;: In a monopoly, there is one seller of the good, who produces all the output. Therefore, the whole market is being served by a single company, and for practical purposes, the company is the same as the industry.
* &quot;Price discrimination&quot;: A monopolist can change the price or quantity of the product. They sell higher quantities at a lower price in a very elastic market, and sell lower quantities at a higher price in a less elastic market.

Market power can be estimated with Lerner index. High profit margins might not correspond to a high rate of return or monopoly prices and might represent risk premiums. 

== Sources of monopoly power ==

Monopolies derive their market power from barriers to entry – circumstances that prevent or greatly impede a potential competitor&#x27;s ability to compete in a market. There are three major types of barriers to entry: economic, legal, and deliberate.
* &quot;Elasticity of demand&quot;: In a complete monopolistic market, the demand curve for the product is the market demand curve. There is only one firm within the industry. The monopolist is the sole seller, and its demand is the demand of the entire market. A monopolist is the price setter, but it is also limited by the law of market demand. If he/she sets a high price, the sales volume will inevitably decline, if expand the sales volume, the price must be lowered, which means that the demand and price in the monopoly market move in opposite directions. Therefore, the demand curve faced by a monopoly is a downward-sloping curve or a negative slope. Since monopolists control the supply of the entire industry, they also control the price of the entire industry and become price setters. A monopolistic firm can have two business decisions: sell less output at a higher price or sell more output at a lower price. There are no close substitutes for the products of a monopolistic firm. Otherwise, other firms can produce substitutes to replace the monopoly firm&#x27;s products, and a monopolistic firm cannot become the only supplier in the market. So consumers have no other choice.
* &quot;Economic barriers&quot;: Economic barriers include economies of scale, capital requirements, cost advantages, and technological superiority.
* &quot;Economies of scale&quot;: Decreasing unit costs for larger volumes of production. Decreasing costs coupled with large initial costs, If for example, the industry is large enough to support one company of minimum efficient scale then other companies entering the industry will operate at a size that is less than MES, and so cannot produce at an average cost that is competitive with the dominant company. And if the long-term average cost of the dominant company is constantly decreasing, then that company will continue to have the least cost method to provide a good or service.
* &quot;Capital requirements&quot;: Production processes that require large investments of capital, perhaps in the form of large research and development costs or substantial sunk costs, limit the number of companies in an industry: this is an example of economies of scale.
* &quot;Technological superiority&quot;: A monopoly may be better able to acquire, integrate, and use the best possible technology in producing its goods while entrants either do not have the expertise or are unable to meet the high fixed costs (see above) needed for the most efficient technology. Thus one large company can often produce goods cheaper than several small companies.
* &quot;No substitute goods&quot;: A monopoly sells a good for which there is no close substitute. The absence of substitutes makes the demand for that good relatively inelastic, enabling monopolies to extract positive profits.
* &quot;Control of natural resources&quot;: A prime source of monopoly power is the control of resources (such as raw materials) that are critical to the production of a final good.
* &quot;Network externalities&quot;: The use of a product by a person can affect the value of that product to other people. This is the network effect. There is a direct relationship between the proportion of people using a product and the demand for that product. In other words, the more people who are using a product, the greater the probability that another individual will start to use the product. This reflects fads, and fashion trends, social networks etc. It also can play a crucial role in the development or acquisition of market power. The most famous current example is the market dominance of the Microsoft Office suite and operating system in personal computers.
* &quot;Legal barriers&quot;: Legal rights can provide the opportunity to monopolize the market in a good. Intellectual property rights, including patents and copyrights, give a monopolist exclusive control of the production and selling of certain goods. Property rights may give a company exclusive control of the materials necessary to produce a good.
* &quot;Advertising&quot;: Advertising and brand names with a high degree of consumer loyalty may prove a difficult obstacle to overcome.
* &quot;Manipulation&quot;: A company wanting to monopolize a market may engage in various types of deliberate action to exclude competitors or eliminate competition. Such actions include collusion, lobbying governmental authorities, and force (see anti-competitive practices).
* &quot;First-mover advantage&quot;: In some industries such as electronics, the pace of product innovation is so rapid that the existing firms will be working on the next generation of products whilst launching the current ranges. New entrants are destined to fail unless they have original ideas or can exploit a new market segment.
* &quot;Monopolistic price&quot;: It may be possible for existing firms to ride the existence of abnormal profit by what is called entry limit pricing. This involves deliberately setting a low price and temporarily abandoning profit maximization in order to force new entrants out of the market.
In addition to barriers to entry and competition, barriers to exit may be a source of market power. Barriers to exit are market conditions that make it difficult or expensive for a company to end its involvement with a market. High liquidation costs are a primary barrier to exiting. Market exit and shutdown are sometimes separate events. The decision of whether to shut down or operate is not affected by exit barriers. A company will shut down if the price falls below minimum average variable costs.

== Monopoly versus competitive markets ==

While monopoly and perfect competition represent the extremes of market structures there is some similarity. The cost functions are the same. Both monopolies and perfectly competitive (PC) companies minimize cost and maximize profit. The shutdown decisions are the same. Both are assumed to have perfectly competitive factors markets. There are distinctions; some of the most important are as follows:
* &quot;Marginal revenue and price&quot;: In a perfectly competitive market, price equals marginal cost. In a monopolistic market, however, price is set above marginal cost. The price equal marginal revenue in this case.
* &quot;Product differentiation&quot;: There is no product differentiation in a perfectly competitive market. Every product is perfectly homogeneous and a perfect substitute for any other. With a monopoly, there is great to absolute product differentiation in the sense that there is no available substitute for a monopolized good. The monopolist is the sole supplier of the good in question. A customer either buys from the monopolizing entity on its terms or does without.
* &quot;Number of competitors&quot;: PC markets are populated by a large number of buyers and sellers. A monopoly involves a single seller.
* &quot;Barriers to entry&quot;: Barriers to entry are factors and circumstances that prevent entry into market by would-be competitors and limit new companies from operating and expanding within the market. PC markets have free entry and exit. There are no barriers to entry, or exit competition. Monopolies have relatively high barriers to entry. The barriers must be strong enough to prevent or discourage any potential competitor from entering the market
* &quot;Elasticity of demand&quot;: The price elasticity of demand is the percentage change of demand caused by a one percent change of relative price. A successful monopoly would have a relatively inelastic demand curve. A low coefficient of elasticity is indicative of effective barriers to entry. A PC company has a perfectly elastic demand curve. The coefficient of elasticity for a perfectly competitive demand curve is infinite.
* &quot;Excess profits&quot;: Excess or positive profits are profit more than the normal expected return on investment. A PC company can make excess profits in the short term but excess profits attract competitors, which can enter the market freely and decrease prices, eventually reducing excess profits to zero. A monopoly can preserve excess profits because barriers to entry prevent competitors from entering the market.
* &quot;Profit maximization&quot;: A PC company maximizes profits by producing such that price equals marginal costs. A monopoly maximises profits by producing where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. The rules are not equivalent. The demand curve for a PC company is perfectly elastic – flat. The demand curve is identical to the average revenue curve and the price line. Since the average revenue curve is constant the marginal revenue curve is also constant and equals the demand curve, Average revenue is the same as price (formula_1). Thus the price line is also identical to the demand curve. In sum, formula_2.
* &quot;P-Max quantity, price and profit&quot;: If a monopolist obtains control of a formerly perfectly competitive industry, the monopolist would increase prices, reduce production, incur deadweight loss, and realise positive economic profits.
* &quot;Supply curve&quot;: in a perfectly competitive market there is a well defined supply function with a one-to-one relationship between price and quantity supplied. In a monopolistic market no such supply relationship exists. A monopolist cannot trace a short-term supply curve because for a given price there is not a unique quantity supplied. As Pindyck and Rubenfeld note, a change in demand &quot;can lead to changes in prices with no change in output, changes in output with no change in price or both&quot;. Monopolies produce where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. For a specific demand curve the supply &quot;curve&quot; would be the price-quantity combination at the point where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. If the demand curve shifted the marginal revenue curve would shift as well and a new equilibrium and supply &quot;point&quot; would be established. The locus of these points would not be a supply curve in any conventional sense.

The most significant distinction between a PC company and a monopoly is that the monopoly has a downward-sloping demand curve rather than the &quot;perceived&quot; perfectly elastic curve of the PC company. Practically all the variations mentioned above relate to this fact. If there is a downward-sloping demand curve then by necessity there is a distinct marginal revenue curve. The implications of this fact are best made manifest with a linear demand curve. Assume that the inverse demand curve is of the form formula_3. Then the total revenue curve is formula_4 and the marginal revenue curve is thus formula_5. From this several things are evident. First, the marginal revenue curve has the same formula_6-intercept as the inverse demand curve. Second, the slope of the marginal revenue curve is twice that of the inverse demand curve. What is not quite so evident is that the marginal revenue curve is below the inverse demand curve at all points (formula_7). Since all companies maximise profits by equating formula_8 and formula_9 it must be the case that at the profit-maximizing quantity MR and MC are less than price, which further implies that a monopoly produces less quantity at a higher price than if the market were perfectly competitive.

The fact that a monopoly has a downward-sloping demand curve means that the relationship between total revenue and output for a monopoly is much different from that of competitive companies. Total revenue equals price times quantity. A competitive company has a perfectly elastic demand curve meaning that total revenue is proportional to output. Thus the total revenue curve for a competitive company is a ray with a slope equal to the market price. A competitive company can sell all the output it desires at the market price. For a monopoly to increase sales it must reduce price. Thus the total revenue curve for a monopoly is a parabola that begins at the origin and reaches a maximum value then continuously decreases until total revenue is again zero. Total revenue has its maximum value when the slope of the total revenue function is zero. The slope of the total revenue function is marginal revenue. So the revenue maximizing quantity and price occur when formula_10. For example, assume that the monopoly&#x27;s demand function is formula_11. The total revenue function would be formula_12 and marginal revenue would be formula_13. Setting marginal revenue equal to zero we have
: formula_14
: formula_15
: formula_16

So the revenue maximizing quantity for the monopoly is 12.5 units and the revenue-maximizing price is 25.

A company with a monopoly does not experience price pressure from competitors, although it may experience pricing pressure from potential competition. If a company increases prices too much, then others may enter the market if they are able to provide the same good, or a substitute, at a lesser price. The idea that monopolies in markets with easy entry need not be regulated against is known as the &quot;revolution in monopoly theory&quot;.

A monopolist can extract only one premium, and getting into complementary markets does not pay. That is, the total profits a monopolist could earn if it sought to leverage its monopoly in one market by monopolizing a complementary market are equal to the extra profits it could earn anyway by charging more for the monopoly product itself. However, the one monopoly profit theorem is not true if customers in the monopoly good are stranded or poorly informed, or if the tied good has high fixed costs.

A pure monopoly has the same economic rationality of perfectly competitive companies, i.e. to optimise a profit function given some constraints. By the assumptions of increasing marginal costs, exogenous inputs&#x27; prices, and control concentrated on a single agent or entrepreneur, the optimal decision is to equate the marginal cost and marginal revenue of production. Nonetheless, a pure monopoly can – unlike a competitive company – alter the market price for its own convenience: a decrease of production results in a higher price. In the economics&#x27; jargon, it is said that pure monopolies have &quot;a downward-sloping demand&quot;. An important consequence of such behaviour is that typically a monopoly selects a higher price and lesser quantity of output than a price-taking company; again, less is available at a higher price.

== Inverse elasticity rule ==
A monopoly chooses that price that maximizes the difference between total revenue and total cost. The basic markup rule (as measured by the Lerner index) can be expressed as
formula_17,
where formula_18 is the price elasticity of demand the firm faces. The markup rules indicate that the ratio between profit margin and the price is inversely proportional to the price elasticity of demand. The implication of the rule is that the more elastic the demand for the product the less pricing power the monopoly has.

=== Market power ===
Market power is the ability to increase the product&#x27;s price above marginal cost without losing all customers. Perfectly competitive (PC) companies have zero market power when it comes to setting prices. All companies of a PC market are price takers. The price is set by the interaction of demand and supply at the market or aggregate level. Individual companies simply take the price determined by the market and produce that quantity of output that maximizes the company&#x27;s profits. If a PC company attempted to increase prices above the market level all its customers would abandon the company and purchase at the market price from other companies. A monopoly has considerable although not unlimited market power. A monopoly has the power to set prices or quantities although not both. A monopoly is a price maker. The monopoly is the market and prices are set by the monopolist based on their circumstances and not the interaction of demand and supply. The two primary factors determining monopoly market power are the company&#x27;s demand curve and its cost structure.

Market power is the ability to affect the terms and conditions of exchange so that the price of a product is set by a single company (price is not imposed by the market as in perfect competition). Although a monopoly&#x27;s market power is great it is still limited by the demand side of the market. A monopoly has a negatively sloped demand curve, not a perfectly inelastic curve. Consequently, any price increase will result in the loss of some customers.

== Price discrimination ==

Price discrimination allows a monopolist to increase its profit by charging higher prices for identical goods to those who are willing or able to pay more. For example, most economic textbooks cost more in the United States than in developing countries like Ethiopia. In this case, the publisher is using its government-granted copyright monopoly to price discriminate between the generally wealthier American economics students and the generally poorer Ethiopian economics students. Similarly, most patented medications cost more in the U.S. than in other countries with a (presumed) poorer customer base. Typically, a high general price is listed, and various market segments get varying discounts. This is an example of framing to make the process of charging some people higher prices more socially acceptable. Perfect price discrimination would allow the monopolist to charge each customer the exact maximum amount they would be willing to pay. This would allow the monopolist to extract all the consumer surplus of the market. A domestic example would be the cost of airplane flights in relation to their takeoff time; the closer they are to flight, the higher the plane tickets will cost, discriminating against late planners and often business flyers. While such perfect price discrimination is a theoretical construct, advances in information technology and micromarketing may bring it closer to the realm of possibility.

Partial price discrimination can cause some customers who are inappropriately pooled with high price customers to be excluded from the market. For example, a poor student in the U.S. might be excluded from purchasing an economics textbook at the U.S. price, which the student may have been able to purchase at the Ethiopian price. Similarly, a wealthy student in Ethiopia may be able to or willing to buy at the U.S. price, though naturally would hide such a fact from the monopolist so as to pay the reduced third world price. These are deadweight losses and decrease a monopolist&#x27;s profits. Deadweight loss is considered detrimental to society and market participation. As such, monopolists have substantial economic interest in improving their market information and &quot;market segmenting&quot;.

There is important information for one to remember when considering the monopoly model diagram (and its associated conclusions) displayed here. The result that monopoly prices are higher, and production output lesser, than a competitive company follow from a requirement that the monopoly not charge different prices for different customers. That is, the monopoly is restricted from engaging in price discrimination (this is termed first degree price discrimination, such that all customers are charged the same amount). If the monopoly were permitted to charge individualised prices (this is termed third degree price discrimination), the quantity produced, and the price charged to the &quot;marginal&quot; customer, would be identical to that of a competitive company, thus eliminating the deadweight loss; however, all gains from trade (social welfare) would accrue to the monopolist and none to the consumer. In essence, every consumer would be indifferent between going completely without the product or service and being able to purchase it from the monopolist.

As long as the price elasticity of demand for most customers is less than one in absolute value, it is advantageous for a company to increase its prices: it receives more money for fewer goods. With a price increase, price elasticity tends to increase, and in the optimum case above it will be greater than one for most customers.

A company maximizes profit by selling where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. A company that does not engage in price discrimination will charge the profit maximizing price, formula_19, to all its customers. In such circumstances there are customers who would be willing to pay a higher price than formula_19 and those who will not pay formula_19 but would buy at a lower price. A price discrimination strategy is to charge less price sensitive buyers a higher price and the more price sensitive buyers a lower price. Thus additional revenue is generated from two sources. The basic problem is to identify customers by their willingness to pay.

The purpose of price discrimination is to transfer consumer surplus to the producer. Consumer surplus is the difference between the value of a good to a consumer and the price the consumer must pay in the market to purchase it. Price discrimination is not limited to monopolies.

Market power is a company&#x27;s ability to increase prices without losing all its customers. Any company that has market power can engage in price discrimination. Perfect competition is the only market form in which price discrimination would be impossible (a perfectly competitive company has a perfectly elastic demand curve and has no market power).

There are three forms of price discrimination. First degree price discrimination charges each consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay. Second degree price discrimination involves quantity discounts. Third degree price discrimination involves grouping consumers according to willingness to pay as measured by their price elasticities of demand and charging each group a different price. Third degree price discrimination is the most prevalent type.

There are three conditions that must be present for a company to engage in successful price discrimination. First, the company must have market power. Second, the company must be able to sort customers according to their willingness to pay for the good. Third, the firm must be able to prevent resell.

A company must have some degree of market power to practice price discrimination. Without market power a company cannot charge more than the market price. Any market structure characterized by a downward sloping demand curve has market power – monopoly, monopolistic competition and oligopoly. The only market structure that has no market power is perfect competition.

A company wishing to practice price discrimination must be able to prevent middlemen or brokers from acquiring the consumer surplus for themselves. The company accomplishes this by preventing or limiting resale. Many methods are used to prevent resale. For instance, persons are required to show photographic identification and a boarding pass before boarding an airplane. Most travelers assume that this practice is strictly a matter of security. However, a primary purpose in requesting photographic identification is to confirm that the ticket purchaser is the person about to board the airplane and not someone who has repurchased the ticket from a discount buyer.

The inability to prevent resale is the largest obstacle to successful price discrimination. Companies have, however, developed numerous methods to prevent resale. For example, universities require that students show identification before entering sporting events. Governments may make it illegal to resell tickets or products. In Boston, Red Sox baseball tickets can only be resold legally to the team.

The three basic forms of price discrimination are first, second and third degree price discrimination. In &quot;first degree price discrimination&quot; the company charges the maximum price each customer is willing to pay. The maximum price a consumer is willing to pay for a unit of the good is the reservation price. Thus for each unit the seller tries to set the price equal to the consumer&#x27;s reservation price. Direct information about a consumer&#x27;s willingness to pay is rarely available. Sellers tend to rely on secondary information such as where a person lives (postal codes); for example, catalog retailers can use mail high-priced catalogs to high-income postal codes. First degree price discrimination most frequently occurs in regard to professional services or in transactions involving direct buyer-seller negotiations. For example, an accountant who has prepared a consumer&#x27;s tax return has information that can be used to charge customers based on an estimate of their ability to pay.

In &quot;second degree price discrimination&quot; or quantity discrimination customers are charged different prices based on how much they buy. There is a single price schedule for all consumers but the prices vary depending on the quantity of the good bought. The theory of second degree price discrimination is a consumer is willing to buy only a certain quantity of a good at a given price. Companies know that consumer&#x27;s willingness to buy decreases as more units are purchased. The task for the seller is to identify these price points and to reduce the price once one is reached in the hope that a reduced price will trigger additional purchases from the consumer. For example, sell in unit blocks rather than individual units.

In &quot;third degree price discrimination&quot; or multi-market price discrimination the seller divides the consumers into different groups according to their willingness to pay as measured by their price elasticity of demand. Each group of consumers effectively becomes a separate market with its own demand curve and marginal revenue curve. The firm then attempts to maximize profits in each segment by equating MR and MC, Generally the company charges a higher price to the group with a more price inelastic demand and a relatively lesser price to the group with a more elastic demand. Examples of third degree price discrimination abound. Airlines charge higher prices to business travelers than to vacation travelers. The reasoning is that the demand curve for a vacation traveler is relatively elastic while the demand curve for a business traveler is relatively inelastic. Any determinant of price elasticity of demand can be used to segment markets. For example, seniors have a more elastic demand for movies than do young adults because they generally have more free time. Thus theaters will offer discount tickets to seniors.

=== Example ===
Assume that by a uniform pricing system the monopolist would sell five units at a price of $10 per unit. Assume that his marginal cost is $5 per unit. Total revenue would be $50, total costs would be $25 and profits would be $25. If the monopolist practiced price discrimination he would sell the first unit for $17 the second unit for $14 and so on which is listed in the table below. Total revenue would be $55, his total cost would be $25 and his profit would be $30. Several things are worth noting. The monopolist acquires all the consumer surplus and eliminates practically all the deadweight loss because he is willing to sell to anyone who is willing to pay at least the marginal cost. Thus the price discrimination promotes efficiency. Secondly, by the pricing scheme price = average revenue and equals marginal revenue. That is the monopolist behaving like a perfectly competitive company. Thirdly, the discriminating monopolist produces a larger quantity than the monopolist operating by a uniform pricing scheme.
=== Classifying customers ===
Successful price discrimination requires that companies separate consumers according to their willingness to buy. Determining a customer&#x27;s willingness to buy a good is difficult. Asking consumers directly is fruitless: consumers do not know, and to the extent they do they are reluctant to share that information with marketers. The two main methods for determining willingness to buy are observation of personal characteristics and consumer actions. As noted information about where a person lives (postal codes), how the person dresses, what kind of car he or she drives, occupation, and income and spending patterns can be helpful in classifying. 

== Monopoly and efficiency ==

According to the standard model, in which a monopolist sets a single price for all consumers, the monopolist will sell a lesser quantity of goods at a higher price than would companies by perfect competition. Because the monopolist ultimately forgoes transactions with consumers who value the product or service less than its price, monopoly pricing creates a deadweight loss referring to potential gains that went neither to the monopolist nor to consumers. Deadweight loss is the cost to society because it is inefficient. Given the presence of this deadweight loss, the combined surplus (or wealth) for the monopolist and consumers is necessarily less than the total surplus obtained by consumers by perfect competition. Where efficiency is defined by the total gains from trade, the monopoly setting is less efficient than perfect competition.

It is often argued that monopolies tend to become less efficient and less innovative over time, becoming &quot;complacent&quot;, because they do not have to be efficient or innovative to compete in the marketplace. Sometimes this very loss of psychological efficiency can increase a potential competitor&#x27;s value enough to overcome market entry barriers, or provide incentive for research and investment into new alternatives. The theory of contestable markets argues that in some circumstances (private) monopolies are forced to behave &quot;as if&quot; there were competition because of the risk of losing their monopoly to new entrants. This is likely to happen when a market&#x27;s barriers to entry are low. It might also be because of the availability in the longer term of substitutes in other markets. For example, a canal monopoly, while worth a great deal during the late 18th century United Kingdom, was worth much less during the late 19th century because of the introduction of railways as a substitute.

Contrary to common misconception, monopolists do not try to sell items for the highest possible price, nor do they try to maximize profit per unit, but rather they try to maximize total profit.

=== Natural monopoly ===
A natural monopoly is an organization that experiences increasing returns to scale over the relevant range of output and relatively high fixed costs. A natural monopoly occurs where the average cost of production &quot;declines throughout the relevant range of product demand&quot;. The relevant range of product demand is where the average cost curve is below the demand curve. When this situation occurs, it is always more efficient for one large company to supply the market than multiple smaller companies; in fact, absent government intervention in such markets, will naturally evolve into a monopoly. Often, a natural monopoly is the outcome of an initial rivalry between several competitors. An early market entrant that takes advantage of the cost structure and can expand rapidly can exclude smaller companies from entering and can drive or buy out other companies. A natural monopoly suffers from the same inefficiencies as any other monopoly. Left to its own devices, a profit-seeking natural monopoly will produce where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. Regulation of natural monopolies is problematic. Fragmenting such monopolies is by definition inefficient. The most frequently used methods dealing with natural monopolies are government regulations and public ownership. Government regulation generally consists of regulatory commissions charged with the principal duty of setting prices. Natural monopolies are synonymous with what is called &quot;single-unit enterprise&quot;, a term which was used in the 1914 book &quot;Social Economics&quot; written by Friedrich von Wieser. As mentioned, government regulations are frequently used with natural monopolies to help control prices. An example that can illustrate this can be found when looking at the United States Postal Service, which has a monopoly over types of mail. According to Wieser, the idea of a competitive market within the postal industry would lead to extreme prices and unnecessary spending, and this highlighted why government regulation in the form of price control is necessary as it helped efficient market.

To reduce prices and increase output, regulators often use average cost pricing. By average cost pricing, the price and quantity are determined by the intersection of the average cost curve and the demand curve. This pricing scheme eliminates any positive economic profits since price equals average cost. Average-cost pricing is not perfect. Regulators must estimate average costs. Companies have a reduced incentive to lower costs. Regulation of this type has not been limited to natural monopolies. Average-cost pricing does also have some disadvantages. By setting price equal to the intersection of the demand curve and the average total cost curve, the firm&#x27;s output is allocatively inefficient as the price is less than the marginal cost (which is the output quantity for a perfectly competitive and allocatively efficient market).

In 1848, J.S. Mill was the first individual to describe monopolies with the adjective &quot;natural&quot;. He used it interchangeably with &quot;practical&quot;. At the time, Mill gave the following examples of natural or practical monopolies: gas supply, water supply, roads, canals, and railways. In his &quot;Social Economics&quot;, Friedrich von Wieser demonstrated his view of the postal service as a natural monopoly: &quot;In the face of [such] single-unit administration, the principle of competition becomes utterly abortive. The parallel network of another postal organization, beside the one already functioning, would be economically absurd; enormous amounts of money for plant and management would have to be expended for no purpose whatever.&quot;
Overall, most monopolies are man-made monopolies, or unnatural monopolies, not natural ones.

=== Government-granted monopoly ===
A government-granted monopoly (also called a &quot;&quot;de jure&quot; monopoly&quot;) is a form of &quot;coercive monopoly&quot;, in which a government grants exclusive privilege to a private individual or company to be the sole provider of a commodity. Monopoly may be granted explicitly, as when potential competitors are excluded from the market by a specific law, or implicitly, such as when the requirements of an administrative regulation can only be fulfilled by a single market player, or through some other legal or procedural mechanism, such as patents, trademarks, and copyright. These monopolies can also be the result of &quot;rent-seeking&quot; behavior, where firms will try to get the prize of having a monopoly, and the increase of profits in acquiring one from a competitive market in their sector.

== Monopolist shutdown rule ==
A monopolist should shut down when price is less than average variable cost for every output level – in other words where the demand curve is entirely below the average variable cost curve. Under these circumstances at the profit maximum level of output (MR = MC) average revenue would be less than average variable costs and the monopolists would be better off shutting down in the short term.

== Breaking up monopolies ==
In an unregulated market, monopolies can potentially be ended by new competition, breakaway businesses, or consumers seeking alternatives. In a regulated market, a government will often either regulate the monopoly, convert it into a publicly owned monopoly environment, or forcibly fragment it (see Antitrust law and trust busting). Public utilities, often being naturally efficient with only one operator and therefore less susceptible to efficient breakup, are often strongly regulated or publicly owned. American Telephone &amp; Telegraph (AT&amp;T) and Standard Oil are often cited as examples of the breakup of a private monopoly by government. The Bell System, later AT&amp;T, was protected from competition first by the Kingsbury Commitment, and later by a series of agreements between AT&amp;T and the Federal Government. In 1984, decades after having been granted monopoly power by force of law, AT&amp;T was broken up into various components, MCI, Sprint, who were able to compete effectively in the long-distance phone market. These breakups are due to the presence of deadweight loss and inefficiency in a monopolistic market, causing the Government to intervene on behalf of consumers and society in order to incite competition. While the sentiment among regulators and judges has generally been against breakups as remedies for antitrust enforcement, recent scholarship has found that this hostility to breakups by administrators is largely unwarranted.&#x27; In fact, some scholars have argued that breakups, even if incorrectly targeted, could still encourage collaboration, innovation, and efficiency.&#x27;

== Law ==

The law regulating dominance in the European Union is governed by Article 102 of the &quot;Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union&quot; which aims at enhancing the consumer&#x27;s welfare and also the efficiency of allocation of resources by protecting competition on the downstream market. The existence of a very high market share does not always mean consumers are paying excessive prices, since the threat of new entrants to the market can restrain a high-market-share company’s price increases. Competition law does not make merely having a monopoly illegal but rather abusing the power a monopoly may confer, for instance, through exclusionary practices (i.e., pricing high just because it is the only one around). It should also be noted that it is illegal to try to obtain a monopoly through practices like buying out the competition or similar methods. If a monopoly occurs naturally, such as a competitor going out of business or a lack of competition, it is not illegal until the monopoly holder abuses their power.

=== Establishing dominance ===
First, it is necessary to determine whether a company is dominant, or whether it behaves “to an appreciable extent independently of its competitors, customers, and ultimately its consumers.” Establishing dominance is a two-stage test. The first thing to consider is market definition, which is one of the crucial factors of the test. This includes the relevant product market and the relevant geographic market.

==== Relevant product market ====
As the definition of the market is of a matter of interchangeability, if the goods or services are regarded as interchangeable then they are within the same product market. For example, in the case of &quot;United Brands v Commission&quot;, it was argued in this case that bananas and other fresh fruit were in the same product market and later on dominance was found because the special features of the banana made it could only be interchangeable with other fresh fruits in a limited extent and other and is only exposed to their competition in a way that is hardly perceptible. The demand substitutability of the goods and services will help in defining the product market and it can be access by the &#x27;hypothetical monopolist&#x27; test or the &#x27;SSNIP&#x27; test.

==== Relevant geographic market ====
It is necessary to define it because some goods can only be supplied within a narrow area due to technical, practical or legal reasons and this may help to indicate which undertakings impose a competitive constraint on the other undertakings in question. Since some goods are too expensive to transport where it might not be economic to sell them to distant markets in relation to their value, therefore the cost of transporting is a crucial factor here. Other factors might be legal controls which restricts an undertaking in a Member States from exporting goods or services to another.

Market definition may be difficult to measure but is important because if it is defined too narrowly, the undertaking may be more likely to be found dominant and if it is defined too broadly, the less likely that it will be found dominant.

==== Market shares ====
As with collusive conduct, market shares are determined with reference to the particular market in which the company and product in question is sold. It does not in itself determine whether an undertaking is dominant but work as an indicator of the states of the existing competition within the market. The Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI) is sometimes used to assess how competitive an industry is. It sums up the squares of the individual market shares of all of the competitors within the market. The lower the total, the less concentrated the market and the higher the total, the more concentrated the market. In the US, the merger guidelines state that a post-merger HHI below 1000 is viewed as not concentrated while HHIs above that will provoke further review.

By European Union law, very large market shares raise a presumption that a company is dominant, which may be rebuttable. A market share of 100% may be very rare but it is still possible to be found and in fact it has been identified in some cases, for instance the &quot;AAMS v Commission&quot; case. Undertakings possessing market share that is lower than 100% but over 90% had also been found dominant, for example, Microsoft v Commission case. In the &quot;AKZO v Commission&quot; case, the undertaking is presumed to be dominant if it has a market share of 50%. There are also findings of dominance that are below a market share of 50%, for instance, &quot;United Brands v Commission&quot;, it only possessed a market share of 40% to 45% and still to be found dominant with other factors. The lowest yet market share of a company considered &quot;dominant&quot; in the EU was 39.7%. If a company has a dominant position, then there is a special responsibility not to allow its conduct to impair competition on the common market; however, these will all falls away if it is not dominant.

When considering whether an undertaking is dominant, it involves a combination of factors. Each of them cannot be taken separately as if they are, they will not be as determinative as they are when they are combined. Also, in cases where an undertaking has previously been found dominant, it is still necessary to redefine the market and make a whole new analysis of the conditions of competition based on the available evidence at the appropriate time.

==== Other related factors ====
According to the Guidance, there are three more issues that must be examined. They are actual competitors that relates to the market position of the dominant undertaking and its competitors, potential competitors that concerns the expansion and entry and lastly the countervailing buyer power.
* Actual Competitors

Market share may be a valuable source of information regarding the market structure and the market position when it comes to accessing it. The dynamics of the market and the extent to which the goods and services differentiated are relevant in this area.
* Potential Competitors

It concerns with the competition that would come from other undertakings which are not yet operating in the market but will enter it in the future. So, market shares may not be useful in accessing the competitive pressure that is exerted on an undertaking in this area. The potential entry by new firms and expansions by an undertaking must be taken into account, therefore the barriers to entry and barriers to expansion is an important factor here.
* Countervailing buyer power

Competitive constraints may not always come from actual or potential competitors. Sometimes, it may also come from powerful customers who have sufficient bargaining strength which come from its size or its commercial significance for a dominant firm.

=== Types of abuses ===
There are three main types of abuses which are exploitative abuse, exclusionary abuse and single market abuse.
* Exploitative abuse

It arises when a monopolist has such significant market power that it can restrict its output while increasing the price above the competitive level without losing customers. This type is less concerned by the Commission than other types.
* Exclusionary abuse

This is most concerned about by the Commissions because it is capable of causing long-term consumer damage and is more likely to prevent the development of competition. An example of it is exclusive dealing agreements.
* Single market abuse

It arises when a dominant undertaking carrying out excess pricing which would not only have an exploitative effect but also prevent parallel imports and limits intra-brand competition.

=== Examples of abuses ===
* Limiting supply
* Predatory pricing or undercutting
* Price discrimination
* Refusal to deal and exclusive dealing
* Tying (commerce) and product bundling

Despite wide agreement that the above constitute abusive practices, there is some debate about whether there needs to be a causal connection between the dominant position of a company and its actual abusive conduct. Furthermore, there has been some consideration of what happens when a company merely attempts to abuse its dominant position.

To provide a more specific example, economic and philosophical scholar Adam Smith cites that trade to the East India Company has, for the most part, been subjected to an exclusive company such as that of the English or Dutch. Monopolies such as these are generally established against the nation in which they arose out of. The profound economist goes on to state how there are two types of monopolies. The first type of monopoly is one which tends to always attract to the particular trade where the monopoly was conceived, a greater proportion of the stock of the society than what would go to that trade originally. The second type of monopoly tends to occasionally attract stock towards the particular trade where it was conceived, and sometimes repel it from that trade depending on varying circumstances. Rich countries tended to repel while poorer countries were attracted to this. For example, The Dutch company would dispose of any excess goods not taken to the market in order to preserve their monopoly while the English sold more goods for better prices. Both of these tendencies were extremely destructive as can be seen in Adam Smith&#x27;s writings.

== Historical monopolies ==
=== Origin ===
The term &quot;monopoly&quot; first appears in Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Politics&quot;. Aristotle describes Thales of Miletus&#x27;s cornering of the market in olive presses as a monopoly (&quot;μονοπώλιον&quot;). Another early reference to the concept of &quot;monopoly&quot; in a commercial sense appears in tractate Demai of the Mishna (2nd century CE), regarding the purchasing of agricultural goods from a dealer who has a monopoly on the produce (chapter 5; 4). The meaning and understanding of the English word &#x27;monopoly&#x27; has changed over the years.

=== Monopolies of resources ===
==== Salt ====

Vending of common salt (sodium chloride) was historically a natural monopoly. Until recently, a combination of strong sunshine and low humidity or an extension of peat marshes was necessary for producing salt from the sea, the most plentiful source. Changing sea levels periodically caused salt &quot;famines&quot; and communities were forced to depend upon those who controlled the scarce inland mines and salt springs, which were often in hostile areas (e.g. the Sahara) requiring well-organised security for transport, storage, and distribution.

The Salt Commission was a legal monopoly in China. Formed in 758, the commission controlled salt production and sales in order to raise tax revenue for the Tang dynasty.

The &quot;Gabelle&quot; was a notoriously high tax levied upon salt in the Kingdom of France. The much-hated levy had a role in the beginning of the French Revolution, when strict legal controls specified who was allowed to sell and distribute salt. First instituted in 1286, the Gabelle was not permanently abolished until 1945.

==== Coal ====
Robin Gollan argues in &quot;The Coalminers of New South Wales&quot; that anti-competitive practices developed in the coal industry of Australia&#x27;s Newcastle as a result of the business cycle. The monopoly was generated by formal meetings of the local management of coal companies agreeing to fix a minimum price for sale at dock. This collusion was known as &quot;The Vend&quot;. The Vend ended and was reformed repeatedly during the late 19th century, ending by recession in the business cycle. &quot;The Vend&quot; was able to maintain its monopoly due to trade union assistance, and material advantages (primarily coal geography). During the early 20th century, as a result of comparable monopolistic practices in the Australian coastal shipping business, the Vend developed as an informal and illegal collusion between the steamship owners and the coal industry, eventually resulting in the High Court case &quot;Adelaide Steamship Co. Ltd v. R. &amp; AG&quot;.

==== Persian filoselle (raw silk) ====
In the 17th century, Shah Abbas established New Julfa (a suburb in the capital of Isfahan) to concentrate Armenian financial capital in Iran. Accordingly, he gave Armenians various privileges, including the monopoly to trade Persian filoselle (raw silk). Armenians exported it all over the world, including Asia, Europe, and America. By the 1750s, Armenia already controlled 75% of the total silk trade in the area. This resulted in a boom in Armenian commerce, which lasted for the next 150 years. At present, as it happens, Armenia&#x27;s own economy is itself highly monopolized; in fact, with 19% of its economy monopolized, Armenia was the most monopolized country in Eastern Europe and Central Asia in 2009.

==== Petroleum ====
Standard Oil was an American oil producing, transporting, refining, and marketing company. Established in 1870, it became the largest oil refiner in the world. John D. Rockefeller was a founder, chairman and major shareholder. The company was an innovator in the development of the business trust. The Standard Oil trust streamlined production and logistics, lowered costs, and undercut competitors. &quot;Trust-busting&quot; critics accused Standard Oil of using aggressive pricing to destroy competitors and form a monopoly that threatened consumers. Its controversial history as one of the world&#x27;s first and largest multinational corporations ended in 1911, when the United States Supreme Court ruled that Standard was an illegal monopoly. The Standard Oil trust was dissolved into 33 smaller companies; two of its surviving &quot;child&quot; companies are ExxonMobil and the Chevron Corporation.

==== Steel ====
U.S. Steel has been accused of being a monopoly. J. P. Morgan and Elbert H. Gary founded U.S. Steel in 1901 by combining Andrew Carnegie&#x27;s Carnegie Steel Company with Gary&#x27;s Federal Steel Company and William Henry &quot;Judge&quot; Moore&#x27;s National Steel Company. At one time, U.S. Steel was the largest steel producer and largest corporation in the world. In its first full year of operation, U.S. Steel made 67 percent of all the steel produced in the United States. However, U.S. Steel&#x27;s share of the expanding market slipped to 50 percent by 1911, and antitrust prosecution that year failed.

==== Diamonds ====
De Beers settled charges of price-fixing in the diamond trade in the 2000s. De Beers is well known for its monopoloid practices throughout the 20th century, whereby it used its dominant position to manipulate the international diamond market. The company used several methods to exercise this control over the market. Firstly, it convinced independent producers to join its single channel monopoly, it flooded the market with diamonds similar to those of producers who refused to join the cartel, and lastly, it purchased and stockpiled diamonds produced by other manufacturers in order to control prices through limiting supply.

In 2000, the De Beers business model changed due to factors such as the decision by producers in Russia, Canada and Australia to distribute diamonds outside the De Beers channel, as well as rising awareness of blood diamonds that forced De Beers to &quot;avoid the risk of bad publicity&quot; by limiting sales to its own mined products. De Beers&#x27; market share by value fell from as high as 90% in the 1980s to less than 40% in 2012, having resulted in a more fragmented diamond market with more transparency and greater liquidity.

In November 2011, the Oppenheimer family announced its intention to sell the entirety of its 40% stake in De Beers to Anglo American plc thereby increasing Anglo American&#x27;s ownership of the company to 85%.[30] The transaction was worth £3.2 billion ($5.1 billion) in cash and ended the Oppenheimer dynasty&#x27;s 80-year ownership of De Beers.

=== Utilities ===
A public utility (or simply &quot;utility&quot;) is an organization or company that maintains the infrastructure for a public service or provides a set of services for public consumption. Common examples of utilities are electricity, natural gas, water, sewage, cable television, and telephone. In the United States, public utilities are often natural monopolies because the infrastructure required to produce and deliver a product such as electricity or water is very expensive to build and maintain.

Western Union was criticized as a &quot;price gouging&quot; monopoly in the late 19th century. American Telephone &amp; Telegraph was a telecommunications giant. AT&amp;T was broken up in 1984. In the case of Telecom New Zealand, local loop unbundling was enforced by central government.

Telkom is a semi-privatised, part state-owned South African telecommunications company. Deutsche Telekom is a former state monopoly, still partially state owned. Deutsche Telekom currently monopolizes high-speed VDSL broadband network. The Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) provided electric service to over 1.1 million customers in Nassau and Suffolk counties of New York, and the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens.

The Comcast Corporation is the largest mass media and communications company in the world by revenue. It is the largest cable company and home Internet service provider in the United States, and the nation&#x27;s third largest home telephone service provider. Comcast has a monopoly in Boston, Philadelphia, and many small towns across the US.

=== Transportation ===
The United Aircraft and Transport Corporation was an aircraft manufacturer holding company that was forced to divest itself of airlines in 1934.

Iarnród Éireann, the Irish Railway authority, is a current monopoly as Ireland does not have the size for more companies.

The Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) was founded in 1834, and since the mid-1800s has provided train service between Long Island and New York City. In the 1870s, LIRR became the sole railroad in that area through a series of acquisitions and consolidations. In 2013, the LIRR&#x27;s commuter rail system is the busiest commuter railroad in North America, serving nearly 335,000 passengers daily.

=== Foreign trade ===
Dutch East India Company was created as a legal trading monopoly in 1602. The &quot;Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie&quot; enjoyed huge profits from its spice monopoly through most of the 17th century.

The British East India Company was created as a legal trading monopoly in 1600. The East India Company was formed for pursuing trade with the East Indies but ended up trading mainly with the Indian subcontinent, North-West Frontier Province, and Balochistan. The Company traded in basic commodities, which included cotton, silk, indigo dye, salt, saltpetre, tea and opium.

=== Professional sports ===

==== Baseball ====
In 1922, the US Supreme Court ruled in Federal Baseball Club v. National League that baseball was not the kind of commerce intended to be affected by federal antitrust, thus making baseball exempt from antitrust laws. The Supreme Court maintained their original ruling in both 1953 and 1972 when the issue was brought up in court. As a legal monopoly, the MLB has not had any competition in the American market since the early 1960s, from the defunct Continental League.

==== American Football ====
After mergers in 1949 with the AAFC and 1970 with the AFL, the National Football League was facing competition USFL following their successful first season in 1983. The USFL initially operated as a spring league, beginning their season approximately one month after the NFL season had concluded and would finish the season approximately one month prior to the start of NFL preseason games. With an increasing popularity and ability to sign big names, such as the 1982-84 Heisman Trophy winners Herschel Walker, Mike Rozier and Doug Flutie, the New Jersey Generals owner Donald Trump persuaded other owners to move the season so it directly competed with the NFL&#x27;s. At the same time an antitrust lawsuit was filed against the NFL as it convinced the 3 major American television channels against broadcasting any USFL games. The trial lasted 42 days and the jury found the NFL has indeed acted monopolistically and violated antitrust laws but as the NFL was not directly responsible for the financial difficulties of the league, the USFL was awarded $1 in damages, which was tripled to $3 due to it being an antitrust case. The USFL announced it would forego the 1986 altogether to appeal the decision; however, the league would fold within a week of the trial ending. The US Supreme Court would, four years later, allow the original ruling to stand and order the NFL to pay damages and to include interest, bringing the total to $3.76. The NFL did previously survive an antitrust lawsuit in the 1960s.

=== Examples of possible/potential monopolies ===

* Microsoft has been the defendant in multiple antitrust suits on strategy &quot;embrace, extend and extinguish&quot;. They settled antitrust litigation in the U.S. in 2001. In 2004 Microsoft was fined 493 million euros by the European Commission which was upheld for the most part by the Court of First Instance of the European Communities in 2007. The fine was US$1.35 billion in 2008 for noncompliance with the 2004 rule.
* Monsanto has been sued by competitors for antitrust and monopolistic practices. They have between 70% and 100% of the commercial GMO seed market in a small number of crops.
* AAFES has a monopoly on retail sales at overseas U.S. military installations.
* The State retail alcohol monopolies of Norway (Vinmonopolet), Sweden (Systembolaget), Finland (Alko), Iceland (Vínbúð), Ontario (LCBO), Quebec (SAQ), British Columbia (Liquor Distribution Branch), among others.
* The Walt Disney Company is one of the largest mass media and entertainment conglomerates in the world, and has acquired huge amounts of assets, companies and corporations – both national and international. The 2019 purchase of the majority of 20th Century Fox&#x27;s assets sparked controversy.

== See also ==

== Notes ==
== References ==

== Further reading ==

* Guy Ankerl, &quot;Beyond Monopoly Capitalism and Monopoly Socialism&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Schenkman Pbl., 1978. .
* Bryce Covert, &quot;The Visible Hand: How monopolies define everyday life in the United States&quot; (review of David Dayen, &quot;Monopolized: Life in the Age of Corporate Power&quot;, The New Press, 2020, 336 pp.), &quot;The Nation&quot;, pp. 38, 40–42.
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="2" end="10" title="Monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="17" end="22" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q319676" start="176" end="187" title="Competition (economics)" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q312588" start="236" end="251" title="substitute good" label="substitute good"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639974" start="284" end="298" title="monopoly price" label="monopoly price"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="328" end="341" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301854" start="363" end="378" title="monopoly profit" label="monopoly profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639974" start="698" end="762" title="Monopoly price" label="overly high prices, which is associated with unfair price raises"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="1131" end="1137" title="cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="1345" end="1357" title="market power" label="market power"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="1545" end="1554" title="natural monopoly" label="naturally"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="1614" end="1629" title="competition law" label="competition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q44009" start="1927" end="1954" title="government-granted monopoly" label="government-granted monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="2107" end="2121" title="advocacy group" label="interest group"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="2123" end="2129" title="Patent" label="Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="2132" end="2141" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="2148" end="2157" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634516" start="2295" end="2314" title="government monopoly" label="government monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="2335" end="2354" title="state-owned company" label="state-owned company"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="2375" end="2384" title="natural monopoly" label="naturally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334952" start="2490" end="2495" title="overhead (business)" label="costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q877707" start="2567" end="2583" title="Market structure" label="Market structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="2628" end="2645" title="Barriers to entry" label="Barriers to entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q958242" start="2940" end="2949" title="sunk cost" label="sunk cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q466764" start="3010" end="3020" title="fixed cost" label="fixed cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q379579" start="3447" end="3471" title="monopolistic competition" label="monopolistic competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="3486" end="3505" title="perfect competition" label="perfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411783" start="3713" end="3736" title="industrial organization" label="industrial organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500849" start="3741" end="3764" title="regulatory economics" label="economics of regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="3848" end="3867" title="perfect competition" label="perfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q379579" start="3869" end="3893" title="monopolistic competition" label="monopolistic competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q103639" start="4423" end="4432" title="oligopoly" label="oligopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="5130" end="5134" title="goods" label="good"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377786" start="5715" end="5731" title="abnormal profits" label="abnormal profits"/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="6251" end="6271" title="Price discrimination" label="Price discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="6396" end="6403" title="Price elasticity of demand" label="elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="6483" end="6495" title="Market power" label="Market power"/>
<link wikidata="Q404141" start="6518" end="6530" title="Lerner index" label="Lerner index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187906" start="6537" end="6550" title="profit margin" label="profit margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317264" start="6583" end="6597" title="rate of return" label="rate of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639974" start="6601" end="6615" title="monopoly price" label="monopoly price"/>
<link wikidata="Q523022" start="6637" end="6649" title="risk premium" label="risk premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="6947" end="6967" title="Elasticity of demand" label="Elasticity of demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="8194" end="8212" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q958242" start="9048" end="9058" title="sunk costs" label="sunk costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312588" start="9619" end="9629" title="substitute good" label="substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q649124" start="10078" end="10092" title="network effect" label="network effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401418" start="11362" end="11388" title="anti-competitive practices" label="anti-competitive practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q121716" start="11399" end="11420" title="First-mover advantage" label="First-mover advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200129" start="13201" end="13224" title="Product differentiation" label="Product differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377422" start="15135" end="15154" title="Profit maximization" label="Profit maximization"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="20829" end="20842" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q841032" start="20847" end="20863" title="marginal revenue" label="marginal revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q404141" start="21521" end="21533" title="Lerner index" label="Lerner index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="21861" end="21874" title="pricing power" label="pricing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="23486" end="23506" title="Price discrimination" label="Price discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="23718" end="23738" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="23744" end="23752" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="23814" end="23823" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="23986" end="23992" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q363057" start="24148" end="24163" title="market segments" label="market segments"/>
<link wikidata="Q594739" start="24209" end="24216" title="framing (social sciences)" label="framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q268617" start="24487" end="24503" title="consumer surplus" label="consumer surplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="24826" end="24848" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267238" start="24853" end="24867" title="micromarketing" label="micromarketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="26120" end="26140" title="price discrimination" label="price discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="26157" end="26190" title="first degree price discrimination" label="first degree price discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="26325" end="26358" title="third degree price discrimination" label="third degree price discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q358063" start="26518" end="26533" title="deadweight loss" label="deadweight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q789788" start="26548" end="26564" title="gains from trade" label="gains from trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="26810" end="26836" title="price elasticity of demand" label="price elasticity of demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="26876" end="26890" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="30561" end="30568" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="35468" end="35487" title="perfect competition" label="perfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q358063" start="35640" end="35655" title="deadweight loss" label="deadweight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="36092" end="36101" title="economic efficiency" label="efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q830650" start="36574" end="36593" title="contestable markets" label="contestable markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="36819" end="36836" title="barriers to entry" label="barriers to entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="36958" end="36963" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186174" start="37163" end="37183" title="List of common misconceptions" label="common misconception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="37426" end="37453" title="Economies of scale" label="increasing returns to scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="41269" end="41276" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9034636" start="41318" end="41335" title="coercive monopoly" label="coercive monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="41576" end="41579" title="primary legislation" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="41647" end="41657" title="delegated legislation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="41768" end="41775" title="patents" label="patents"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="41777" end="41787" title="trademarks" label="trademarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="41793" end="41802" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="42787" end="42796" title="Antitrust" label="Antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="42821" end="42837" title="Public utility" label="Public utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="42995" end="43029" title="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph" label="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="43045" end="43057" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="43142" end="43153" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413155" start="43215" end="43235" title="Kingsbury Commitment" label="Kingsbury Commitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089784" start="43441" end="43444" title="MCI Communications" label="MCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="43446" end="43452" title="Sprint Corporation" label="Sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128" start="44216" end="44263" title="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union" label="Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q370089" start="47615" end="47641" title="Herfindahl–Hirschman index" label="Herfindahl–Hirschman Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819114" start="47937" end="47954" title="merger guidelines" label="merger guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797203" start="51860" end="51875" title="Artificial scarcity" label="Limiting supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200561" start="51878" end="51895" title="Predatory pricing" label="Predatory pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="51914" end="51934" title="Price discrimination" label="Price discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307705" start="51937" end="51952" title="Refusal to deal" label="Refusal to deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419692" start="51957" end="51974" title="exclusive dealing" label="exclusive dealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q973710" start="51977" end="51993" title="Tying (commerce)" label="Tying (commerce)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020767" start="51998" end="52014" title="product bundling" label="product bundling"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="53615" end="53624" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69539" start="53632" end="53652" title="Politics (Aristotle)" label="&amp;quot;Politics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="53674" end="53691" title="Thales of Miletus" label="Thales of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641560" start="53726" end="53739" title="Olive oil extraction" label="olive presses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198003" start="53876" end="53890" title="Demai (Talmud)" label="tractate Demai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="53898" end="53904" title="Mishna" label="Mishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="54206" end="54221" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="54483" end="54489" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="54647" end="54653" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405978" start="54736" end="54751" title="Salt Commission" label="Salt Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="54868" end="54871" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="54888" end="54900" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488259" start="54913" end="54920" title="Gabelle" label="Gabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="54978" end="54995" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="55052" end="55069" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="55401" end="55410" title="Newcastle, Australia" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="55430" end="55444" title="business cycle" label="business cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681782" start="56171" end="56193" title="Adelaide Steamship Company" label="Adelaide Steamship Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="56366" end="56373" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="56423" end="56430" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="56995" end="57007" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="57024" end="57027" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="57155" end="57174" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133938" start="57286" end="57291" title="trust (monopoly)" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="57401" end="57414" title="Trust-busting" label="Trust-busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="57619" end="57644" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="57670" end="57683" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="57684" end="57697" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="57860" end="57870" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="57879" end="57898" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="57917" end="57927" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="57966" end="57978" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353709" start="57983" end="57997" title="Elbert Henry Gary" label="Elbert H. Gary"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="58038" end="58053" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442802" start="58061" end="58083" title="Carnegie Steel Company" label="Carnegie Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010517" start="58127" end="58164" title="William Henry &amp;quot;Judge&amp;quot; Moore" label="William Henry &amp;quot;Judge&amp;quot; Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="58553" end="58561" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464026" start="59394" end="59407" title="blood diamond" label="blood diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q541451" start="59840" end="59858" title="Anglo American plc" label="Anglo American plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="60092" end="60106" title="public utility" label="public utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="60188" end="60202" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="60209" end="60223" title="public services" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326624" start="60311" end="60322" title="Electric utility" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="60324" end="60335" title="Natural gas utility" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q474883" start="60337" end="60342" title="Water utility" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q474883" start="60344" end="60350" title="Water industry" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="60352" end="60368" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="60374" end="60383" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="60434" end="60452" title="natural monopoly" label="natural monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="60593" end="60606" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253693" start="60633" end="60646" title="price gouging" label="price gouging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="60688" end="60722" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549526" start="60802" end="60821" title="Telecom New Zealand" label="Telecom New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344439" start="60823" end="60844" title="local loop unbundling" label="local loop unbundling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818970" start="60882" end="60888" title="Telkom (South Africa)" label="Telkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="60928" end="60940" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="60970" end="60986" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Deutsche Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035174" start="61122" end="61149" title="Long Island Power Authority" label="Long Island Power Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="61216" end="61222" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="61227" end="61234" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="61247" end="61255" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q62569" start="61265" end="61283" title="Rockaway, Queens" label="Rockaway Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="61287" end="61293" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="61300" end="61307" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="61335" end="61345" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="61350" end="61364" title="communications" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="61416" end="61421" title="cable television" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="61439" end="61464" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="61528" end="61554" title="telephone service provider" label="telephone service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="61582" end="61588" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="61590" end="61602" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550686" start="61668" end="61709" title="United Aircraft and Transport Corporation" label="United Aircraft and Transport Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="61810" end="61825" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="61881" end="61888" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="61937" end="61958" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="62046" end="62057" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="62062" end="62075" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="62212" end="62225" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="62348" end="62372" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="62565" end="62583" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="62695" end="62706" title="Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="62744" end="62763" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412467" start="62765" end="62793" title="North-West Frontier Province (1901–55)" label="North-West Frontier Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="62799" end="62810" title="Balochistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="62868" end="62874" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="62876" end="62880" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="62882" end="62892" title="indigo dye" label="indigo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="62894" end="62898" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="62900" end="62909" title="Potassium nitrate" label="saltpetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="62911" end="62914" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="62919" end="62924" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="62988" end="63004" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440025" start="63014" end="63054" title="Federal Baseball Club v. National League" label="Federal Baseball Club v. National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128779" start="63426" end="63444" title="Continental League" label="Continental League"/>
<link wikidata="Q389307" start="63506" end="63510" title="All-America Football Conference" label="AAFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="63529" end="63532" title="American Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="63538" end="63562" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469276" start="63634" end="63638" title="1983 USFL season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q609950" start="63969" end="63984" title="Herschel Walker" label="Herschel Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091437" start="63986" end="63997" title="Mike Rozier" label="Mike Rozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251736" start="64002" end="64013" title="Doug Flutie" label="Doug Flutie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100525" start="64019" end="64038" title="New Jersey Generals" label="New Jersey Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="64045" end="64057" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906538" start="64229" end="64265" title="Big Three (American television)" label="3 major American television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="65035" end="65044" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335089" start="65114" end="65144" title="embrace, extend and extinguish" label="embrace, extend and extinguish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="65260" end="65279" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q740574" start="65322" end="65345" title="General Court (European Union)" label="Court of First Instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="65353" end="65373" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q207983" start="65460" end="65468" title="Monsanto" label="Monsanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q671921" start="65635" end="65640" title="AAFES" label="AAFES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044854" start="65719" end="65750" title="alcohol monopoly" label="State retail alcohol monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740534" start="65762" end="65774" title="Vinmonopolet" label="Vinmonopolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476113" start="65785" end="65798" title="Systembolaget" label="Systembolaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849187" start="65810" end="65814" title="Alko" label="Alko"/>
<link wikidata="Q249499" start="65826" end="65832" title="Vínbúð" label="Vínbúð"/>
<link wikidata="Q845263" start="65844" end="65848" title="LCBO" label="LCBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488077" start="65859" end="65862" title="Société des alcools du Québec" label="SAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557537" start="65883" end="65909" title="Liquor Distribution Branch" label="Liquor Distribution Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="65928" end="65951" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q283194" start="66048" end="66098" title="List of assets owned by The Walt Disney Company" label="huge amounts of assets, companies and corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758788" start="66143" end="66151" title="Acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney" label="purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="66171" end="66187" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q90848124" start="66534" end="66545" title="David Dayen" label="David Dayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="66645" end="66655" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
</links>
</doc>
