<doc id="19291" wikidata="Q1028" url="?curid=19291" title="Morocco">
<text>Morocco, officially the Kingdom of Morocco, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. It overlooks the Mediterranean Sea to the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and has land borders with Algeria to the east, and the disputed territory of Western Sahara to the south. Morocco also claims the Spanish exclaves of Ceuta, Melilla and Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera, and several small Spanish-controlled islands off its coast. It has a population of approximately 37 million. Islam is both the official and predominant religion, while Arabic and Berber are the official languages. Additionally, French and the Moroccan dialect of Arabic are widely spoken. The culture of Morocco is a mix of Arab, Berber, African and European cultures. Its capital is Rabat, while its largest city is Casablanca.

The region constituting Morocco has been inhabited since the Paleolithic era over 300,000 years ago. The Idrisid dynasty was established by Idris I in 788 and Morocco was subsequently ruled by a series of other independent dynasties, reaching its zenith as a regional power in the 11th and 12th centuries, under the Almoravid and Almohad dynasties, when it controlled most of the Iberian peninsula and the Maghreb. Centuries of Arab migration to the Maghreb since the 7th century shifted the demographic scope of the region. In the 15th and 16th centuries, Morocco faced external threats to its sovereignty, with Portugal seizing some territory and the Ottoman Empire encroaching from the east. The Marinid and Saadi dynasties otherwise resisted foreign domination, and Morocco was the only North African nation to escape Ottoman dominion. The &#x27;Alawi dynasty, which rules the country to this day, seized power in 1631, and over the next two centuries expanded diplomatic and commercial relations with the Western world. Morocco&#x27;s strategic location near the mouth of the Mediterranean drew renewed European interest; in 1912, France and Spain divided the country into respective protectorates, reserving an international zone in Tangier. Following intermittent riots and revolts against colonial rule, in 1956, Morocco regained its independence and reunified.

Since independence, Morocco has remained relatively stable. It has the fifth-largest economy in Africa and wields significant influence in both Africa and the Arab world; it is considered a middle power in global affairs and holds membership in the Arab League, the Arab Maghreb Union, the Union for the Mediterranean, and the African Union. Morocco is a unitary semi-constitutional monarchy with an elected parliament. The executive branch is led by the King of Morocco and the prime minister, while legislative power is vested in the two chambers of parliament: the House of Representatives and the House of Councillors. Judicial power rests with the Constitutional Court, which may review the validity of laws, elections, and referendums. The king holds vast executive and legislative powers, especially over the military, foreign policy and religious affairs; he can issue decrees called &quot;dahirs&quot;, which have the force of law, and can also dissolve the parliament after consulting the prime minister and the president of the constitutional court.

Morocco claims ownership of the non-self-governing territory of Western Sahara, which it has designated its Southern Provinces. In 1975, after Spain agreed to decolonise the territory and cede its control to Morocco and Mauritania, a guerrilla war broke out between those powers and some of the local inhabitants. In 1979, Mauritania relinquished its claim to the area, but the war continued to rage. In 1991, a ceasefire agreement was reached, but the issue of sovereignty remained unresolved. Today, Morocco occupies two-thirds of the territory, and efforts to resolve the dispute have thus far failed to break the political deadlock.

== Etymology and name ==
The English &quot;Morocco&quot; is an anglicisation of the Spanish name for the country, , derived from the name of the city of Marrakesh, which was the capital of the Almoravid dynasty, the Almohad Caliphate, and the Saadian dynasty. During the Almoravid dynasty, the city of Marrakesh was established under the name of , derived from the city&#x27;s ancient Berber name of (). In English, the first vowel has been changed, likely influenced by the word &quot;Moor&quot;.

Historically, the territory has been part of what Muslim geographers referred to as (, &#x27;the Farthest West [of the Islamic world]&#x27; designating roughly the area from Tiaret to the Atlantic) in contrast with neighbouring regions of (, &#x27;the Middle West&#x27;: Tripoli to Béjaïa) and (, &#x27;the Nearest West&#x27;: Alexandria to Tripoli).

Morocco&#x27;s modern Arabic name is (, ), with the Kingdom&#x27;s official Arabic name being (; ). In Turkish, Morocco is known as , a name derived from its medieval capital of Fes which is derived from the Arabic word &quot;Faʾs&quot; (; ), as the city&#x27;s founder Idris I ibn Abd Allah reputedly used a silver and gold pickaxe to trace the outlines of the city. In other parts of the Islamic world, for example in Egyptian and Middle Eastern Arabic literature before the mid-20th century, Morocco was commonly referred to as (). The term is still used to refer to Morocco today in several Indo-Iranian languages, including Persian, Urdu, and Punjabi.

Morocco has also been referred to politically by a variety of terms denoting the Sharifi heritage of the &#x27;Alawi dynasty, such as (), () and (), rendered in French as and in English as the &#x27;Sharifian Empire&#x27;.

== History ==
===Prehistory and antiquity===
The area of present-day Morocco has been inhabited since at least Paleolithic times, beginning sometime between 190,000 and 90,000 BC. A recent publication has suggested that there is evidence for even earlier human habitation of the area: &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; fossils that had been discovered in the late 2000s near the Atlantic coast in Jebel Irhoud were recently dated to roughly 315,000 years ago. During the Upper Paleolithic, the Maghreb was more fertile than it is today, resembling a savanna, in contrast to its modern arid landscape.

DNA studies of Iberomaurusian peoples at Taforalt, Morocco dating to around 15,000 years ago have found them to have a distinctive Maghrebi ancestry formed from a mixture of Near Eastern and African ancestry, which is still found as a part of the genome of modern Northwest Africans. Later during the Neolithic, from around 7,500 years ago onwards, there was a migration into Northwest Africa of European Neolithic Farmers from the Iberian Peninsula (who had originated in Anatolia several thousand years prior), as well as pastoralists from the Levant, both of whom also significantly contributed to the ancestry of modern Northwest Africans. The proto-Berber tribes evolved from these prehistoric communities during the late Bronze- and early Iron ages.

In the early part of Classical Antiquity, Northwest Africa and Morocco were slowly drawn into the wider emerging Mediterranean world by the Phoenicians, who established trading colonies and settlements there, the most substantial of which were Chellah, Lixus, and Mogador. Mogador was established as a Phoenician colony as early as the 6th century BC.
Morocco later became a realm of the Northwest African civilisation of ancient Carthage, and part of the Carthaginian empire. The earliest known independent Moroccan state was the Berber kingdom of Mauretania, under King Baga. This ancient kingdom (not to be confused with the modern state of Mauritania) flourished around 225 BC or earlier. Mauretania became a client kingdom of the Roman Empire in 33 BC. Emperor Claudius annexed Mauretania directly in 44 AD, making it a Roman province ruled by an imperial governor (either a &quot;procurator Augusti&quot;, or a &quot;legatus Augusti pro praetore&quot;).

Christianity in Morocco appeared during the Roman times, when it was practiced by Berber Christians in Roman Mauretania Tingitana. During the Crisis of the Third Century, parts of Mauretania were reconquered by Berbers. By the late 3rd century, direct Roman rule had become confined to a few coastal cities, such as Septum (Ceuta) in Mauretania Tingitana and Cherchell in Mauretania Caesariensis. When, in 429 AD, the area was devastated by the Vandals, the Roman Empire lost its remaining possessions in Mauretania, and local Mauro-Roman kings assumed control of them. In the 530s, the Eastern Roman Empire, under Byzantine control, re-established direct imperial rule of Septum and Tingi, fortified Tingis and erected a church.

=== Foundation and dynasties ===

The Muslim conquest of the Maghreb that had begun during the mid-7th century was completed under the Umayyad Caliphate by 709. The caliphate introduced both Islam and the Arabic language to the area; this period also saw the beginning of a trend of Arab migration to the Maghreb which would last for centuries and effect a demographic shift in the region. While constituting part of the larger empire, Morocco was initially organised as a subsidiary province of Ifriqiya, with the local governors appointed by the Muslim governor in Kairouan.

The indigenous Berber tribes adopted Islam, but retained their customary laws. They also paid taxes and tribute to the new Muslim administration. The first independent Muslim state in the area of modern Morocco was the Kingdom of Nekor, an emirate in the Rif Mountains. It was founded by Salih I ibn Mansur in 710, as a client state to the Umayyad Caliphate. After the outbreak of the Berber Revolt in 739, the Berbers formed other independent states such as the Miknasa of Sijilmasa and the Barghawata.

The founder of the Idrisid dynasty and the great-grandson of Hasan ibn Ali, Idris ibn Abdallah, had fled to Morocco after the massacre of his family by the Abbasids in the Hejaz. He convinced the Awraba Berber tribes to break their allegiance to the distant Abbasid caliphs and he founded the Idrisid dynasty in 788. The Idrisids established Fes as their capital and Morocco became a centre of Muslim learning and a major regional power. The Idrisids were ousted in 927 by the Fatimid Caliphate and their Miknasa allies. After Miknasa broke off relations with the Fatimids in 932, they were removed from power by the Maghrawa of Sijilmasa in 980.
From the 11th century onward, a series of Berber dynasties arose. Under the Sanhaja Almoravid dynasty and the Masmuda Almohad dynasty, Morocco dominated the Maghreb, al-Andalus in Iberia, and the western Mediterranean region. From the 13th century onward the country saw a massive migration of the Banu Hilal Arab tribes. In the 13th and 14th centuries the Zenata Berber Marinids held power in Morocco and strove to replicate the successes of the Almohads through military campaigns in Algeria and Spain. They were followed by the Wattasids. In the 15th century, the Reconquista ended Muslim rule in Iberia and many Muslims and Jews fled to Morocco. Portuguese efforts to control the Atlantic sea trade in the 15th century did not greatly affect the interior of Morocco even though they managed to control some possessions on the Moroccan coast but not venturing further afield inland.

In 1549, the region fell to successive Arab dynasties claiming descent from the Islamic prophet Muhammad: first the Saadi dynasty who ruled from 1549 to 1659, and then the Alawi dynasty, who have remained in power since the 17th century. Morocco faced aggression from Spain in the north, and the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s allies pressing westward.

Under the Saadis, the sultanate ended the Portuguese Aviz dynasty in 1578 at the Battle of Alcácer Quibir. The reign of Ahmad al-Mansur brought new wealth and prestige to the Sultanate, and a large expedition to West Africa inflicted a crushing defeat on the Songhay Empire in 1591. However, managing the territories across the Sahara proved too difficult. Upon the death of al-Mansur, the country was divided among his sons.

After a period of political fragmentation and conflict during the decline of the Saadi dynasty, Morocco was finally reunited by the Alawi sultan al-Rashid in the late 1660s, who took Fez in 1666 and Marrakesh in 1668. The &#x27;Alawis succeeded in stabilising their position, and while the kingdom was smaller than previous ones in the region, it remained quite wealthy. Against the opposition of local tribes Ismail Ibn Sharif (1672–1727) began to create a unified state. With his Riffian army, he re-occupied Tangier from the English who had abandoned it in 1684 and drove the Spanish from Larache in 1689. The Portuguese abandoned Mazagão, their last territory in Morocco, in 1769. However, the siege of Melilla against the Spanish ended in defeat in 1775.

Morocco was the first nation to recognise the fledgling United States as an independent nation in 1777. In the beginning of the American Revolution, American merchant ships in the Atlantic Ocean were subject to attacks by other fleets. On 20 December 1777, Morocco&#x27;s Sultan Mohammed III declared that American merchant ships would be under the protection of the sultanate and could thus enjoy safe passage. The 1786 Moroccan–American Treaty of Friendship stands as the United States&#x27; oldest unbroken friendship treaty.

===French and Spanish protectorates===
As Europe industrialised, Northwest Africa was increasingly prized for its potential for colonisation. France showed a strong interest in Morocco as early as 1830, not only to protect the border of its Algerian territory, but also because of the strategic position of Morocco with coasts on the Mediterranean and the open Atlantic. In 1860, a dispute over Spain&#x27;s Ceuta enclave led Spain to declare war. Victorious Spain won a further enclave and an enlarged Ceuta in the settlement. In 1884, Spain created a protectorate in the coastal areas of Morocco.

In 1904, France and Spain carved out zones of influence in Morocco. Recognition by the United Kingdom of France&#x27;s sphere of influence provoked a strong reaction from the German Empire; and a crisis loomed in 1905. The matter was resolved at the Algeciras Conference in 1906. The Agadir Crisis of 1911 increased tensions between European powers. The 1912 Treaty of Fez made Morocco a protectorate of France, and triggered the 1912 Fez riots. Spain continued to operate its coastal protectorate. By the same treaty, Spain assumed the role of protecting power over the northern coastal and southern Saharan zones.

Tens of thousands of colonists entered Morocco. Some bought up large amounts of rich agricultural land, while others organised the exploitation and modernisation of mines and harbours. Interest groups that formed among these elements continually pressured France to increase its control over Morocco – with some Moroccan tribes allying with the French against other competing tribes from early on in its conquest. The French colonial administrator, Governor general Marshal Hubert Lyautey, sincerely admired Moroccan culture and succeeded in imposing a joint Moroccan-French administration, while creating a modern school system. Several divisions of Moroccan soldiers (Goumiers or regular troops and officers) served in the French army in both World War I and World War II, and in the Spanish Nationalist Army in the Spanish Civil War and after (&quot;Regulares&quot;). The institution of slavery was abolished in 1925.

Between 1921 and 1926, an uprising in the Rif Mountains, led by Abd el-Krim, led to the establishment of the Republic of the Rif. The Spanish used anti-civilian bombing raids and mustard gas to prevent the Rif republic from gaining independence. They lost more than 13,000 soldiers at Annual in July–August 1921 alone. The Riffi were eventually suppressed by 1927 by the Franco-Spanish military. The casualties on the Spanish-French side were 52,000 and from the Riffi 10,000 died.
In 1943, the Istiqlal Party (Independence Party) was founded to press for independence, with discreet US support. Moroccan nationalists drew heavily on transnational activist networks for lobbying to end colonial rule, primarily at the United Nations. The Istiqlal Party subsequently provided most of the leadership for the nationalist movement.
France&#x27;s exile of Sultan Mohammed V in 1953 to Madagascar and his replacement by the unpopular Mohammed Ben Aarafa sparked active opposition to the French and Spanish protectorates. The most notable violence occurred in Oujda where Moroccans attacked French and other European residents in the streets. France allowed Mohammed V to return in 1955, and the negotiations that led to Moroccan independence began the following year. In March 1956 Morocco regained its independence from France as the Kingdom of Morocco. A month later Spain forsook its protectorate in Northern Morocco to the new state but kept its two coastal enclaves (Ceuta and Melilla) on the Mediterranean coast which dated from earlier conquests, but over which Morocco still claims sovereignty to this day.

===Post-independence===

Sultan Mohammed became King in 1957. Upon the death of Mohammed V, Hassan II became King of Morocco on 3 March 1961. Morocco held its first general elections in 1963. However, Hassan declared a state of emergency and suspended parliament in 1965. In 1971 and 1972, there were two failed attempts to depose the king and establish a republic. A truth commission set up in 2005 to investigate human rights abuses during his reign confirmed nearly 10,000 cases, ranging from death in detention to forced exile. Some 592 people were recorded killed during Hassan&#x27;s rule according to the truth commission.

In 1963, the Sand War was fought between Algerian and Moroccan troops over Moroccan claims to parts of Algerian territory. A formal peace agreement was signed in February 1964; however, relations remained strained between the two countries following the conflict. The Spanish enclave of Ifni in the south was returned to Morocco in 1969.

The Polisario movement was formed in 1973, with the aim of establishing an independent state in the Spanish Sahara. On 6 November 1975, King Hassan asked for volunteers to cross into the Spanish Sahara. Some 350,000 civilians were reported as being involved in the &quot;Green March&quot;. A month later, Spain agreed to leave the Spanish Sahara, soon to become Western Sahara, and to transfer it to joint Moroccan-Mauritanian control, despite the objections and threats of military intervention by Algeria. Moroccan forces occupied the territory.

Moroccan and Algerian troops soon clashed in Western Sahara. Morocco and Mauritania divided up Western Sahara. Fighting between the Moroccan military and Polisario forces continued for many years. The prolonged war was a considerable financial drain on Morocco. In 1983, Hassan cancelled planned elections amid political unrest and economic crisis. In 1984, Morocco left the Organisation of African Unity in protest at the SADR&#x27;s admission to the body. Polisario claimed to have killed more than 5,000 Moroccan soldiers between 1982 and 1985. Algerian authorities have estimated the number of Sahrawi refugees in Algeria to be 165,000. Diplomatic relations with Algeria were restored in 1988. In 1991, a UN-monitored ceasefire began in Western Sahara, but the territory&#x27;s status remains undecided and ceasefire violations are reported. The following decade saw much wrangling over a proposed referendum on the future of the territory but the deadlock was not broken.
Political reforms in the 1990s resulted in the establishment of a bicameral legislature with Morocco&#x27;s first opposition-led government coming to power. King Hassan II died in 1999 and was succeeded by his son, Mohammed VI. He is a cautious moderniser who has introduced some economic and social liberalisation. Mohammed VI paid a controversial visit to the Western Sahara in 2002. Morocco unveiled an autonomy blueprint for Western Sahara to the United Nations in 2007. The Polisario rejected the plan and put forward its own proposal. Morocco and the Polisario Front held UN-sponsored talks in New York City but failed to come to any agreement. In 2010, security forces stormed a protest camp in the Western Sahara, triggering violent demonstrations in the regional capital El Aaiún.
In 2002, Morocco and Spain agreed to a US-brokered resolution over the disputed island of Perejil. Spanish troops had taken the normally uninhabited island after Moroccan soldiers landed on it and set up tents and a flag. There were renewed tensions in 2005, as dozens of African migrants stormed the borders of the Spanish enclaves of Melilla and Ceuta. In response, Spain deported dozens of the illegal migrants to Morocco from Melilla. In 2006, the Spanish Premier Zapatero visited Spanish enclaves. He was the first Spanish leader in 25 years to make an official visit to the territories. The following year, Spanish King Juan Carlos I visited Ceuta and Melilla, further angering Morocco which demanded control of the enclaves.

During the 2011–2012 Moroccan protests, thousands of people rallied in Rabat and other cities calling for political reform and a new constitution curbing the powers of the king. In July 2011, the King won a landslide victory in a referendum on a reformed constitution he had proposed to placate the Arab Spring protests. In the first general elections that followed, the moderate Islamist Justice and Development Party won a plurality of seats, with Abdelilah Benkirane being designated as head of government per the new constitution. Despite the reforms made by Mohammed VI, demonstrators continued to call for deeper reforms. Hundreds took part in a trade union rally in Casablanca in May 2012. Participants accused the government of failing to deliver on reforms.

On 24 August 2021, neighbouring Algeria cut diplomatic relations with Morocco, accusing Morocco of supporting a separatist group and hostile actions against Algeria. Morocco called the decision unjustified. Foreign Minister Ramtane Lamamra accused Morocco of using Pegasus spyware against its officials. Amnesty International found that two phones of Sahraoui human rights defender Aminatou Haidar were infected in November 2021.

On 8 September 2023, a 6.8 magnitude earthquake hit Morocco killing more than 2,800 people and injuring thousands. The epicentre of the quake was around 70 km southwest of city of Marrakech.

On 10 December 2020, the Israel–Morocco normalisation agreement was announced, and Morocco announced its intention to resume diplomatic relations with Israel. Joint Declaration of the Kingdom of Morocco, the United States of America and the State of Israel was signed on 22 December 2020. The agreement was met with criticism due to the October 2023 Israel–Hamas war. Moroccan Foreign Minister Nasser Bourita argues that maintaining relations does not signify endorsement of Israeli government actions.

== Geography ==


Morocco has a coast by the Atlantic Ocean that reaches past the Strait of Gibraltar into the Mediterranean Sea. It is bordered by Spain to the north (a water border through the Strait and land borders with three small Spanish-controlled exclaves, Ceuta, Melilla and Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera), Algeria to the east, and Western Sahara to the south. Since Morocco controls most of Western Sahara, its &quot;de facto&quot; southern boundary is with Mauritania. The geography of Morocco spans from the Atlantic Ocean, to mountainous areas, to the Sahara desert. Morocco is a Northern African country, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, between Algeria and the annexed Western Sahara. It is one of only three nations (along with Spain and France) to have both Atlantic and Mediterranean coastlines.

A large part of Morocco is mountainous. The Atlas Mountains are located mainly in the centre and the south of the country. The Rif Mountains are located in the north of the country. Both ranges are mainly inhabited by the Berber people. Its total area is about . Algeria borders Morocco to the east and southeast, though the border between the two countries has been closed since 1994. The internationally recognised borders of the country lie between latitudes 27° and 36°N, and longitudes 1° and 14°W. Morocco&#x27;s capital city is Rabat, a city that is beside the Oued Bou Regreg River; its largest city is its main port, Casablanca. Other cities recording a population over 500,000 in the 2014 Moroccan census are Fes, Marrakesh, Meknes, Salé and Tangier.

The Rif mountains stretch over the region bordering the Mediterranean from the northwest to the northeast. The Atlas Mountains run down the backbone of the country, from the northeast to the southwest. Most of the southeast portion of the country is in the Sahara Desert and as such is generally sparsely populated and unproductive economically. Most of the population lives to the north of these mountains, with Morocco&#x27;s largest cities encapsulated by the Middle Atlas and the High Atlas mountain range, while to the south lies the Western Sahara, a former Spanish colony that was annexed by Morocco in 1975 during the Green March. Morocco claims that the Western Sahara is part of its territory and refers to that as its Southern Provinces.

Spanish territory in Northwest Africa neighbouring Morocco comprises five enclaves on the Mediterranean coast: Ceuta, Melilla, Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera, Peñón de Alhucemas, the Chafarinas islands and the disputed islet Perejil. Off the Atlantic coast the Canary Islands belong to Spain, whereas Madeira to the north is Portuguese. To the north, Morocco is bordered by the Strait of Gibraltar, where international shipping has unimpeded transit passage between the Atlantic and Mediterranean.

Morocco is represented in the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 geographical encoding standard by the symbol &quot;MA&quot;. This code was used as the basis for Morocco&#x27;s internet domain, .ma.

===Climate===

In area, Morocco&#x27;s climate is mainly &quot;hot summer Mediterranean&quot; (&quot;Csa&quot;) and &quot;hot desert&quot; (&quot;BWh&quot;) zones.

Central mountain ranges and the effects of the cold Canary Current, off the Atlantic coast, are significant factors in Morocco&#x27;s relatively large variety of vegetation zones, ranging from lush forests in the northern and central mountains, giving way to steppe, semi-arid and desert areas in the eastern and southern regions. The Moroccan coastal plains experience moderate temperatures even in summer.

In the Rif, Middle and High Atlas Mountains, there exist several different types of climates: Mediterranean along the coastal lowlands, giving way to a humid temperate climate at higher elevations with sufficient moisture to allow for the growth of different species of oaks, moss carpets, junipers, and Atlantic fir which is a royal conifer tree endemic to Morocco. In the valleys, fertile soils and high precipitation allow for the growth of thick and lush forests. Cloud forests can be found in the west of the Rif Mountains and Middle Atlas Mountains. At higher elevations, the climate becomes alpine in character, and can sustain ski resorts.

Southeast of the Atlas mountains, near the Algerian borders, the climate becomes very dry, with long and hot summers. Extreme heat and low moisture levels are especially pronounced in the lowland regions east of the Atlas range due to the rain shadow effect of the mountain system. The southeasternmost portions of Morocco are very hot, and include portions of the Sahara desert, where vast swathes of sand dunes and rocky plains are dotted with lush oases.

In contrast to the Sahara region in the south, coastal plains are fertile in the central and northern regions of the country, and comprise the backbone of the country&#x27;s agriculture, in which 95% of the population live. The direct exposure to the North Atlantic Ocean, the proximity to mainland Europe and the long stretched Rif and Atlas mountains are the factors of the rather European-like climate in the northern half of the country. That makes Morocco a country of contrasts. Forested areas cover about 12% of the country while arable land accounts for 18%. Approximately 5% of Moroccan land is irrigated for agricultural use.
In general, apart from the southeast regions (pre-Saharan and desert areas), Morocco&#x27;s climate and geography are very similar to the Iberian peninsula. Thus Morocco has the following climate zones:
* Mediterranean: Dominates the coastal Mediterranean regions of the country, along the (500 km strip), and some parts of the Atlantic coast. Summers are hot to moderately hot and dry, average highs are between and . Winters are generally mild and wet, daily average temperatures hover around to , and average low are around to , typical to the coastal areas of the west Mediterranean. Annual Precipitation in this area varies from 600 to 800 mm in the west to 350–500 mm in the east. Notable cities that fall into this zone are Tangier, Tetouan, Al Hoceima, Nador and Safi.
* Sub-Mediterranean: It influences cities that show Mediterranean characteristics, but remain fairly influenced by other climates owing to their either relative elevation, or direct exposure to the North Atlantic Ocean. There are thus two main influencing climates:

:* &quot;Oceanic:&quot; Determined by the cooler summers, where highs are around and in terms of the Essaouira region, are almost always around . The medium daily temperatures can get as low as , while winters are chilly to mild and wet. Annual precipitation varies from 400 to 700 mm. Notable cities that fall into this zone are Rabat, Casablanca, Kénitra, Salé and Essaouira.

:* &quot;Continental:&quot; Determined by the bigger gap between highs and lows, that results in hotter summers and colder winters, than found in typical Mediterranean zones. In summer, daily highs can get as high as during heat waves, but usually are between and . However, temperatures drop as the sun sets. Night temperatures usually fall below , and sometimes as low as in mid-summer. Winters are cooler, and can get below the freezing point multiple times between December and February. Also, snow can fall occasionally. Fès for example registered in winter 2005. Annual precipitation varies between 500 and 900 mm. Notable cities are Fès, Meknès, Chefchaouen, Beni-Mellal and Taza.
* Continental: Dominates the mountainous regions of the north and central parts of the country, where summers are hot to very hot, with highs between and . Winters on the other hand are cold, and lows usually go beyond the freezing point. And when cold damp air comes to Morocco from the northwest, for a few days, temperatures sometimes get below . It often snows abundantly in this part of the country. Precipitation varies between 400 and 800 mm. Notable cities are Khenifra, Imilchil, Midelt and Azilal.
* Alpine: Found in some parts of the Middle Atlas Mountain range and the eastern part of the High Atlas Mountain range. Summers are very warm to moderately hot, and winters are longer, cold and snowy. Precipitation varies between 400 and 1200 mm. In summer highs barely go above , and lows are cool and average below . In winters, highs average around , and lows go well below the freezing point. In this part of the country, there are many ski resorts, such as Oukaimeden and Mischliefen. Notable cities are Ifrane, Azrou and Boulmane.
* Semi-arid: This type of climate is found in the south of the country and some parts of the east of the country, where rainfall is lower and annual precipitations are between 200 and 350 mm. However, one usually finds Mediterranean characteristics in those regions, such as the precipitation pattern and thermal attributes. Notable cities are Agadir, Marrakesh and Oujda.

South of Agadir and east of Jerada near the Algerian borders, arid and desert climate starts to prevail.

Due to Morocco&#x27;s proximity to the Sahara desert and the North Sea of the Atlantic Ocean, two phenomena occur to influence the regional seasonal temperatures, either by raising temperatures by 7–8 degrees Celsius when sirocco blows from the east creating heatwaves, or by lowering temperatures by 7–8 degrees Celsius when cold damp air blows from the northwest, creating a coldwave or cold spell. However, these phenomena do not last for more than two to five days on average.

Climate change is expected to significantly impact Morocco on multiple dimensions. As a coastal country with hot and arid climates, environmental impacts are likely to be wide and varied. As of the 2019 Climate Change Performance Index, Morocco was ranked second in preparedness behind Sweden.

===Biodiversity===

Morocco has a wide range of biodiversity. It is part of the Mediterranean basin, an area with exceptional concentrations of endemic species undergoing rapid rates of habitat loss, and is therefore considered to be a hotspot for conservation priority. Avifauna are notably variant. The avifauna of Morocco includes a total of 454 species, five of which have been introduced by humans, and 156 are rarely or accidentally seen. Morocco is home to six terrestrial ecoregions: Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests, Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe, Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets, Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe, Mediterranean woodlands and forests and North Saharan steppe and woodlands.

The Barbary lion, hunted to extinction in the wild, was a subspecies native to Morocco and is a national emblem. The last Barbary lion in the wild was shot in the Atlas Mountains in 1922. The other two primary predators of northern Africa, the Atlas bear and Barbary leopard, are now extinct and critically endangered, respectively. Relic populations of the West African crocodile persisted in the Draa river until the 20th century. The Barbary macaque, a primate endemic to Morocco and Algeria, is also facing extinction due to offtake for trade human interruption, urbanisation, wood and real estate expansion that diminish forested area—the macaque&#x27;s habitat.

Trade of animals and plants for food, pets, medicinal purposes, souvenirs and photo props is common across Morocco, despite laws making much of it illegal. This trade is unregulated and causing unknown reductions of wild populations of native Moroccan wildlife. Because of the proximity of northern Morocco to Europe, species such as cacti, tortoises, mammal skins, and high-value birds (falcons and bustards) are harvested in various parts of the country and exported in appreciable quantities, with especially large volumes of eel harvested – 60 tons exported to the Far East in the period 2009‒2011.

== Government and politics ==
According to the 2022 &quot;Economist Democracy Index&quot;, Morocco is ruled under a hybrid regime, scoring #3 in the Middle East and North Africa, and #95 in the world. Morocco has a &quot;difficult&quot; ranking on the 2023 &quot;World Press Freedom Index&quot;.

Following the March 1998 elections, a coalition government headed by opposition socialist leader Abderrahmane Youssoufi and composed largely of ministers drawn from opposition parties, was formed. Prime Minister Youssoufi&#x27;s government was the first ever government drawn primarily from opposition parties, and also represents the first opportunity for a coalition of socialists, left-of-centre, and nationalist parties to be included in the government until October 2002. It was also the first time in the modern political history of the Arab world that the opposition assumed power following an election. The current government is headed by Aziz Akhannouch.

The Constitution of Morocco provides for a monarchy with a Parliament and an independent judiciary. With the 2011 constitutional reforms, the King of Morocco retains less executive powers whereas those of the prime minister have been enlarged. The constitution grants the king honorific powers (among other powers); he is both the secular political leader and the &quot;Commander of the Faithful&quot; as a direct descendant of the Prophet Mohammed. He presides over the Council of Ministers; appoints the Prime Minister from the political party that has won the most seats in the parliamentary elections, and on recommendations from the latter, appoints the members of the government.

The constitution of 1996 theoretically allowed the king to terminate the tenure of any minister, and after consultation with the heads of the higher and lower Assemblies, to dissolve the Parliament, suspend the constitution, call for new elections, or rule by decree. The only time this happened was in 1965. The King is formally the commander-in-chief of the armed forces.

===Legislative branch===

Since the constitutional reform of 1996, the bicameral legislature consists of two chambers. The Assembly of Representatives of Morocco (&quot;Majlis an-Nuwwâb/Assemblée des Répresentants&quot;) has 395 members elected for a five-year term, 305 elected in multi-seat constituencies and 90 in national lists consisting of women and youth.

The Assembly of Councillors (&quot;Majlis al-Mustasharin&quot;) has 120 members, elected for a six-year term. 72 members are elected at the regional level, 20 members are elected from trade unions, 8 seats from professional organisations and 20 from wage-earners.

The Parliament&#x27;s powers, though still relatively limited, were expanded under the 1992 and 1996 and even further in the 2011 constitutional revisions and include budgetary matters, approving bills, questioning ministers, and establishing ad hoc commissions of inquiry to investigate the government&#x27;s actions. The lower chamber of Parliament may dissolve the government through a vote of no confidence.

The latest parliamentary elections were held on 8 September 2021. Voter turnout in these elections was estimated to be 50.35% of registered voters.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Morocco is officially divided into 12 regions, which, in turn, are subdivided into 62 provinces and 13 prefectures.

Regions
# Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima
# Oriental
# Fès-Meknès
# Rabat-Salé-Kénitra
# Béni Mellal-Khénifra
# Casablanca-Settat
# Marrakesh-Safi
# Drâa-Tafilalet
# Souss-Massa
# Guelmim-Oued Noun
# Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra
# Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab

===Foreign relations===
Morocco is a member of the United Nations and belongs to the African Union (AU), Arab League, Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of Sahel–Saharan States (CEN–SAD). Morocco&#x27;s relationships vary greatly between African, Arab and Western states. Morocco has had strong ties to the West in order to gain economic and political benefits. France and Spain remain the primary trade partners, as well as the primary creditors and foreign investors in Morocco. From the total foreign investments in Morocco, the European Union invests approximately 73.5%, whereas the Arab world invests only 19.3%. Many countries from the Persian Gulf and Maghreb regions are getting more involved in large-scale development projects in Morocco.

In 2002, a dispute with Spain in 2002 over the small island of Perejil arose, which brought attention to the issue of the sovereignty of Melilla and Ceuta. These small enclaves on the Mediterranean coast are surrounded by Morocco and have been under Spanish administration for centuries.

In 2004, the George W. Bush administration granted Morocco the status of major non-NATO ally. Morocco was the first country in the world to recognise US sovereignty, in 1777. After gaining independence, Morocco established strong ties with the United States, receiving significant economic and military aid. This partnership flourished during the Cold War, with Morocco becoming a key ally against communist expansion in North Africa. In return, the US supported Morocco&#x27;s territorial ambitions and efforts to modernise its economy. Morocco received more than $400 million in American aid between 1957 and 1963, which elevated it to the fifth-largest recipient of US agricultural assistance by 1966. The long-lasting relationship between the two nations has endured, with the US remaining one of Morocco&#x27;s top allies. Additionally, Morocco is included in the European Union&#x27;s European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.

Morocco&#x27;s membership in the African Union has been marked by significant events. In 1984, Morocco withdrew from the organisation after it admitted the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic in 1982 without conducting a referendum of self-determination in the disputed territory of Western Sahara. This decision was made unilaterally by Morocco. However, in 2017, Morocco rejoined the AU, signaling a shift in its diplomatic stance. In November 2020, Brahim Ghali, leader of the Polisario Front and the Sahrawi president, unilaterally ended a 29-year-old ceasefire agreement with Morocco overseen by the United Nations. In December 2020, Morocco had started to pursue military cooperation with Israel from a normalization agreement. Algeria backs the Polisario Front of Morocco&#x27;s breakaway state, the Western Sahara. In August 2021, Algeria severed diplomatic relations with Morocco. Algerian authorities have accused Rabat of supporting the Movement for the Self-Determination of Kabylie (MAK), which it classifies as a terrorist organisation.

===Western Sahara status===
The status of the Saguia el-Hamra and Río de Oro regions is disputed. The Western Sahara War saw the Polisario Front, the Sahrawi rebel national liberation movement, battling both Morocco and Mauritania between 1976 and a ceasefire in 1991. The Moroccan government has stated that their claimed area of Western Sahara is referred to as the &quot;Southern Provinces&quot;. A United Nations mission, MINURSO, is tasked with organising a referendum on whether the territory should become independent or recognised as a part of Morocco.

Part of the territory, the Free Zone, is a mostly uninhabited area that the Polisario Front controls as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. Its administrative headquarters are located in Tindouf, Algeria. , no UN member state had recognised Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara. In 2006, the government of Morocco suggested autonomous status for the region through the Moroccan Royal Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs (CORCAS). The project was presented to the United Nations Security Council in mid-April 2007. The proposal was encouraged by Moroccan allies such as the United States, France, and Spain. The Security Council has called upon the parties to enter into direct and unconditional negotiations to reach a mutually accepted political solution.

In 2020, the United States under the Trump administration became the first Western country to back Morocco&#x27;s contested sovereignty over the disputed Western Sahara region, on the agreement that Morocco would simultaneously normalise relations with Israel. The Polisario later declared an end to the ceasefire; this led to occasional clashes between the two. The Guerguerat clashes had led to Morocco launching a military operation in Guerguerat, Western Sahara. Germany&#x27;s request for consultations has led to Rabat suspending diplomatic ties in retaliation.

===Military===
Morocco&#x27;s military consists of the Royal Armed Forces—this includes the Army (the largest branch), the Navy, the Air Force, the Royal Guard, the Royal Gendarmerie and the Auxiliary Forces. Internal security is generally effective, and acts of political violence are rare (with one exception, the 2003 Casablanca bombings which killed 45 people).

The UN maintains a small observer force in Western Sahara, where a large number of Moroccan troops are stationed. The Sahrawi Polisario Front maintains an active militia of an estimated 5,000 fighters in Western Sahara and has engaged in intermittent warfare with Moroccan forces since the 1970s.

=== Human rights ===

During the early 1960s to the late 1980s, under the leadership of Hassan II, Morocco had one of the worst human rights records in both Africa and the world. Government repression of political dissent was widespread during Hassan II&#x27;s leadership, until it dropped sharply in the mid-1990s. The decades during which abuses were committed are referred to as the Years of Lead (&quot;les années de plomb&quot;), and included forced disappearances, assassinations of government opponents and protesters, and secret internment camps such as Tazmamart. To examine abuses committed during the reign of King Hassan II (1961–1999), the government under King Mohammed set up an Equity and Reconciliation Commission (IER).

According to a Human Rights Watch annual report in 2016, Moroccan authorities restricted the rights to peaceful expression, association and assembly through several laws. The authorities continue to prosecute both printed and online media which criticises the government or the king (or the royal family). There are also persistent allegations of violence against both Sahrawi pro-independence and pro-Polisario demonstrators in Western Sahara; a disputed territory which is occupied by and considered by Morocco as part of its Southern Provinces. Morocco has been accused of detaining Sahrawi pro-independence activists as prisoners of conscience.

Homosexual acts as well as pre-marital sex are illegal in Morocco, and can be punishable by six months to three years of imprisonment. It is illegal to proselytise for any religion other than Islam (article 220 of the Moroccan Penal Code), and that crime is punishable by a maximum of 15 years of imprisonment. Violence against women and sexual harassment have been criminalised. The penalty can be from one month to five years, with fines ranging from $200 to $1,000. It is also a criminal offence in Morocco to undermine the monarchy; in August 2023, a Moroccan resident of Qatar was sentenced to five years&#x27; imprisonment for criticising the King&#x27;s policy decisions on Facebook.

== Economy ==
Morocco&#x27;s economy is considered a relatively liberal economy governed by the law of supply and demand. Since 1993, the country has followed a policy of privatisation of certain economic sectors which used to be in the hands of the government. Morocco has become a major player in African economic affairs, and is the sixth largest economy in Africa by GDP (PPP). Morocco was ranked as the first African country by the Economist Intelligence Unit&#x27;s quality-of-life index, ahead of South Africa. However, in the years since that first-place ranking was given, Morocco has slipped into fourth place behind Egypt.

Government reforms and steady yearly growth in the region of 4–5% from 2000 to 2007, including 4.9% year-on-year growth in 2003–2007 helped the Moroccan economy to become much more robust compared to a few years earlier. For 2012, the World Bank forecast a rate of 4% growth for Morocco and 4.2% for following year, 2013. Between 2000 and 2019, the share of Moroccan workers in agriculture declined, while those that are in industry increased.

===Tourism===
Tourism is one of the most important sectors in the Moroccan economy. It is a strong tourist industry focused on the country&#x27;s coast, culture, and history. In 2022, tourism in Morocco had surpassed the average number of visitors in the 2010s, while setting an all-time high in 2023 with 14.5 million international tourist arrivals and MAD 104.7 billion in receipts. In 2010, the government launched its Vision 2020, which plans to make Morocco one of the top 20 tourist destinations in the world and to double the annual number of international arrivals to 20 million by 2020. In November 2024, Morocco had nearly 16 million tourists visiting that contributed to 7% of its GDP.
Tourism is increasingly focused on Morocco&#x27;s culture, such as its ancient cities. The modern tourist industry capitalises on Morocco&#x27;s ancient and Islamic sites and on its landscape and cultural history. 60% of Morocco&#x27;s tourists visit for its culture and heritage. Agadir is a major coastal resort and has a third of all Moroccan bed nights. It is a base for tours to the Atlas Mountains. Other resorts in northern Morocco are also very popular.

Large government sponsored marketing campaigns to attract tourists advertised Morocco as an inexpensive and exotic, yet safe, place for tourists. Most of the visitors to Morocco continue to be European, with French nationals making up almost 20% of all visitors. Most Europeans visit between April and August. Casablanca is the major cruise port in Morocco, and has a developed market for tourists in Morocco. The Majorelle botanical garden in Marrakech is a popular tourist attraction. It was bought by the fashion designer Yves Saint-Laurent and Pierre Bergé in 1980. , activity and adventure tourism in the Atlas and Rif Mountains are the fastest growth area in Moroccan tourism. These locations have walking and trekking opportunities from late March to mid-November. The government is investing in trekking circuits. They are also developing desert tourism in competition with Tunisia.

===Agriculture===

===Infrastructure===

According to the Global Competitiveness Report of 2019, Morocco Ranked 32nd in the world in terms of Roads, 16th in Sea, 45th in Air and 64th in Railways. This gives Morocco the best infrastructure rankings in the African continent. To meet the growing domestic demand, the Moroccan government invested more than $15 billion from 2010 to 2015 in upgrading its basic infrastructure. Morocco also has the largest port in Africa and the Mediterranean, Tanger-Med, which is ranked the 18th in the world with a handling capacity of over 9 million containers. It is situated in the Tangier free economic zone and serves as a logistics hub for Africa and the world.

In 2014, Morocco began the construction of the first high-speed railway system in Africa linking the cities of Tangier and Casablanca. It was inaugurated in 2018 by the King following over a decade of planning and construction by Moroccan national railway company Office National des Chemins de Fer (ONCF). It is the first phase of what is planned to eventually be a 1,500 kilometeres (930 mi) high-speed rail network in Morocco. An extension of the line to Marrakesh is already being planned. The Moroccan Ministry of Equipment, Transport and Logistics aims to build an additional 3,380 kilometers of expressway and 2,100 kilometers of highway by 2030 with SNCF; the project came at an expected cost of US$9.6 billion. The project also involved purchasing 18 high-speed trains and 150 multi-service trains.

===Energy===
In 2008, about 56% of Morocco&#x27;s electricity supply was provided by coal. However, as forecasts indicate that energy requirements in Morocco will rise 6% per year between 2012 and 2050, a new law passed encouraging Moroccans to look for ways to diversify the energy supply, including more renewable resources. The Moroccan government has launched a project to build a solar thermal energy power plant and is also looking into the use of natural gas as a potential source of revenue for Morocco&#x27;s government.

Morocco has embarked upon the construction of large solar energy farms to lessen dependence on fossil fuels, and to eventually export electricity to Europe. On 17 April 2022, Rabat-Moroccan agency for solar energy (Masen) and the ministry of energy transition and sustainable development announced the launch of phase one of the mega project Nor II solar energy plant which is a multi-site solar energy project with a total capacity set at 400 megawatts (MN).

===Narcotics===

Since the 7th century, cannabis has been cultivated in the Rif region. In 2004, according to the UN World Drugs Report, cultivation and transformation of cannabis represents 0.57% of the national GDP of Morocco in 2002. According to a French Ministry of the Interior 2006 report, 80% of the cannabis resin (hashish) consumed in Europe comes from the Rif region in Morocco, which is mostly mountainous terrain in the north of Morocco, also hosting plains that are very fertile and expanding from Melwiyya River and Ras Kebdana in the East to Tangier and Cape Spartel in the West. Also, the region extends from the Mediterranean in the south, home of the Wergha River, to the north. In addition to that, Morocco is a transit point for cocaine from South America destined for Western Europe.

=== Water supply and sanitation ===

Water supply and sanitation in Morocco are provided by a wide array of utilities. They range from private companies in the largest city—Casablanca, Rabat, and two other cities—to public municipal utilities in 13 other cities, as well as a national electricity and water company. Morocco&#x27;s Office National de l’Eau Potable (ONEP) is in charge of bulk water supply in about 500 towns. According to a study by the National Liquid Sanitation Master Plan (SNDAL) that started in 1994, only 15 of their 63 treatment plants are operational, and out of approximately 500million cubic meters of wastewater generated annually, 95% is discharged untreated into natural water bodies.

There have been substantial improvements in access to water supply, and to a lesser extent to sanitation, over the past fifteen years. Remaining challenges include a low level of wastewater treatment (only 13% of collected wastewater is being treated), lack of house connections in the poorest urban neighbourhoods and limited sustainability of rural systems (20% of rural systems are estimated not to function). In 2005, a National Sanitation Programme was approved that aims at treating 60% of collected wastewater and connecting 80% of urban households to sewers by 2020. The issue of lack of water connections for some of the urban poor is being addressed as part of the National Human Development Initiative, under which residents of informal settlements have received land titles and have fees waived that are normally paid to utilities in order to connect to the water and sewer network. An investment programme of about MAD 15 billion was made to cover the centres managed by ONEP from 2003–2017. Japanese and Canadian cooperators and AFESD have also financed several projects for ONEP.

Though, between 1960 and 2020, the per capita availability of renewable water resources went from 2,560m3 to about 620m3 per person annually. The World Bank has reported that they have supported the Noor Solar Power project in Morocco with US$700 million in financing the project &quot;To address water scarcity and its impacts on agriculture&quot;.

=== Science and technology ===
The Moroccan government has been implementing reforms to improve the quality of education and make research more responsive to socio-economic needs. In May 2009, Morocco&#x27;s prime minister, Abbas El Fassi, announced that investment in science and technology would rise from US$620,000 in 2008 to US$8.5 million (69 million Moroccan dirhams) in 2009 to finance the laboratories construction, training courses for researchers and a scholarship programme for science during a meeting at the National Centre for Scientific and Technical Research. Morocco was ranked 66th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024, an increase in ranking from 2020 at 75th.

The &quot;Moroccan Innovation Strategy&quot; was launched at the country&#x27;s first National Innovation Summit in June 2009 by the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Investment and the Digital Economy. The &quot;Moroccan Innovation Strategy&quot; fixed the target of producing 1,000 Moroccan patents and creating 200 innovative start-ups by 2014. In 2012, Moroccan inventors applied for 197 patents, up from 152 two years earlier. In 2011, the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and New Technologies created a Moroccan Club of Innovation, in partnership with the Moroccan Office of Industrial and Commercial Property. The idea is to create a network of players in innovation to help them develop innovative projects.

The Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research is supporting research in advanced technologies. The Moroccan Phosphate Office (&quot;Office chérifien des phosphates&quot;) has invested in a project to develop a smart city, King Mohammed VI Green City, around Mohammed VI University located between Casablanca and Marrakesh, at a cost of DH 4.7 billion (circa US$479 million). In 2012, the Hassan II Academy of Sciences and Technologies identified a number of sectors where Morocco has a comparative advantage and skilled human capital, including mining, fisheries, food chemistry and new technologies. It also identified a number of strategic sectors, such as renewable energies, health sectors, the environment and geosciences.

On 20 May 2015, less than a year after its inception, the Higher Council for Education, Training and Scientific Research presented a report to the king offering a &quot;Vision for Education in Morocco 2015–2030&quot;. The report advocated making education egalitarian and, thus, accessible to the greatest number. The report also recommended developing an integrated national innovation system which would be financed by gradually increasing the share of GDP devoted to research and development (R&amp;D) from 0.73% of GDP in 2010 to &#x27;1% in the short term, 1.5% by 2025 and 2% by 2030&#x27;. As of 2015, Morocco had three technoparks. Since the first technopark was established in Rabat in 2005, a second has been set up in Casablanca, followed, in 2015, by a third in Tangers. The technoparks host start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises specialising in information and communication technologies (ICTs), &#x27;green&#x27; technologies (namely, environmentally friendly technologies) and cultural industries. According to Office Marocain de la Propriété Industrielle et Commerciale, patent filing in Morocco grew by 167% during the period 2015–2019.

In 2024, Morocco is among the top four most-connected populations of a country to the Internet in Africa by number of population. In 2022, the number of internet users in Morocco reached around 31.6 million. Later, as of January 2024, Morocco had approximately 34.5 million internet users; it has a penetration rate of about 90.7%. Morocco has several Internet-related projects; an example of such is the National Digital Development Strategy 2030. In 2024, as part of another program called the Connected Campus, the American wireless network provider Cambium Networks deployed 18,000 Wi-Fi access points for public universities in Morocco.

== Demographics ==
=== Population ===
Morocco has a population of around inhabitants ( estimate). Morocco&#x27;s population was 11.6 million in 1960. In 2024, 49.7% of the population is female, while 50.3% of it is male. According to the 2014 Morocco population census, there were around 84,000 immigrants in the country. Of these foreign-born residents, most were of French origin, followed by individuals mainly from various nations in West Africa and Algeria. There are also a number of foreign residents of Spanish origin. Some of them are descendants of colonial settlers, who primarily work for European multinational companies, while others are married to Moroccans or are retirees. Prior to independence, Morocco was home to half a million Europeans, most of whom were Christians. Also, prior to independence, Morocco was home to 250,000 Spaniards. Morocco&#x27;s once prominent Jewish minority has decreased significantly since its peak of 265,000 in 1948, declining to around 3,500 in 2022.

Morocco has a large diaspora, most of which is located in France, which has reportedly over one million Moroccans of up to the third generation. There are also large Moroccan communities in Spain (about 700,000 Moroccans), the Netherlands (360,000), and Belgium (300,000). Other large communities can be found in Italy, Canada, the United States and Israel, where Moroccan Jews are thought to constitute the second biggest Jewish ethnic subgroup. Morocco is also the country with the largest Berber population in the world, with estimates typically ranging between 40–60% of the population.

==== Ethnic groups ====

In Morocco, ethnic identity is deeply intertwined with language and culture, with the population primarily comprising two major groups: Arabs and Berbers. However, the Higher Planning Commission, the country’s state statistics bureau, does not collect data on ethnic demographics, citing the historical difficulty of distinguishing between Arabs and Berbers, even among Berber speakers.

Arabs form the largest and majority ethnic group, making up between 65% and 80% of the Moroccan population. It is estimated that the indigenous Berbers constitute between 30% and 35% of the population. Berbers, who are also known as Amazigh, are typically divided into three main groups with varying dialects who live spread out in rural mountain areas, namely the Rifians in the Rif, the Zayanes in the Middle Atlas, and the Shilha people in the Anti-Atlas. Since the 7th century, the influx of Arab migrants from the Arabian Peninsula has contributed to shaping Morocco’s demographic, cultural, and genetic landscape. Additionally, a considerable portion of the population includes Haratin, Sahrawis, and Gnawa, descendants of West African or mixed-race enslaved peoples, as well as Moriscos, European Muslims expelled from Spain and Portugal in the 17th century.

According to &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 44% of Moroccans are Arab, 24% are Arabized Berbers, 21% are Berbers and 10% are Mauritanian Moors. Additionally, Minority Rights Group International estimates that around 90,000 Sahrawis reside in internationally recognized Morocco, compared to approximately 190,000 in the disputed Western Sahara.

===Religion===

The religious affiliation in the country was estimated by the Pew Forum in 2010 as 99% Muslim, with all remaining groups accounting for less than 1% of the population. Of those affiliated with Islam, virtually all are Sunni Muslims, with Shia Muslims accounting for less than 0.1%. However, nearly 15% of Moroccans nonetheless describe themselves as non religious according to a 2018 survey conducted by the research network Arab Barometer; the same survey saw nearly 100 percent of respondents identify as Muslims. Another 2021 Arab Barometer survey found that 67.8% of Moroccans identified as religious, 29.1% as somewhat religious, and 3.1% as non religious. The 2015 Gallup International poll reported that 93% of Moroccans considered themselves to be religious.

Prior to Morocco&#x27;s independence in 1956, the country was home to a significant Christian community, numbering over 500,000 Christians, predominantly of Spanish and French ancestry. These Catholic settlers had a historic legacy and a powerful presence. However, following Morocco&#x27;s independence, many of these Christian settlers left to Spain or France. The predominantly Catholic and Protestant foreign-resident Christian community consists of approximately 40,000 practising members. Most foreign resident Christians reside in the Casablanca, Tangier, Marrakesh and Rabat urban areas. Meanwhile, the Moroccan Association of Human Rights estimates there are 25,000 Christian citizens.

Before the founding of the State of Israel in 1948, there were about 265,000 Jews in the country, which gave Morocco the largest Jewish community in the Muslim world. The most recent estimates put the size of the historic Casablanca Jewish community at about 2,500, and the Rabat and Marrakesh Jewish communities at about 100 members each. The remainder of the Jewish population is dispersed throughout the country. This population is mostly elderly, with a decreasing number of young people. The Baháʼí Faith community, located in urban areas, numbers 350 to 400 persons.

===Languages===
Morocco&#x27;s official languages are Arabic and Berber. The country&#x27;s distinctive group of Moroccan Arabic dialects is referred to as Darija. Approximately 92.7% of the whole population can speak Arabic. Berber languages are spoken by 24.8% of the population in three dialects (Tarifit spoken by 3.2%, Tashelhit spoken by 14.2% and Central Atlas Tamazight spoken by 7.4%). According to the 2024 census, 99.2%, or almost the entire literate population of Morocco, could read and write in Arabic, whereas 1.5% of the population could read and write in Berber. The census also reported that 80.6% of Moroccans consider Arabic to be their native language, while 18.9% regard any of the various Berber languages as their mother tongue. After Morocco declared independence in 1956, French and Arabic became the main languages of administration and education.

French is widely used in governmental institutions, media, mid-size and large companies, international commerce with French-speaking countries and often in international diplomacy. French is taught as an obligatory language in all schools. According to the 2004 census, 2.19 million Moroccans spoke a foreign language other than French. English, while far behind French in terms of number of speakers, is the first foreign language of choice, since French is obligatory, among educated youth and professionals. In 2010, there were 10,366,000 French-speakers in Morocco, or about 32% of the population.

According to &quot;Ethnologue&quot;, as of 2016, there are 1,536,590 individuals (or approximately 4.5% of the population) in Morocco who speak Spanish. Spanish is mostly spoken in northern Morocco and the former Spanish Sahara because Spain had previously occupied those areas. Meanwhile, a 2018 study by the Instituto Cervantes found 1.7 million Moroccans who were at least proficient in Spanish, placing Morocco as the country with the most Spanish speakers outside the Hispanophone world (unless the United States is also excluded from Spanish-speaking countries). A significant portion of northern Morocco receives Spanish media, television signal and radio airwaves, which reportedly facilitate competence in the language in the region.

===Education===
Education in Morocco is free and compulsory through primary school. The estimated literacy rate for the country in 2012 was 72%. In September 2006, UNESCO awarded Morocco, amongst other countries such as Cuba, Pakistan, India and Turkey, the &quot;UNESCO 2006 Literacy Prize&quot;.

Morocco has more than four dozen universities, institutes of higher learning and polytechnics dispersed at urban centres throughout the country. Its leading institutions include Mohammed V University in Rabat, the country&#x27;s largest university, with branches in Casablanca and Fès; the Hassan II Agriculture and Veterinary Institute in Rabat, which conducts leading social science research in addition to its agricultural specialties; and Al-Akhawayn University in Ifrane, the first English-language university in Northwest Africa, inaugurated in 1995 with contributions from Saudi Arabia and the United States.

The al-Qarawiyin University, founded by Fatima al-Fihri in the city of Fez in 859 as a madrasa, is considered by some sources, including UNESCO, to be the &quot;oldest university of the world&quot;. Morocco has also some of prestigious postgraduate schools, including: Mohammed VI Polytechnic University, l&#x27;, École Nationale Supérieure d&#x27;Électricité et de Mecanique (ENSEM), EMI, ISCAE, INSEA, National School of Mineral Industry, École Hassania des Travaux Publics, Les Écoles nationales de commerce et de gestion and École supérieure de technologie de Casablanca.

=== Health ===
Many efforts are made by countries around the world to address health issues and eradicate disease, Morocco included. Morocco is a developing country that has made many strides to improve these categories. According to research published, in 2005, only 16% of citizens in Morocco had health insurance or coverage. In data from the World Bank, Morocco experiences high infant mortality rates at 20 deaths per 1,000 births (2017) and high maternal mortality rates at 121 deaths per 100,000 births (2015).

The government of Morocco sets up surveillance systems within the already existing healthcare system to monitor and collect data. Mass education in hygiene is implemented in primary education schools which are free for residents of Morocco. In 2005, the government of Morocco approved two reforms to expand health insurance coverage. The first reform was a mandatory health insurance plan for public and private sector employees to expand coverage from 16 percent of the population to 30 percent. The second reform created a fund to cover services for the poor. Both reforms improved access to high-quality care. Infant mortality has improved significantly since 1960 when there were 144 deaths per 1,000 live births, in 2000, 42 per 1,000 live births, and it is 15 per 1,000 live births in 2022. The country&#x27;s under-five mortality rate dropped by 60% between 1990 and 2011.

According to data from the World Bank, the present mortality rate is still very high, over seven times higher than in neighbouring country Spain. In 2014, Morocco adopted a national plan to increase progress on maternal and child health. The Moroccan Plan was started by the Moroccan Minister of Health, El Houssaine Louardi and Ala Alwan, WHO Regional Director for the Eastern Mediterranean Region, on 13 November 2013 in Rabat. Morocco has made significant progress in reducing deaths among both children and mothers. Based on World Bank data, the nation&#x27;s maternal mortality ratio fell by 67% between 1990 and 2010.

In 2014, spending on healthcare accounted for 5.9% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Since 2014, spending on healthcare as part of the GDP has decreased. However, health expenditure per capita (PPP) has steadily increased since 2000. In 2015, the Moroccan health expenditure was $435.29 per capita. In 2016, the life expectancy at birth was 74.3, or 73.3 for men and 75.4 for women, and there were 6.3 physicians and 8.9 nurses and midwives per 10,000 inhabitants. In 2024, according to the World Factbook, life expectancy for Morocco is 74.2 years.

== Culture ==
Morocco is a country with a rich culture and civilisation. Through Moroccan history, it has hosted many people. Culturally speaking, Morocco has combined its Arabic, Berber and Jewish cultural heritage with external influences such as the French and the Spanish and, during the last decades, the Anglo-American lifestyles. Since independence, painting and sculpture, music, amateur theatre and filmmaking have developed. The Moroccan National Theatre (founded 1956) offers regular productions of Moroccan and French dramatic works. Art and music festivals take place throughout the country during the summer months, among them the World Sacred Music Festival at Fès.

===Architecture===

===Literature===
Moroccan literature is written mostly in Arabic, Berber, Hebrew and French. Particularly under the Almoravid and Almohad empires, Moroccan literature was closely related to the literature of al-Andalus, and shared important poetic and literary forms such as &quot;zajal&quot;, the &quot;muwashshah&quot; and the &quot;maqama&quot;. Islamic literature, such as Quranic exegeses and other religious works such as Qadi Ayyad&#x27;s &quot;Al-Shifa&quot;, were influential. The University of al-Qarawiyyin in Fes was an important literary centre attracting scholars from abroad, including Maimonides, Ibn al-Khatib, and Ibn Khaldun.

Under the Almohad dynasty Morocco experienced a period of prosperity and brilliance of learning. The Almohad built the Kutubiyya Mosque in Marrakesh, which accommodated no fewer than 25,000 people, but was also famed for its books, manuscripts, libraries and book shops, which gave it its name; the first book bazaar in history. The Almohad Caliph Abu Yakub had a great love for collecting books. He founded a great library, which was eventually carried to the Casbah and turned into a public library.

Modern Moroccan literature began in the 1930s. Two main factors gave Morocco a pulse toward witnessing the birth of modern literature. Morocco, as a French and Spanish protectorate left Moroccan intellectuals the opportunity to exchange and to produce literary works freely with the contact of other Arabic literature and Europe. Three generations of writers especially shaped 20th century Moroccan literature. The first was the generation that lived and wrote during the Protectorate (1912–1956), its most important representative being Mohammed Ben Brahim (1897–1955). The second generation played an important role in the transition to independence, with writers like Abdelkrim Ghallab (1919–2006), Allal al-Fassi (1910–1974) and Mohammed al-Mokhtar Soussi (1900–1963). The third generation is that of writers of the sixties. Moroccan literature had writers such as Mohamed Choukri, Driss Chraïbi, Mohamed Zafzaf and Driss El Khouri.

During the 1950s and 1960s, Morocco was a refuge and artistic centre and attracted writers as Paul Bowles, Tennessee Williams and William S. Burroughs. Moroccan literature flourished with novelists such as Mohamed Zafzaf and Mohamed Choukri, who wrote in Arabic, and Driss Chraïbi and Tahar Ben Jelloun who wrote in French. Other important Moroccan authors include: Abdellatif Laabi, Abdelkrim Ghallab, Fouad Laroui, Mohammed Berrada and Leila Abouzeid. Orature (oral literature) is also an integral part of Moroccan culture, be it in Moroccan Arabic or Berber.

===Music===

Moroccan music is of Arabic, Berber and sub-Saharan origins. Rock-influenced chaabi bands are widespread, as is trance music with historical origins in Islamic music. Amazigh people have also played music using a &quot;lotar&quot;, a type of lute from the Rwais tribe in the High Atlas mountains. The lotar is usually played by a duo, which may also include a &quot;rebab&quot;. The Berber music is usually monodic with a pentatonic scale system. Malḥūn poetry in oral form is also accompanied by traditional instruments, such as lutes, violins, rebabs and small drums.
&quot;Aita&quot; is a Bedouin musical style sung in the countryside. Chaabi (&quot;popular&quot;) is music consisting of numerous varieties that are descended from the multifarious forms of Moroccan folk music. Chaabi was originally performed in markets, but is now found at any celebration or meeting. Morocco is also home to Andalusian classical music that is found throughout Northwest Africa. It probably evolved under the Moors in Cordoba, and the Persian-born musician Ziryab is usually credited with its invention. A genre known as Contemporary Andalusian music is the brainchild of Morisco visual artist, composer and oudist Tarik Banzi, founder of the Al-Andalus Ensemble. Artists like Nass El Ghiwane and Jil Jilala mix traditional styles with modern influences. Popular Western forms of music are also becoming increasingly popular in Morocco, such as fusion, rock, country, metal and, in particular, hip hop. Arabic pop artists such as Hatim Ammor and ElGrandeToto are well-known.

===Media===

Cinema in Morocco has a long history, stretching back over a century to the filming of &quot;Le chevrier Marocain&quot; (&quot;The Moroccan Goatherd&quot;) by Louis Lumière in 1897. Between that time and 1944, many foreign movies were shot in the country, especially in the Ouarzazate area. In 1944, the (CCM), the nation&#x27;s film regulatory agency, was established. Studios were also opened in Rabat.

In 1952, Orson Welles&#x27; &quot;Othello&quot; won the at the Cannes Film Festival under the Moroccan flag. However, the Festival&#x27;s musicians did not play the Moroccan national anthem, as no one in attendance knew what it was. Six years later, Mohammed Ousfour would create the first Moroccan movie, &quot;Le fils maudit&quot; (&quot;The Damned Son&quot;). In 1968, the first Mediterranean Film Festival was held in Tangier. In its current incarnation, the event is held in Tetouan. This was followed in 1982 with the first national festival of cinema, which was held in Rabat. In 2001, the first International Film Festival of Marrakech (FIFM) was held in Marrakech. Some of Moroccan television channels include 2M, Al Aoula (Societe Nationale de Radiodiffusion et de Television) and Medi 1 TV.

===Cuisine===
Moroccan cuisine is considered one of the most diversified cuisines in the world. This is a result of the centuries-long interaction of Morocco with the outside world. The cuisine of Morocco is mainly a fusion of Moorish, European and Mediterranean cuisines. Spices are used extensively in Moroccan cuisine. While spices have been imported to Morocco for thousands of years, many ingredients such as saffron from Tiliouine, mint and olives from Meknes, and oranges and lemons from Fez, are home-grown.

Chicken is the most widely eaten meat in Morocco. The most commonly eaten red meat in Morocco is beef; lamb is preferred but is relatively expensive. The main Moroccan dish most people are familiar with is couscous, the old national delicacy. Beef is the most commonly eaten red meat in Morocco, usually eaten in a tagine with vegetables or legumes. Chicken is also very commonly used in tagines; one of the most famous tagine is the tagine of chicken, potatoes and olives. Lamb is also consumed, but as Northwest African sheep breeds store most of their fat in their tails, Moroccan lamb does not have the pungent flavour that Western lamb and mutton have. Poultry is also very common, and the use of seafood is increasing in Moroccan food. In addition, there are dried salted meats and salted preserved meats such as kliia/khlia and &quot;g&#x27;did&quot; which are used to flavor tagines or used in &quot;el ghraif&quot;, a folded savory Moroccan pancake.

Among the most famous Moroccan dishes are Couscous, Pastilla (also spelled Bsteeya or Bestilla), Tajine, Tanjia and Harira. Although the latter is a soup, it is considered a dish in itself and is served as such or with dates especially during the month of Ramadan. Pork consumption is forbidden in accordance with Sharia, religious laws of Islam.

A big part of the daily meal is bread. Bread in Morocco is principally from durum wheat semolina known as khobz. Bakeries are very common throughout Morocco and fresh bread is a staple in every city, town and village. The most common is whole grain coarse ground or white flour bread. There are also a number of flat breads and pulled unleavened pan-fried breads. The most popular drink is &quot;atai&quot;, green tea with mint leaves and other ingredients.

===Sport===
Football is the country&#x27;s most popular sport, popular among the urban youth in particular. In 1986, Morocco became the first Arab and African country to qualify for the second round of the FIFA World Cup. Morocco hosted the Africa Cup of Nations in 1988 and will host it again in 2025 after original host Guinea was stripped from hosting rights due to inadequacy of hosting preparations. Morocco was originally scheduled to host the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations, but refused to host the tournament on the scheduled dates because of fears over the Ebola outbreak on the continent. Morocco made six attempts to host the FIFA World Cup but lost five times to the United States, France, Germany, South Africa and a Canada–Mexico–United States joint bid, however Morocco will co-host it in 2030 along with Portugal and Spain having finally won the bid in their sixth attempt. In 2022, Morocco became the first African and Arab team to reach the semifinals and finished 4th in the tournament.

At the 1984 Olympic Games, two Moroccans won gold medals in track and field. Nawal El Moutawakel won in the 400 metres hurdles; she was the first woman from an Arab or Islamic country to win an Olympic gold medal. Saïd Aouita won the 5000 metres at the same games. Hicham El Guerrouj won gold medals for Morocco at the 2004 Summer Olympics in the 1500 metres and 5000 metres and holds several world records in the mile run.

Spectator sports in Morocco traditionally centred on the art of horsemanship until European sports—football, polo, swimming and tennis—were introduced at the end of the 19th century. Tennis and golf have become popular. Several Moroccan professional players have competed in international competition, and the country fielded its first Davis Cup team in 1999. Morocco established one of Africa&#x27;s first competitive leagues in basketball. Rugby came to Morocco in the early 20th century, mainly by the French who occupied the country. As a result, Moroccan rugby was tied to the fortunes of France, during the first and second World War, with many Moroccan players going away to fight. Like many other Maghreb nations, Moroccan rugby tended to look to Europe for inspiration, rather than to the rest of Africa. Kickboxing is also popular in Morocco. The Moroccan-Dutch Badr Hari, heavyweight kickboxer and martial artist, is a former K-1 heavyweight champion and K-1 World Grand Prix 2008 and 2009 finalist.

== See also ==

* Index of Morocco-related articles
* Outline of Morocco

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==
* Pennell, C. R. &quot;Morocco Since 1830: A History&quot;, New York University Press, 2000. 
* Pennell, C. R. &quot;Morocco: From Empire to Independence&quot;, Oneworld Publications, 2013. (preview )
* Stenner, David. &quot;Globalizing Morocco: Transnational Activism and the Postcolonial State&quot; (Stanford UP, 2019). online review 
* Terrasse, Henri. &quot;History of Morocco&quot;, Éd. Atlantides, 1952.

; In French
* Bernard Lugan, &quot;Histoire du Maroc&quot;, Éd. Perrin, 2000. 
* Michel Abitbol, &quot;Histoire du Maroc&quot;, Éd. Perrin, 2009. 

== External links ==

* Official website of the government of Morocco 
* Official bulletins of the government of Morocco 
* Parliament of Morocco 
* Official website of the Moroccan National Tourist Office 
* Census results of 1994 and 2004 
* Morocco . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Morocco profile from the BBC News
* Key Development Forecasts for Morocco from International Futures
* EU Neighbourhood Info Centre: Morocco 
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Morocco </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="0" end="7" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="24" end="42" title="Morocco" label="Kingdom of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="64" end="71" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="82" end="94" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="113" end="130" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="152" end="166" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="206" end="213" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742537" start="217" end="225" title="Algeria–Morocco border" label="the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="257" end="271" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089130" start="275" end="284" title="Morocco–Western Sahara border" label="the south"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="310" end="317" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="318" end="326" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="330" end="335" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="337" end="344" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191146" start="349" end="376" title="Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera" label="Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q191011" start="396" end="422" title="Plazas de soberanía" label="Spanish-controlled islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q286806" start="671" end="689" title="culture of Morocco" label="culture of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="702" end="706" title="Arab culture" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="708" end="714" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q149416" start="716" end="723" title="Culture of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="728" end="736" title="Culture of Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="762" end="767" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="795" end="805" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="869" end="880" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="913" end="928" title="Idrisid dynasty" label="Idrisid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q438601" start="948" end="955" title="Idris I of Morocco" label="Idris I"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="1067" end="1081" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="1124" end="1133" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="1138" end="1145" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1188" end="1205" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="1236" end="1265" title="Arab migration to the Maghreb" label="Arab migration to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="1421" end="1429" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1461" end="1475" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="1507" end="1514" title="Marinid Sultanate" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="1519" end="1524" title="Saadi Sultanate" label="Saadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129036" start="1652" end="1671" title="&amp;#x27;Alawi dynasty" label="&amp;#x27;Alawi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q378426" start="1773" end="1783" title="diplomatic" label="diplomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1818" end="1831" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1986" end="2010" title="#French and Spanish protectorates" label="respective protectorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497642" start="2025" end="2054" title="Tangier International Zone" label="international zone in Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622706" start="2250" end="2271" title="List of African countries by GDP (nominal)" label="fifth-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="2338" end="2348" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="2369" end="2381" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="2428" end="2439" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="2445" end="2463" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="2469" end="2496" title="Union for the Mediterranean" label="Union for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="2506" end="2519" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="2534" end="2541" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="2547" end="2570" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="2603" end="2619" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14566719" start="2634" end="2649" title="King of Morocco" label="King of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842743" start="2658" end="2672" title="Prime Minister of Morocco" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="2680" end="2697" title="Legislature" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572773" start="2747" end="2771" title="House of Representatives (Morocco)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718576" start="2780" end="2800" title="House of Councillors (Morocco)" label="House of Councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q34511" start="2995" end="3003" title="Royal Moroccan Armed Forces" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011948" start="3071" end="3089" title="Moroccan Dahir" label="&amp;quot;dahirs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066147" start="3178" end="3192" title="List of heads of government of Morocco" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="3273" end="3301" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="3305" end="3319" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418613" start="3349" end="3367" title="Southern Provinces" label="Southern Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q549912" start="3390" end="3424" title="Madrid Accords" label="agreed to decolonise the territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="3461" end="3471" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093550" start="3475" end="3488" title="Western Sahara War" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="3536" end="3553" title="Sahrawi people" label="local inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458092" start="3588" end="3597" title="Tiris al-Gharbiyya" label="its claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036120" start="3793" end="3823" title="Western Sahara peace process" label="efforts to resolve the dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3908" end="3915" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="3942" end="3955" title="anglicisation" label="anglicisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3963" end="3970" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="4032" end="4041" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="4072" end="4089" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="4095" end="4112" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="4122" end="4137" title="Saadian dynasty" label="Saadian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="4264" end="4270" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q565568" start="4552" end="4558" title="Tiaret" label="Tiaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="4566" end="4574" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="4649" end="4656" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="4660" end="4666" title="Béjaïa" label="Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="4705" end="4715" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="4719" end="4726" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4752" end="4758" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="4833" end="4840" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="4908" end="4911" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q438601" start="5000" end="5021" title="Idris I of Morocco" label="Idris I ibn Abd Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="5325" end="5337" title="Indo-Iranian languages" label="Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="5359" end="5366" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="5368" end="5372" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="5378" end="5385" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107334321" start="5469" end="5485" title="Sharifism" label="Sharifi heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129036" start="5499" end="5512" title="Alawi dynasty" label="Alawi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5723" end="5740" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="5903" end="5915" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="5982" end="5996" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="6000" end="6012" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="6074" end="6091" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="6097" end="6104" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="6153" end="6160" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470903" start="6220" end="6234" title="Iberomaurusian" label="Iberomaurusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167862" start="6246" end="6254" title="Taforalt" label="Taforalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="6379" end="6388" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="6506" end="6515" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758238" start="6601" end="6627" title="Early European Farmers" label="European Neolithic Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="6678" end="6686" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="6751" end="6757" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855698" start="6853" end="6865" title="Proto-Berber language" label="proto-Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6932" end="6938" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6950" end="6954" title="Iron Age" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="6983" end="7002" title="Classical Antiquity" label="Classical Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7075" end="7088" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="7102" end="7113" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314811" start="7206" end="7213" title="Chellah" label="Chellah"/>
<link wikidata="Q923835" start="7215" end="7220" title="Lixus (ancient city)" label="Lixus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="7226" end="7233" title="Mogador" label="Mogador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="7384" end="7400" title="ancient Carthage" label="ancient Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="7493" end="7521" title="Mauretania" label="Berber kingdom of Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841456" start="7534" end="7538" title="Baga (king)" label="Baga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="7606" end="7616" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="7655" end="7665" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="7675" end="7681" title="Client state" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7697" end="7709" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="7728" end="7736" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="7787" end="7801" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="7823" end="7831" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="7923" end="7935" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7967" end="7972" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931065" start="8005" end="8022" title="Berber Christians" label="Berber Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244742" start="8032" end="8052" title="Mauretania Tingitana" label="Mauretania Tingitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="8065" end="8092" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="8247" end="8252" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244742" start="8257" end="8277" title="Mauretania Tingitana" label="Mauretania Tingitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617666" start="8282" end="8291" title="Cherchell" label="Cherchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q734505" start="8295" end="8318" title="Mauretania Caesariensis" label="Mauretania Caesariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="8368" end="8375" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080783" start="8450" end="8467" title="Mauro-Roman kingdom" label="Mauro-Roman kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8510" end="8530" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247360" start="8607" end="8612" title="Tingi" label="Tingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="8692" end="8722" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="8789" end="8806" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8845" end="8850" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="8937" end="8966" title="Arab migration to the Maghreb" label="Arab migration to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="9150" end="9158" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="9221" end="9229" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="9295" end="9308" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709337" start="9451" end="9467" title="Kingdom of Nekor" label="Kingdom of Nekor"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="9487" end="9500" title="Rif Mountains" label="Rif Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404494" start="9520" end="9538" title="Salih I ibn Mansur" label="Salih I ibn Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q759998" start="9617" end="9630" title="Berber Revolt" label="Berber Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423557" start="9695" end="9702" title="Miknasa" label="Miknasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="9706" end="9715" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="9724" end="9734" title="Barghawata" label="Barghawata"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="9756" end="9771" title="Idrisid dynasty" label="Idrisid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="9798" end="9811" title="Hasan ibn Ali" label="Hasan ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q438601" start="9813" end="9831" title="Idris ibn Abdallah" label="Idris ibn Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="9893" end="9901" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="9909" end="9914" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="10079" end="10082" title="Fes, Morocco" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="10159" end="10173" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="10214" end="10231" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="10354" end="10362" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="10460" end="10467" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="10468" end="10485" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="10494" end="10501" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="10502" end="10517" title="Almohad dynasty" label="Almohad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="10550" end="10560" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="10564" end="10570" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="10657" end="10674" title="Arab migration to the Maghreb" label="massive migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="10682" end="10692" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="10741" end="10747" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="10755" end="10763" title="Marinids" label="Marinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="10915" end="10924" title="Wattasids" label="Wattasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="10951" end="10962" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672654" start="11012" end="11016" title="History of the Jews in Morocco" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="11034" end="11044" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="11367" end="11375" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="11387" end="11400" title="Saadi dynasty" label="Saadi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129036" start="11443" end="11456" title="Alawi dynasty" label="Alawi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="11539" end="11544" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332476" start="11648" end="11681" title="Portuguese succession crisis of 1580" label="ended the Portuguese Aviz dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121532" start="11697" end="11721" title="Battle of Alcácer Quibir" label="Battle of Alcácer Quibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q400911" start="11736" end="11751" title="Ahmad al-Mansur" label="Ahmad al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119106" start="11808" end="11824" title="Saadian invasion of the Songhai Empire" label="large expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="11875" end="11889" title="Songhay Empire" label="Songhay Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="11944" end="11950" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q303729" start="12188" end="12197" title="Al-Rashid of Morocco" label="al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q276938" start="12453" end="12470" title="Ismail Ibn Sharif" label="Ismail Ibn Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="12525" end="12528" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378393" start="12554" end="12561" title="English Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q606775" start="12635" end="12642" title="Larache" label="Larache"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="12677" end="12684" title="Mazagan" label="Mazagão"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337399" start="12741" end="12757" title="Siege of Melilla (1774)" label="siege of Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="12932" end="12951" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q548563" start="13083" end="13095" title="Mohammed ben Abdallah" label="Mohammed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q374130" start="13225" end="13263" title="Moroccan–American Treaty of Friendship" label="Moroccan–American Treaty of Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14021" end="14035" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="14053" end="14072" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="14109" end="14122" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163573" start="14184" end="14204" title="Algeciras Conference" label="Algeciras Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="14218" end="14231" title="Agadir Crisis" label="Agadir Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q931982" start="14293" end="14306" title="Treaty of Fez" label="Treaty of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="14322" end="14334" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16130700" start="14364" end="14378" title="1912 Fez riots" label="1912 Fez riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q442872" start="14479" end="14495" title="protecting power" label="protecting power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="14535" end="14541" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q265104" start="15025" end="15039" title="Hubert Lyautey" label="Hubert Lyautey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602100" start="15221" end="15228" title="Goumier" label="Goumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="15276" end="15287" title="French army" label="French army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15296" end="15307" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15312" end="15324" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="15345" end="15361" title="Francoism" label="Nationalist Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="15369" end="15386" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812763" start="15404" end="15413" title="Regulares" label="Regulares"/>
<link wikidata="Q114952492" start="15441" end="15448" title="slavery in Morocco" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q766437" start="15499" end="15507" title="Rif War" label="uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="15515" end="15518" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q202650" start="15537" end="15548" title="Muhammad Ibn &amp;#x27;Abd al-Karim al-Khattabi" label="Abd el-Krim"/>
<link wikidata="Q37102" start="15582" end="15601" title="Republic of the Rif" label="Republic of the Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138460" start="15758" end="15764" title="Battle of Annual" label="Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q477273" start="15968" end="15982" title="Istiqlal Party" label="Istiqlal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755512" start="16107" end="16138" title="Revolution of the King and the People" label="transnational activist networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193874" start="16331" end="16341" title="Mohammed V of Morocco" label="Mohammed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="16353" end="16363" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q604530" start="16401" end="16420" title="Mohammed Ben Aarafa" label="Mohammed Ben Aarafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="16526" end="16531" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="16939" end="16944" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="16949" end="16956" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="17057" end="17068" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="17175" end="17184" title="Hassan II of Morocco" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587207" start="17248" end="17273" title="Moroccan parliamentary election, 1963" label="general elections in 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891008" start="17727" end="17735" title="Sand War" label="Sand War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="17990" end="17997" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q763141" start="18001" end="18005" title="Ifni" label="Ifni"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="18057" end="18075" title="Polisario movement" label="Polisario movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q870684" start="18324" end="18335" title="Green March" label="Green March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093550" start="18631" end="18661" title="Western Sahara War" label="soon clashed in Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="19025" end="19029" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="SADR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211603" start="19200" end="19216" title="Sahrawi refugees" label="Sahrawi refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342928" start="19495" end="19514" title="Houston Agreement" label="proposed referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="19794" end="19805" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47837" start="20359" end="20367" title="El Aaiún" label="El Aaiún"/>
<link wikidata="Q191750" start="20459" end="20466" title="Perejil Island" label="Perejil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="20837" end="20845" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="20995" end="21008" title="Juan Carlos I" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144666" start="21113" end="21140" title="2011–2012 Moroccan protests" label="2011–2012 Moroccan protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969170" start="21332" end="21342" title="2011 Moroccan constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="21401" end="21412" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757124" start="21436" end="21453" title="2011 Moroccan general election" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255232" start="21491" end="21520" title="Justice and Development Party (Morocco)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q307921" start="21552" end="21571" title="Abdelilah Benkirane" label="Abdelilah Benkirane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130427" start="22094" end="22109" title="Ramtane Lamamra" label="Ramtane Lamamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26734737" start="22135" end="22150" title="Pegasus (spyware)" label="Pegasus spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="22174" end="22195" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q115979" start="22252" end="22267" title="Aminatou Haidar" label="Aminatou Haidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122351413" start="22338" end="22348" title="2023 Al Haouz earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q106032" start="22420" end="22429" title="Epicenter" label="epicentre"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102352" start="22518" end="22556" title="Israel–Morocco normalization agreement" label="Israel–Morocco normalisation agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="22843" end="22859" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q26036628" start="22887" end="22901" title="Nasser Bourita" label="Nasser Bourita"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="23042" end="23056" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="23079" end="23098" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="23108" end="23125" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="23145" end="23150" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748217" start="23203" end="23215" title="Morocco–Spain border" label="land borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="23252" end="23259" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="23262" end="23267" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="23269" end="23276" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191146" start="23281" end="23308" title="Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera" label="Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="23311" end="23318" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="23336" end="23350" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="23463" end="23473" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="23588" end="23603" title="Northern Africa" label="Northern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="23628" end="23648" title="North Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="23768" end="23773" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="23778" end="23784" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="23883" end="23898" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="23966" end="23979" title="Rif Mountains" label="Rif Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="24061" end="24074" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254926" start="24301" end="24304" title="27th parallel north" label="27°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698951" start="24337" end="24341" title="14th meridian west" label="14°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="24374" end="24379" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q894940" start="24407" end="24428" title="Bou Regreg" label="Oued Bou Regreg River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="24465" end="24475" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599909" start="24533" end="24553" title="2014 Moroccan census" label="2014 Moroccan census"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="24558" end="24561" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="24563" end="24572" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="24574" end="24580" title="Meknes" label="Meknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="24582" end="24586" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="24591" end="24598" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="24858" end="24871" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433137" start="25064" end="25076" title="Middle Atlas" label="Middle Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q584279" start="25085" end="25095" title="High Atlas" label="High Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q870684" start="25227" end="25238" title="Green March" label="Green March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418613" start="25330" end="25348" title="Southern Provinces" label="Southern Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="25462" end="25467" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="25469" end="25476" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191146" start="25478" end="25505" title="Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera" label="Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184963" start="25507" end="25525" title="Peñón de Alhucemas" label="Peñón de Alhucemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q130574" start="25531" end="25541" title="Islas Chafarinas" label="Chafarinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191750" start="25573" end="25580" title="Isla Perejil" label="Perejil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="25609" end="25623" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="25649" end="25656" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="25673" end="25683" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q289218" start="25790" end="25805" title="transit passage" label="transit passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140221" start="25877" end="25895" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2" label="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q41439" start="26025" end="26028" title=".ma" label=".ma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26094" end="26118" title="Mediterranean climate#Hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="hot summer Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="26153" end="26163" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q213197" start="26248" end="26262" title="Canary Current" label="Canary Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="26272" end="26280" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="26952" end="26959" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="27619" end="27625" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="27705" end="27710" title="Oasis" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="27768" end="27773" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="28198" end="28212" title="Forest" label="Forested areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="29080" end="29087" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185157" start="29089" end="29096" title="Tetouan" label="Tetouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310350" start="29098" end="29108" title="Al Hoceima" label="Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="29110" end="29115" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q183405" start="29120" end="29124" title="Safi, Morocco" label="Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="29723" end="29728" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="29730" end="29740" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q478207" start="29742" end="29749" title="Kénitra" label="Kénitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="29751" end="29755" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="29760" end="29769" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="30412" end="30415" title="Fès" label="Fès"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="30417" end="30423" title="Meknès" label="Meknès"/>
<link wikidata="Q676778" start="30425" end="30436" title="Chefchaouen" label="Chefchaouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q817279" start="30438" end="30449" title="Beni-Mellal" label="Beni-Mellal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574469" start="30454" end="30458" title="Taza" label="Taza"/>
<link wikidata="Q990115" start="30929" end="30937" title="Khenifra" label="Khenifra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676569" start="30939" end="30947" title="Imilchil" label="Imilchil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501809" start="30949" end="30955" title="Midelt" label="Midelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934167" start="30960" end="30966" title="Azilal" label="Azilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090623" start="31430" end="31440" title="Oukaïmeden" label="Oukaimeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001887" start="31477" end="31483" title="Ifrane" label="Ifrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q794128" start="31485" end="31490" title="Azrou" label="Azrou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745175" start="31495" end="31503" title="Boulmane" label="Boulmane"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="31849" end="31855" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="31857" end="31866" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="31871" end="31876" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q180372" start="32207" end="32214" title="sirocco" label="sirocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q94645457" start="32467" end="32481" title="Climate change in Morocco" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q391581" start="32670" end="32702" title="Climate Change Performance Index" label="Climate Change Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133491" start="32733" end="32759" title="Climate change in Sweden" label="preparedness behind Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="32810" end="32822" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="32842" end="32861" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="33033" end="33041" title="Bird" label="Avifauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="33144" end="33154" title="introduced species" label="introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969096" start="33254" end="33293" title="Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests" label="Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102173570" start="33295" end="33334" title="Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe" label="Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890828" start="33336" end="33401" title="Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets" label="Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888780" start="33403" end="33441" title="Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe" label="Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616731" start="33443" end="33478" title="Mediterranean woodlands and forests" label="Mediterranean woodlands and forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q41285" start="33483" end="33517" title="North Saharan steppe and woodlands" label="North Saharan steppe and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q221094" start="33524" end="33536" title="Barbary lion" label="Barbary lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q695431" start="33764" end="33774" title="Atlas bear" label="Atlas bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q39153" start="33779" end="33794" title="Barbary leopard" label="Barbary leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q551529" start="33878" end="33900" title="West African crocodile" label="West African crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q486636" start="33918" end="33928" title="Draa river" label="Draa river"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="34851" end="34876" title="The Economist Democracy Index" label="Economist Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424254" start="34909" end="34922" title="hybrid regime" label="hybrid regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="34942" end="34970" title="MENA" label="Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="35056" end="35081" title="World Press Freedom Index" label="World Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="35170" end="35179" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q470946" start="35187" end="35209" title="Abderrahmane Youssoufi" label="Abderrahmane Youssoufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638114" start="35737" end="35752" title="Aziz Akhannouch" label="Aziz Akhannouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616245" start="35759" end="35782" title="Constitution of Morocco" label="Constitution of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004884" start="35814" end="35824" title="Parliament of Morocco" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="35844" end="35853" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969170" start="35864" end="35891" title="Moroccan constitutional referendum, 2011" label="2011 constitutional reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081829" start="36125" end="36150" title="Amir al-Mu&amp;#x27;minin" label="Commander of the Faithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="36195" end="36203" title="Mohammed" label="Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572773" start="36940" end="36978" title="Assembly of Representatives of Morocco" label="Assembly of Representatives of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="37110" end="37124" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718576" start="37186" end="37209" title="Assembly of Councillors" label="Assembly of Councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q41263" start="37614" end="37620" title="budget" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="37643" end="37647" title="bill (proposed law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="37836" end="37857" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q84035221" start="37908" end="37924" title="2021 Moroccan general election" label="8 September 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q845643" start="38081" end="38087" title="Regions of Morocco" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360877" start="38126" end="38157" title="Prefectures and provinces of Morocco" label="62 provinces and 13 prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951300" start="38170" end="38195" title="Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima" label="Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048167" start="38198" end="38206" title="Oriental (Morocco)" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951027" start="38209" end="38219" title="Fès-Meknès" label="Fès-Meknès"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951239" start="38222" end="38240" title="Rabat-Salé-Kénitra" label="Rabat-Salé-Kénitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953016" start="38243" end="38263" title="Béni Mellal-Khénifra" label="Béni Mellal-Khénifra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19843788" start="38266" end="38283" title="Casablanca-Settat" label="Casablanca-Settat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951125" start="38286" end="38300" title="Marrakesh-Safi" label="Marrakesh-Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19950954" start="38303" end="38317" title="Drâa-Tafilalet" label="Drâa-Tafilalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20652586" start="38320" end="38331" title="Souss-Massa" label="Souss-Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951051" start="38334" end="38351" title="Guelmim-Oued Noun" label="Guelmim-Oued Noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951088" start="38354" end="38377" title="Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra" label="Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q21235104" start="38380" end="38400" title="Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab" label="Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="38453" end="38467" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="38487" end="38500" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="38507" end="38518" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="38520" end="38538" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="38546" end="38581" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="38593" end="38613" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q605883" start="38622" end="38655" title="Community of Sahel–Saharan States" label="Community of Sahel–Saharan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="39011" end="39025" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="39122" end="39134" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="39139" end="39146" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079683" start="39241" end="39300" title="Perejil Island crisis" label="dispute with Spain in 2002 over the small island of Perejil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="39367" end="39374" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="39379" end="39384" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="39532" end="39561" title="George W. Bush administration" label="George W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="39592" end="39611" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913195" start="39722" end="39776" title="Morocco–United States relations" label="Morocco established strong ties with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="39866" end="39874" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="39940" end="39952" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="40410" end="40439" title="European Neighbourhood Policy" label="European Neighbourhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="40474" end="40476" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="40538" end="40551" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="40661" end="40693" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955460" start="40954" end="40966" title="Brahim Ghali" label="Brahim Ghali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="41309" end="41323" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q852354" start="41450" end="41496" title="Movement for the Self-Determination of Kabylie" label="Movement for the Self-Determination of Kabylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q740930" start="41600" end="41615" title="Saguia el-Hamra" label="Saguia el-Hamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q929147" start="41620" end="41630" title="Río de Oro" label="Río de Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093550" start="41656" end="41674" title="Western Sahara War" label="Western Sahara War"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="41683" end="41698" title="Polisario Front" label="Polisario Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q695186" start="41980" end="41987" title="MINURSO" label="MINURSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399038" start="42143" end="42152" title="Free Zone (Western Sahara region)" label="Free Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="42224" end="42256" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q328510" start="42305" end="42312" title="Tindouf" label="Tindouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q160016" start="42328" end="42343" title="member state of the United Nations" label="UN member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119685" start="42446" end="42456" title="autonomy for Western Sahara" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049108" start="42500" end="42542" title="Royal Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs" label="Royal Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="42586" end="42617" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="42918" end="42938" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16131322" start="43119" end="43140" title="Israel–Morocco relations" label="relations with Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q101559356" start="43248" end="43258" title="Western Saharan clashes (2020–present)" label="Guerguerat"/>
<link wikidata="Q101559356" start="43259" end="43266" title="Western Saharan clashes (2020–present)" label="clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118919" start="43320" end="43330" title="Guerguerat" label="Guerguerat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616232" start="43542" end="43546" title="Royal Moroccan Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721678" start="43573" end="43577" title="Royal Moroccan Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062751" start="43583" end="43592" title="Royal Moroccan Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095418" start="43598" end="43609" title="Moroccan Royal Guard" label="Royal Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238830" start="43615" end="43632" title="Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie" label="Royal Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q637615" start="43641" end="43657" title="Auxiliary Forces" label="Auxiliary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q569394" start="43766" end="43790" title="2003 Casablanca bombings" label="2003 Casablanca bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="43943" end="43958" title="Polisario Front" label="Polisario Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="44203" end="44212" title="Hassan II" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851214" start="44501" end="44514" title="Years of Lead (Morocco)" label="Years of Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="44563" end="44583" title="forced disappearance" label="forced disappearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735054" start="44677" end="44686" title="Tazmamart" label="Tazmamart"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="44736" end="44750" title="Hassan II of Morocco" label="King Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q830889" start="44809" end="44845" title="Equity and Reconciliation Commission" label="Equity and Reconciliation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="44869" end="44887" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="45132" end="45136" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="45223" end="45230" title="Sahrawi people" label="Sahrawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="45235" end="45247" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="45256" end="45265" title="Polisario" label="Polisario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136379" start="45266" end="45279" title="Independence Intifada (Western Sahara)" label="demonstrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418613" start="45382" end="45400" title="Southern Provinces" label="Southern Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="45504" end="45519" title="LGBT rights by country or territory" label="Homosexual acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="45656" end="45667" title="Proselytism" label="proselytise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566690" start="45696" end="45701" title="Islam in Morocco" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="46260" end="46275" title="liberal economy" label="liberal economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="46292" end="46316" title="Supply and demand" label="law of supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="46367" end="46380" title="privatization" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153937" start="46446" end="46456" title="Politics of Morocco" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463027" start="46532" end="46563" title="List of African countries by GDP (PPP)" label="sixth largest economy in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="46633" end="46660" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q375508" start="46668" end="46689" title="quality-of-life index" label="quality-of-life index"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="46700" end="46712" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="46823" end="46828" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="49318" end="49325" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="49386" end="49415" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="Global Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q518888" start="49818" end="49828" title="Tanger-Med" label="Tanger-Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815809" start="50293" end="50327" title="ONCF" label="Office National des Chemins de Fer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445967" start="50527" end="50582" title="Ministry of Equipment, Transport and Logistics (Morocco)" label="Moroccan Ministry of Equipment, Transport and Logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="50687" end="50691" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138571" start="51144" end="51163" title="renewable resources" label="renewable resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q303288" start="51223" end="51243" title="solar thermal energy" label="solar thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="51244" end="51255" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="51421" end="51433" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="51518" end="51524" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="51813" end="51822" title="Watt" label="megawatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="51870" end="51878" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="51906" end="51909" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="52154" end="52161" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004716" start="52361" end="52372" title="Ras Kebdana" label="Ras Kebdana"/>
<link wikidata="Q772975" start="52400" end="52412" title="Cape Spartel" label="Cape Spartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="52810" end="52820" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151134" start="54027" end="54064" title="National Human Development Initiative" label="National Human Development Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137381" start="54395" end="54400" title="Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development" label="AFESD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138571" start="54510" end="54519" title="Renewable resource" label="renewable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264697" start="54647" end="54651" title="Ouarzazate Solar Power Station" label="Noor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264697" start="54652" end="54663" title="Ouarzazate Solar Power Station" label="Solar Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153937" start="54834" end="54853" title="Moroccan government" label="Moroccan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q305956" start="55023" end="55037" title="Abbas El Fassi" label="Abbas El Fassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="55407" end="55430" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q501605" start="56306" end="56331" title="OCP Group" label="Moroccan Phosphate Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231558" start="56417" end="56427" title="smart city" label="smart city"/>
<link wikidata="Q25062827" start="56595" end="56641" title="Hassan II Academy of Sciences and Technologies" label="Hassan II Academy of Sciences and Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="57805" end="57847" title="Information and communications technology" label="information and communication technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q743030" start="57896" end="57933" title="Environmental technology" label="environmentally friendly technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022019" start="58034" end="58047" title="Patent application" label="patent filing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15542961" start="58401" end="58417" title="Global Internet usage" label="penetration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918375" start="58655" end="58671" title="Cambium Networks" label="Cambium Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q326717" start="58688" end="58707" title="Wireless access point" label="Wi-Fi access points"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="59113" end="59119" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="59256" end="59263" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948461" start="59493" end="59502" title="European Moroccans" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="59522" end="59531" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="59632" end="59638" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q195006" start="59767" end="59775" title="Moroccan diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="60111" end="60124" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="60376" end="60391" title="ethnic identity" label="ethnic identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="60500" end="60505" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="60510" end="60517" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128426" start="60532" end="60558" title="Haut Commissariat au Plan (Morocco)" label="Higher Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="60752" end="60757" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="60788" end="60800" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="60896" end="60903" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541828" start="61117" end="61124" title="Rifians" label="Rifians"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="61132" end="61135" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574946" start="61141" end="61148" title="Zayanes" label="Zayanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433137" start="61156" end="61168" title="Middle Atlas" label="Middle Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267932" start="61178" end="61191" title="Shilha people" label="Shilha people"/>
<link wikidata="Q574853" start="61199" end="61209" title="Anti-Atlas" label="Anti-Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="61238" end="61261" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="influx of Arab migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="61271" end="61288" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584897" start="61436" end="61443" title="Haratin" label="Haratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="61445" end="61453" title="Sahrawis" label="Sahrawis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533184" start="61459" end="61464" title="Gnawa" label="Gnawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778119" start="61508" end="61524" title="Trans-Saharan slave trade" label="enslaved peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="61537" end="61544" title="Morisco" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="61638" end="61661" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514516" start="61704" end="61719" title="Arabized Berber" label="Arabized Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315580" start="61783" end="61818" title="Minority Rights Group International" label="Minority Rights Group International"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="61848" end="61856" title="Sahrawis" label="Sahrawis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="62048" end="62057" title="Pew Forum" label="Pew Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="62073" end="62079" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="62204" end="62217" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="62224" end="62236" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572899" start="62657" end="62677" title="Gallup International Association" label="Gallup International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078455" start="62838" end="62857" title="Christianity in Morocco" label="Christian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948461" start="62874" end="62892" title="European Moroccans" label="500,000 Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="63135" end="63143" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="63148" end="63158" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="63176" end="63185" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="63271" end="63281" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="63296" end="63306" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="63308" end="63315" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="63317" end="63326" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="63331" end="63336" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="63461" end="63469" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="founding"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="63477" end="63492" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="63519" end="63531" title="Moroccan Jews" label="265,000 Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="63603" end="63615" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="63947" end="63959" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="64078" end="64084" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="64089" end="64095" title="Berber language" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194795" start="64180" end="64186" title="Darija" label="Darija"/>
<link wikidata="Q34174" start="64324" end="64331" title="Riff language" label="Tarifit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34152" start="64348" end="64357" title="Shilha language" label="Tashelhit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49741" start="64378" end="64401" title="central Morocco Tamazight" label="Central Atlas Tamazight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64436" end="64447" title="2024 Moroccan census" label="2024 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="64900" end="64906" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="65237" end="65244" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="65522" end="65532" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="65647" end="65654" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q689837" start="65716" end="65730" title="Spanish Sahara" label="Spanish Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q165715" start="65813" end="65832" title="Instituto Cervantes" label="Instituto Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="66345" end="66353" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="66467" end="66471" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="66473" end="66481" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="66483" end="66488" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="66493" end="66499" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853332" start="66568" end="66591" title="List of universities in Morocco" label="four dozen universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360237" start="66724" end="66745" title="Mohammed V University" label="Mohammed V University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829294" start="66989" end="67011" title="Al-Akhawayn University" label="Al-Akhawayn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q378014" start="67167" end="67190" title="University of Al-Karaouine" label="al-Qarawiyin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q182363" start="67203" end="67218" title="Fatima al-Fihri" label="Fatima al-Fihri"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="67250" end="67257" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="67300" end="67306" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61931430" start="67432" end="67466" title="Mohammed VI Polytechnic University" label="Mohammed VI Polytechnic University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67477" end="67538" title="École nationale supérieure d&amp;#x27;électricité et de mécanique de Nancy" label="École Nationale Supérieure d&amp;#x27;Électricité et de Mecanique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577687" start="67548" end="67551" title="École Mohammadia d&amp;#x27;ingénieurs" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152559" start="67553" end="67558" title="ISCAE" label="ISCAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737222" start="67560" end="67565" title="National Instistute of Statistics and Applied Economics" label="INSEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578123" start="67567" end="67602" title="National School of Mineral Industry" label="National School of Mineral Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577670" start="67604" end="67638" title="École Hassania des Travaux Publics" label="École Hassania des Travaux Publics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="70249" end="70263" title="The World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="70356" end="70363" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="70368" end="70380" title="civilization" label="civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q472658" start="70390" end="70406" title="History of Morocco" label="Moroccan history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070139" start="70954" end="70988" title="World Sacred Music Festival" label="World Sacred Music Festival at Fès"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179236" start="71028" end="71047" title="Moroccan literature" label="Moroccan literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="71127" end="71136" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="71141" end="71148" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183351" start="71205" end="71229" title="literature of al-Andalus" label="literature of al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q140222" start="71292" end="71297" title="zajal" label="zajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956166" start="71315" end="71325" title="muwashshah" label="muwashshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q919947" start="71346" end="71352" title="maqama" label="maqama"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="71388" end="71404" title="Tafsir" label="Quranic exegeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101035" start="71439" end="71449" title="Qadi Ayyad" label="Qadi Ayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120006" start="71457" end="71477" title="Al-Shifa bi Ta&amp;#x27;rif Huquq al-Mustafa" label="&amp;quot;Al-Shifa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q378014" start="71501" end="71528" title="University of al-Qarawiyyin" label="University of al-Qarawiyyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="71612" end="71622" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737184" start="71624" end="71637" title="Ibn al-Khatib" label="Ibn al-Khatib"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="71643" end="71654" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="71667" end="71674" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137533" start="71776" end="71792" title="Kutubiyya Mosque" label="Kutubiyya Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="71967" end="71973" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335489" start="72005" end="72014" title="Yusuf I, Almohad Caliph" label="Abu Yakub"/>
<link wikidata="Q89468" start="72118" end="72124" title="Casbah" label="Casbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="72143" end="72157" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="72309" end="72315" title="French Morocco" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="72320" end="72340" title="Spanish Morocco" label="Spanish protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194380" start="72460" end="72477" title="Arabic literature" label="Arabic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="72632" end="72644" title="French protectorate of Morocco" label="Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118433" start="72698" end="72717" title="Mohammed Ben Brahim" label="Mohammed Ben Brahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818623" start="72831" end="72848" title="Abdelkrim Ghallab" label="Abdelkrim Ghallab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837662" start="72862" end="72876" title="Allal al-Fassi" label="Allal al-Fassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318725" start="72893" end="72919" title="Mohammed al-Mokhtar Soussi" label="Mohammed al-Mokhtar Soussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335436" start="73029" end="73044" title="Mohamed Choukri" label="Mohamed Choukri"/>
<link wikidata="Q379960" start="73046" end="73059" title="Driss Chraïbi" label="Driss Chraïbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942639" start="73061" end="73075" title="Mohamed Zafzaf" label="Mohamed Zafzaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12182007" start="73080" end="73095" title="Driss El Khouri" label="Driss El Khouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q358342" start="73192" end="73203" title="Paul Bowles" label="Paul Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="73205" end="73223" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="73228" end="73248" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942639" start="73304" end="73318" title="Mohamed Zafzaf" label="Mohamed Zafzaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q335436" start="73323" end="73338" title="Mohamed Choukri" label="Mohamed Choukri"/>
<link wikidata="Q379960" start="73365" end="73378" title="Driss Chraïbi" label="Driss Chraïbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334989" start="73383" end="73400" title="Tahar Ben Jelloun" label="Tahar Ben Jelloun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821160" start="73464" end="73480" title="Abdellatif Laabi" label="Abdellatif Laabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818623" start="73482" end="73499" title="Abdelkrim Ghallab" label="Abdelkrim Ghallab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766736" start="73501" end="73513" title="Fouad Laroui" label="Fouad Laroui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091386" start="73515" end="73531" title="Mohammed Berrada" label="Mohammed Berrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773385" start="73536" end="73550" title="Leila Abouzeid" label="Leila Abouzeid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961759" start="73751" end="73757" title="chaabi (Morocco)" label="chaabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="73786" end="73798" title="trance music" label="trance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482325" start="73826" end="73839" title="Islamic music" label="Islamic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="74040" end="74045" title="rebab" label="rebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q827775" start="74081" end="74088" title="Monody" label="monodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305039" start="74121" end="74127" title="Malhun" label="Malḥūn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949256" start="74250" end="74254" title="Aita (Morocco)" label="Aita"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="74266" end="74273" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961763" start="74313" end="74319" title="Chaabi" label="Chaabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q623904" start="74571" end="74597" title="Andalusian classical music" label="Andalusian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="74680" end="74687" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267054" start="74719" end="74725" title="Ziryab" label="Ziryab"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="74834" end="74841" title="Morisco" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="74870" end="74873" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702201" start="74877" end="74888" title="Al-Andalus Ensemble" label="Tarik Banzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090329" start="74939" end="74954" title="Nass El Ghiwane" label="Nass El Ghiwane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178681" start="74959" end="74969" title="Jil Jilala" label="Jil Jilala"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="75107" end="75113" title="Fusion (music)" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="75121" end="75128" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="75130" end="75135" title="Metal (music)" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="75156" end="75163" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q624081" start="75165" end="75175" title="Arabic pop" label="Arabic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128286" start="75192" end="75203" title="Hatim Ammor" label="Hatim Ammor"/>
<link wikidata="Q107453223" start="75208" end="75220" title="ElGrandeToto" label="ElGrandeToto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962284" start="75410" end="75423" title="Louis Lumière" label="Louis Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q505208" start="75525" end="75535" title="Ouarzazate" label="Ouarzazate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639780" start="75585" end="75602" title="regulatory agency" label="regulatory agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="75666" end="75678" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704454" start="75685" end="75704" title="Othello (1952 film)" label="&amp;quot;Othello&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="75720" end="75740" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q238826" start="75822" end="75846" title="Hymne Chérifien" label="Moroccan national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75969" end="75983" title="Le fils maudit" label="Le fils maudit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185157" start="76137" end="76144" title="Tetouan" label="Tetouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070717" start="76260" end="76300" title="International Film Festival of Marrakech" label="International Film Festival of Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="76320" end="76329" title="Marrakech" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q222061" start="76376" end="76378" title="2M (TV channel)" label="2M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276749" start="76380" end="76388" title="Al Aoula" label="Al Aoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303949" start="76448" end="76457" title="Medi 1 TV" label="Medi 1 TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="76874" end="76881" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q185157" start="76887" end="76896" title="Tétouan" label="Tiliouine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="76898" end="76902" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="76907" end="76912" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="76919" end="76925" title="Meknes" label="Meknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="77080" end="77084" title="Sheep" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="77183" end="77191" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="77451" end="77455" title="domestic sheep" label="Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="77613" end="77628" title="lamb and mutton" label="lamb and mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="77979" end="77987" title="Couscous" label="Couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q664137" start="77989" end="77997" title="Pastilla" label="Pastilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q865004" start="78034" end="78040" title="Tajine" label="Tajine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515119" start="78042" end="78048" title="Tangia" label="Tanjia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513612" start="78053" end="78059" title="Harira" label="Harira"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="78086" end="78090" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="78156" end="78161" title="date (fruit)" label="dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="78193" end="78200" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="78251" end="78257" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862619" start="78391" end="78396" title="Khubz" label="khobz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="78693" end="78702" title="green tea" label="green tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="78950" end="78964" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="78985" end="79006" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q753144" start="79010" end="79014" title="1988 African Cup of Nations" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q60515006" start="79041" end="79045" title="2025 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364269" start="79194" end="79220" title="2015 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2015 Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569761" start="79306" end="79320" title="Ebola outbreak" label="Ebola outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935989" start="79544" end="79548" title="2030 FIFA World Cup" label="2030"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="79560" end="79568" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="79573" end="79578" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="79633" end="79637" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="79754" end="79772" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q239993" start="79824" end="79843" title="Nawal El Moutawakel" label="Nawal El Moutawakel"/>
<link wikidata="Q231419" start="79855" end="79873" title="400 metres hurdles" label="400 metres hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q311364" start="79961" end="79972" title="Saïd Aouita" label="Saïd Aouita"/>
<link wikidata="Q240500" start="79981" end="79992" title="5000 metres" label="5000 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q83905" start="80012" end="80030" title="Hicham El Guerrouj" label="Hicham El Guerrouj"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="80066" end="80086" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191691" start="80094" end="80105" title="1500 metres" label="1500 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q208410" start="80140" end="80152" title="List of world records in athletics" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q943635" start="80161" end="80169" title="mile run" label="mile run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356073" start="80172" end="80188" title="Spectator sports" label="Spectator sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="80236" end="80248" title="horsemanship" label="horsemanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="80271" end="80279" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="80281" end="80285" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="80287" end="80295" title="swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="80300" end="80306" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="80366" end="80370" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="80508" end="80517" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="80614" end="80619" title="Rugby football" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378433" start="80723" end="80737" title="Rugby union in Morocco" label="Moroccan rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="80802" end="80811" title="World War" label="World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="80986" end="80996" title="Kickboxing" label="Kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q368711" start="81044" end="81053" title="Badr Hari" label="Badr Hari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797709" start="81202" end="81235" title="Index of Morocco-related articles" label="Index of Morocco-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112370" start="81238" end="81256" title="Outline of Morocco" label="Outline of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197809" start="81771" end="81784" title="Bernard Lugan" label="Bernard Lugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="82165" end="82183" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="82191" end="82218" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="82247" end="82255" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="82301" end="82322" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19292" wikidata="Q472658" url="?curid=19292" title="History of Morocco">
<text>The history of human habitation in Morocco spans since the Lower Paleolithic, with the earliest known being Jebel Irhoud. Much later Morocco was part of Iberomaurusian culture, including Taforalt. It dates from the establishment of Mauretania and other ancient Berber kingdoms, to the establishment of the Moroccan state by the Idrisid dynasty followed by other Islamic dynasties, through to the colonial and independence periods.

Archaeological evidence has shown that the area was inhabited by hominids at least 400,000 years ago. The recorded history of Morocco begins with the Phoenician colonization of the Moroccan coast between the 8th and 6th centuries BCE, although the area was inhabited by indigenous Berbers for some two thousand years before that. In the 5th century BCE, the city-state of Carthage extended its hegemony over the coastal areas. They remained there until the late 3rd century BCE, while the hinterland was ruled by indigenous monarchs. Indigenous Berber monarchs ruled the territory from the 3rd century BCE until 40 CE, when it was annexed to the Roman Empire. In the mid-5th century CE, it was overrun by Vandals, before being recovered by the Byzantine Empire in the 6th century.

The region was conquered by the Muslims in the early 8th century CE, but broke away from the Umayyad Caliphate after the Berber Revolt of 740. Half a century later, the Moroccan state was established by the Idrisid dynasty. The Saadi dynasty ruled the country from 1549 to 1659, followed by the Alawis from 1667 onwards, who have since been the ruling dynasty of Morocco.

==Prehistoric Morocco==

Archaeological excavations have demonstrated the presence of people in Morocco that were ancestral to &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, as well as the presence of early human species. The fossilized bones of a 400,000-year-old early human ancestor were discovered in Salé in 1971. The bones of several very early &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; were excavated at Jebel Irhoud in 1991, these were dated using modern techniques in 2017 and found to be at least 300,000 years old, making them the oldest examples of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; discovered anywhere in the world. In 2007, small perforated seashell beads were discovered in Taforalt that are 82,000 years old, making them the earliest known evidence of personal adornment found anywhere in the world.

In Mesolithic times, between 20,000 and 5000 years ago, the geography of Morocco resembled a savanna more than the present arid landscape. While little is known of settlements in Morocco during that period, excavations elsewhere in the Maghreb region have suggested an abundance of game and forests that would have been hospitable to Mesolithic hunters and gatherers, such as those of the Capsian culture.

During the Neolithic period, which followed the Mesolithic, the savanna was occupied by hunters and herders. The culture of these Neolithic hunters and herders flourished until the region began to desiccate after 5000 BCE as a result of climatic changes. The coastal regions of present-day Morocco in the early Neolithic shared in the Cardium pottery culture that was common to the entire Mediterranean region. Archaeological excavations have suggested that the domestication of cattle and the cultivation of crops both occurred in the region during that period. In the Chalcolithic period, or the copper age, the Beaker culture reached the north coast of Morocco.

==Early history==
=== Carthage (c. 800 – c. 300 BCE) ===

The arrival of Phoenicians on the Moroccan coast heralded many centuries of rule by foreign powers in the north of Morocco. Phoenician traders penetrated the western Mediterranean before the 8th century BCE, and soon after set up depots for salt and ore along the coast and up the rivers of the territory of present-day Morocco. Major early settlements of the Phoenicians included those at Chellah, Lixus and Mogador. Mogador is known to have been a Phoenician colony by the early 6th century BCE.

By the 5th century BCE, the state of Carthage had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa. Carthage developed commercial relations with the Berber tribes of the interior, and paid them an annual tribute to ensure their cooperation in the exploitation of raw materials.

===Mauretania (c. 300 BCE – c. 430 CE)===

Mauretania was an independent tribal Berber kingdom on the Mediterranean coast of north Africa, corresponding to northern modern-day Morocco from about the 3rd century BCE. The earliest known king of Mauretania was Baga who lived around 225 BC and possibly belonged to an older dynasty. Some of its earliest recorded history relates to Phoenician and Carthaginian settlements such as Lixus and Chellah. The Berber kings ruled inland territories overshadowing the coastal outposts of Carthage and Rome, often as satellites, allowing Roman rule to exist. It became a client of the Roman empire in 33 BCE, then a full province after Emperor Caligula had the last king, Ptolemy of Mauretania, executed (39 CE or 40).

Rome controlled the vast, ill-defined territory through alliances with the tribes rather than through military occupation, expanding its authority only to those areas that were economically useful or that could be defended without additional manpower. Hence, Roman administration never extended outside the restricted area of the northern coastal plain and valleys. This strategic region formed part of the Roman Empire, governed as Mauretania Tingitana, with the city of Volubilis as its capital.
During the time of the Roman emperor Augustus, Mauretania was a vassal state, and its rulers, such as Juba II, controlled all the areas south of Volubilis. But the effective control of Roman legionaries reached as far as the area of Sala Colonia (the castra &quot;Exploratio Ad Mercurios&quot; south of Sala is the southernmost discovered up to now). Some historians believe the Roman frontier reached present-day Casablanca, known then as Anfa, which had been settled by the Romans as a port.

During the reign of Juba II, Augustus founded three colonies of Roman citizens in Mauretania close to the Atlantic coast: Iulia Constantia Zilil, Iulia Valentia Banasa, and Iulia Campestris Babba. Augustus would eventually found twelve colonies in the region. During that period, the area controlled by Rome experienced significant economic development, aided by the construction of Roman roads. The area was initially not completely under the control of Rome, and only in the mid-2nd century was a limes built south of Sala extending to Volubilis. Around 278 CE the Romans moved their regional capital to Tangier and Volubilis started to lose importance.

Christianity was introduced to the region in the 2nd century CE, and gained converts in the towns and among slaves as well as among Berber farmers. By the end of the 4th century, the Romanized areas had been Christianized, and inroads had been made among the Berber tribes, who sometimes converted en masse. Schismatic and heretical movements also developed, usually as forms of political protest. The area had a substantial Jewish population as well.

==Early Islamic Morocco (c. 700 – c. 743)==
=== Muslim conquest (c. 700) ===

The Muslim conquest of the Maghreb, that started in the middle of the 7th century CE, was achieved in the early 8th century. It brought both the Arabic language and Islam to the area. Although part of the larger Islamic Empire, Morocco was initially organized as a subsidiary province of Ifriqiya, with the local governors appointed by the Muslim governor in Kairouan.

The indigenous Berber tribes adopted Islam, but retained their customary laws. They also paid taxes and tribute to the new Muslim administration.

=== Berber Revolt (740–743) ===

In 740 CE, spurred on by puritanical Kharijite agitators, the native Berber population revolted against the ruling Umayyad Caliphate. The rebellion began among the Berber tribes of western Morocco, and spread quickly across the region. Although the insurrection petered out in 742 CE before it reached the gates of Kairouan, neither the Umayyad rulers in Damascus nor their Abbasid successors managed to re-impose their rule on the areas west of Ifriqiya. Morocco passed out of Umayyad and Abbasid control, and fragmented into a collection of small, independent Berber states such as Berghwata, Sijilmassa and Nekor, in addition to Tlemcen and Tahert in what is now western Algeria. The Berbers went on to shape their own version of Islam. Some, like the Banu Ifran, retained their connection with radical puritan Islamic sects, while others, like the Berghwata, constructed a new syncretic faith.

== Barghawata (744–1058) ==

The Barghawatas were a confederation of Berber groups inhabiting the Atlantic coast of Morocco, who belonged to the Masmuda Berber tribal division. After allying with the Sufri Kharijite rebellion in Morocco against the Umayyads, they established an independent state (CE 744 – 1058) in the area of Tamesna on the Atlantic coast between Safi and Salé under the leadership of Tarif al-Matghari.

== Emirate of Sijilmasa (757–976) ==

The Midrarid dynasty or Banu Midrar were a Berber dynasty that ruled the Tafilalt region and founded the city of Sijilmasa in 757.
Sijilmasa was a medieval Moroccan city and trade entrepôt at the northern edge of the Sahara desert. The ruins of the town lie for along the River Ziz in the Tafilalt oasis near the town of Rissani. The town&#x27;s history was marked by several successive invasions by Berber dynasties. Up until the 14th century, as the northern terminus for the western trans-Sahara trade route, it was one of the most important trade centres in the Maghreb during the Middle Ages.

== Kingdom of Nekor (710–1019) ==

The Kingdom of Nekor was an emirate centered in the Rif area of Morocco. Its capital was initially located at Temsaman, and then moved to Nekor. The polity was founded in 710 CE by Salih I ibn Mansur through a Caliphate grant. Under his guidance, the local Berber tribes adopted Islam, but later deposed him in favor of one az-Zaydi from the Nafza tribe. They subsequently changed their mind and reappointed Ibn Mansur. His dynasty, the Banū Sālih, thereafter ruled the region until 1019.

In 859, the kingdom became subject to a 62 ship-strong group of Vikings, who defeated a Moorish force in Nekor that had attempted to interfere with their plunderings in the area. After staying for eight days in Morocco, the Vikings went back to Spain and continued up the east coast.

== Idrisid dynasty (789–974) ==
The Idrisid dynasty was a Muslim polity centered in Morocco, which ruled from 788 to 974. Named after the founder Idriss I, the great-grandchild of Hasan ibn Ali, the Idrisids are considered by historians to be the founders of the first Moroccan state.

=== Founders of the Idrisid state: Idris I and Idris II ===
By the second half of the 8th century the westernmost regions of the Maghreb, including present-day Morocco, had been effectively independent of the Umayyad Caliphate since the Khariji-led Berber revolts that started in 739–740. The Abbasid Caliphate after 750 had no more success in re-establishing control over Morocco. The overthrow of eastern authority meant that Morocco was controlled by various local Berber tribes and principalities which emerged around this time, such as the Barghwata Confederacy on the Atlantic coast and the Midrarid Emirate in Sijilmasa.

The founder of the Idrisid dynasty was Idris ibn Abdallah (788–791), who traced his ancestry back to Ali ibn Abi Talib (died 661) and his wife Fatimah, daughter of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad. He was the great-grandchild of Hasan ibn Ali. After the Battle of Fakhkh, near Mecca, between the Abbasids and supporters of the descendants of the prophet Muhammad, Idris ibn Abdallah fled to the Maghreb. He first arrived in Tangier, the most important city of Morocco at the time, and by 788 he had settled in Volubilis (known as Walili in Arabic).

The powerful Awraba Berbers of Volubilis took in Idris and made him their &#x27;imam&#x27; (religious leader). The Awraba tribe had supported Kusayla in his struggle against the Ummayad armies in the 670s and 680s. By the second half of the 8th century they had settled in northern Morocco, where their leader Ishak had his base in the Roman town of Volubilis. By this time the Awraba were already Muslim, but lived in an area where most tribes were either Christian, Jewish, Khariji or pagan. The Awraba seem to have welcomed a Sharifi imam as a way to strengthen their political position. Idris I, who was very active in the political organization of the Awraba, began by asserting his authority and working toward the subjugation of the Christian and Jewish tribes. In 789 he founded a settlement south east of Volubilis, called &quot;Medinat Fas&quot;. In 791 Idris I was poisoned and killed by an Abbasid agent. Even though he left no male heir, shortly after his death, his wife Lalla Kanza bint Uqba al-Awrabi, bore him his only son and successor, Idris II. Idris&#x27; loyal Arab ex-slave and companion Rashid brought up the boy and took on himself the regency of the state, on behalf of the Awraba. In 801 Rashid was killed by the Abbasids. In the following year, at the age of 11 years, Idris II was proclaimed imam by the Awraba.

Even though he had spread his authority across much of northern Morocco, as far west as Tlemcen, Idris I had been completely dependent on the Awraba leadership. Idris II began his rule with the weakening of Awraba power by welcoming Arab settlers in Walili and by appointing two Arabs as his &quot;vizier&quot; and &quot;qadi&quot;. Thus he transformed himself from a protégé of the Awraba into their sovereign. The Awraba leader Ishak responded by plotting against his life with the Aghlabids of Tunisia. Idris reacted by having his former protector Ishak killed, and in 809 moved his seat of government from the Awraba dominated Walili to Fes, where he founded a new settlement named Al-&#x27;Aliya. Idris II (791–828) developed the city of Fez, established earlier by his father as a Berber market town. Here he welcomed two waves of Arab immigration: one in 818 from Cordoba and another in 824 from Aghlabid Tunisia, giving Fes a more Arab character than other Maghrebi cities. When Idris II died in 828, the Idrisid state spanned from western Algeria to the Sous in southern Morocco and had become the leading state of Morocco, ahead of the principalities of Sijilmasa, Barghawata and Nekor which remained outside their control.

=== The successors of Idris II ===

The dynasty&#x27;s power would slowly decline following Idris II&#x27;s death. Under his son and successor Muhammad (828–836) the kingdom was divided amongst seven of his brothers, whereby eight Idrisid statelets formed in Morocco and western Algeria. Muhammad himself came to rule Fes, with only nominal power over his brothers. His brother Isa, who was given control of the coastal Tamesna regions near the Bou Regreg from his base at Chellah, quickly revolted against him. Muhammad entrusted his brother Umar, who had received the territories around the Rif, to punish Isa. Umar successfully drove Isa from power, who was forced to take refuge in Chellah, and then turned north to punish his other brother al-Qasim at Tangier because he had earlier refused to join him and Muhammad against Isa. Al-Qasim fled to Asilah and settled nearby, while Muhammad gave Umar governorship of Tangier as a reward. Upon Umar&#x27;s death in September or October 835 his son Ali ibn Umar was granted all of his father&#x27;s domains in turn. Muhammad himself died seven months later in the March or April 836. His son Ali ibn Muhammad inherited his position and ruled for 13 years (836–849) in a competent manner, ensuring the stability of the state. After his death in 849 he was succeeded by his brother Yahya ibn Muhammad (or Yahya I), who also enjoyed a peaceful reign.

During this time Islamic and Arabic culture gained a stronghold in the towns and Morocco profited from the trans-Saharan trade, which came to be dominated by Muslim (mostly Berber) traders. The city of Fes also flourished and became an important religious center. During Yahya&#x27;s reign more Arab immigrants arrived and the famous mosques of al-Qarawiyyin and al-Andalusiyyin were founded. Even so, the Islamic and Arabic culture only made its influence felt in the towns, with the vast majority of Morocco&#x27;s population still using the Berber languages and often adhering to Islamic heterodox and heretical doctrines. The Idrisids were principally rulers of the towns and had little power over the majority of the country&#x27;s population.

=== Decline of the Idrisids and rise of Zenata dominance ===
After the death of Yahya I in 863 he was succeeded by his less competent son, Yahya II, who divided up the Idrisid realm yet again among the extended families. Yahya II died in uncertain circumstances in 866 after fleeing his palace. After an episode of disorder in Fes his cousin Ali ibn Umar took over power. In 868, under the leadership of the Abd al-Razzaq the Berber Khariji Sufri tribes of Madyuna, Ghayata and Miknasa of the Fes region formed a common front against the Idrisids. From their base in Sefrou they were able to defeat Ali ibn Umar and occupy Fes. Fes refused to submit, however, and another Yahya, the son of al-Qasim, was able to retake the city and establish himself as the new ruler, Yahya III. Thus the ruling line had passed from the sons of Muhammad to the son of Umar and now the sons of al-Qasim.

Yahya III ruled over the entire Idrisid realm and continued to attack the Sufris. In 905 however he died in battle against another family member, Yahya ibn Idris ibn Umar (a grandson of Umar), who then took power as Yahya IV. At this point, however, the Fatimids in the east began to intervene in Morocco, hoping to expand their influence. In 917 the Miknasa and its leader Masala ibn Habus, acting on behalf of their Fatimid allies, attacked Fes and forced Yahya IV to recognize Fatimid suzerainty, before deposing him in 919 or 921. He was succeeded by his cousin Musa ibn Abul &#x27;Afiya, who had already been given charge over the rest of the country. The Idrisid Hassan I al-Hajam, a grandson of al-Qasim, managed to wrest control of Fez from 925 but in 927 Musa returned, captured Hassan and killed him, marking the last time the Idrisids held power in Fes.

From Fes, the Miknasa began pursuing the Idrisid family across Morocco. The family took refuge at the fortress of Hajar an-Nasr in northern Morocco, where the Miknasa besieged them. Soon after, however, civil war broke out among the Miknasa when Musa switched allegiance to the Umayyads of Cordoba in 931 in an attempt to gain more independence. The Fatimids sent Humayd ibn Yasal (or Hamid), the nephew of Masala ibn Habus, to confront Musa, defeating him in 933 and forcing him to fall back into line. The Idrisids took advantage of the situation to break the siege of their fortress and defeat the Mikanasa Zenata troops. Once the Fatimids were gone, however, Musa once again threw off their authority and recognized the Umayyad caliph. The Fatimids sent their general Maysur to confront him again, and this time he fled. He was pursued and killed by the Idrisids.

After this Idrisids settled among the Jbala tribes in the Rif region of north-west Morocco where they partially rebuilt their power base from Hajar an-Nasr, alternately acknowledging either the Umayyads of Cordoba (under Abd ar-Rahman III) or the Fatimids as overlords. Al-Qasim al-Gannoun ibn Muhammad ruled here from 938 until 948 in the name of the Fatimids. His son and successor, Ahmad, known as Abul-&#x27;Aysh, recognized the Umayyads instead but ran afoul of them when he refused to let them occupy Tangier. He was besieged there and forced to retreat, retaining only the areas around al-Basra and Asilah while the Umayyads occupied the rest of northern Morocco. He eventually left for Al-Andalus, leaving his brother Hasan ibn al-Qasim al-Gannoun as the new leader in 954. In 958 the Fatimids sent a new general, Jawhar, to invade Morocco. His success forced the Idrisids to again accept Fatimid overlordship. Soon afterwards, however, when Jawhar and the Fatimids were busy taking control of Egypt, the Umayyads made a comeback. In 973 their general, Ghalib, invaded Morocco. The Idrisids were expelled from their territories and al-Hasan, along with many other Idrisids or their sons, were taken as hostages to Cordoba in 974. The remaining Idrisids in Morocco acknowledged Umayyad rule. Al-Hasan was later expelled from Cordoba and fled to Egypt, which was now under Fatimid rule. In 979 Buluggin ibn Ziri, the Fatimid governor of Ifriqiya (after the Fatimid Caliphs moved their capital to Cairo), returned to defeat the Umayyads and impose Fatimid overlordship in the western Maghreb again. In 985 he returned to Morocco with Fatimid support, but that same year he was defeated by another Umayyad general sent by al-Mansur and then assassinated on the way to Cordoba. This brought a final end to the Idrisid dynasty. The Umayyads kept control over northern Morocco until their caliphate&#x27;s collapse in the early 11th century. Following this, Morocco was dominated by various Zenata Berber tribes. Until the rise of the Sanhaja Almoravids later in the century, the Maghrawa controlled Fes, Sijilmasa and Aghmat while the Banu Ifran ruled over Tlemcen, Salé (Chellah), and the Tadla region.

Despite having fallen from power, the Idrisids nonetheless spawned many sharifian families which continued to be present for centuries to come. Some Moroccans today still claim descent from them. In the 11th century an Idrisid family descended from Umar (son of Idris II), the Hammudids were able to gain power in several cities of northern Morocco and southern Spain. In Fes and in the town of Moulay Idriss (near Volubilis), the tombs of Idris II and Idris I, respectively, eventually developed into important religious complexes and pilgrimage sites (e.g. the Zawiya of Moulay Idris II). Several prominent sharifian families in Fez traced their lineages to Idris I, and some of these played a role in maintaining or rebuilding the Zawiya of Idris II in the city.

== Almoravid dynasty (c. 1060 – 1147) ==
The Almoravid dynasty (c.1060–1147) originated among the Lamtuna nomadic Berber tribe belonging to the Sanhaja. They succeeded in unifying Morocco after it had been divided among several Zenata principalities in the late 10th century, and annexed the Emirate of Sijilmasa and the Barghawata (Tamesna) into their realm.

Under Yusuf ibn Tashfin, the Almoravids were invited by the Muslim &quot;taifa&quot; princes of Al-Andalus to defend their territories from the Christian kingdoms. Their involvement was crucial in preventing the fall of Al-Andalus. After having succeeded in repelling Christian forces in 1086, Yusuf returned to Iberia in 1090 and annexed most of the major &quot;taifas&quot;.Almoravid power began to decline in the first half of the 12th century, as the dynasty was weakened after its defeat at the battle of Ourique and because of the agitation of the Almohads. The conquest of the city of Marrakech by the Almohads in 1147 marked the fall of the dynasty. However, fragments of the Almoravids (the Banu Ghaniya) continued to struggle in the Balearic Islands and in Tunisia.

The Berbers of the Tamazgha in the early Middle Ages could be roughly classified into three major groups: the Zenata across the north, the Masmuda concentrated in central Morocco, and the Sanhaja, clustered in two areas: the western part of the Sahara and the hills of the eastern Maghreb. The eastern Sanhaja included the Kutama Berbers, who had been the base of the Fatimid rise in the early 10th century, and the Zirid dynasty, who ruled Ifriqiya as vassals of the Fatimids after the latter moved to Egypt in 972. The western Sanhaja were divided into several tribes: the Gazzula and the Lamta in the Draa valley and the foothills of the Anti-Atlas range; further south, encamped in the western Sahara, were the Massufa, the Lamtuna and the Banu Warith; and most southerly of all, the Gudala, in littoral Mauritania down to the borderlands of the Senegal River.

The western Sanhaja had been converted to Islam some time in the 9th century. They were subsequently united in the 10th century and, with the zeal of new converts, launched several campaigns against the &quot;Sudanese&quot; (pagan peoples of sub-Saharan Africa). Under their king Tinbarutan ibn Usfayshar, the Sanhaja Lamtuna erected (or captured) the citadel of Awdaghust, a critical stop on the trans-Saharan trade route. After the collapse of the Sanhaja union, Awdagust passed over to the Ghana empire; and the trans-Saharan routes were taken over by the Zenata Maghrawa of Sijilmassa. The Maghrawa also exploited this disunion to dislodge the Sanhaja Gazzula and Lamta out of their pasturelands in the Sous and Draa valleys. Around 1035, the Lamtuna chieftain Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Tifat (alias Tarsina), tried to reunite the Sanhaja desert tribes, but his reign lasted less than three years.

Around 1040, Yahya ibn Ibrahim, a chieftain of the Gudala (and brother-in-law of the late Tarsina), went on pilgrimage to Mecca. On his return, he stopped by Kairouan in Ifriqiya, where he met Abu Imran al-Fasi, a native of Fes and a jurist and scholar of the Sunni Maliki school. At this time, Ifriqiya was in ferment. The Zirid ruler al-Muizz ibn Badis, was openly contemplating breaking with his Shi&#x27;ite Fatimid overlords in Cairo, and the jurists of Kairouan were agitating for him to do so. Within this heady atmosphere, Yahya and Abu Imran fell into conversation on the state of the faith in their western homelands, and Yahya expressed his disappointment at the lack of religious education and negligence of Islamic law among his southern Sanhaja people. With Abu Imran&#x27;s recommendation, Yahya ibn Ibrahim made his way to the &quot;ribat&quot; of Waggag ibn Zelu in the Sous valley of southern Morocco, to seek out a Maliki teacher for his people. Waggag assigned him one of his residents, Abdallah ibn Yasin.

Abdallah ibn Yasin was a Gazzula Berber, and probably a convert rather than a born Muslim. His name can be read as &quot;son of Ya Sin&quot; (the title of the 36th Sura of the Qur&#x27;an), suggesting he had obliterated his family past and was &quot;re-born&quot; of the Holy Book. Ibn Yasin certainly had the ardor of a puritan zealot; his creed was mainly characterized by a rigid formalism and a strict adherence to the dictates of the Qur&#x27;an, and the Orthodox tradition. (Chroniclers such as al-Bakri allege Ibn Yasin&#x27;s learning was superficial.) Ibn Yasin&#x27;s initial meetings with the Gudala people went poorly. As he had more ardor than depth, Ibn Yasin&#x27;s arguments were disputed by his audience. He responded to questioning with charges of apostasy and handed out harsh punishments for the slightest deviations. The Gudala soon had enough and expelled him almost immediately after the death of his protector, Yahya ibn Ibrahim, sometime in the 1040s.

Ibn Yasin, however, found a more favorable reception among the neighboring Lamtuna people. Probably sensing the useful organizing power of Ibn Yasin&#x27;s pious fervor, the Lamtuna chieftain Yahya ibn Umar al-Lamtuni invited the man to preach to his people. The Lamtuna leaders, however, kept Ibn Yasin on a careful leash, forging a more productive partnership between them. Invoking stories of the early life of Muhammad, Ibn Yasin preached that conquest was a necessary addendum to Islamicization, that it was not enough to merely adhere to God&#x27;s law, but necessary to also destroy opposition to it. In Ibn Yasin&#x27;s ideology, anything and everything outside of Islamic law could be characterized as &quot;opposition&quot;. He identified tribalism, in particular, as an obstacle. He believed it was not enough to urge his audiences to put aside their blood loyalties and ethnic differences, and embrace the equality of all Muslims under the Sacred Law, it was necessary to make them do so. For the Lamtuna leadership, this new ideology dovetailed with their long desire to refound the Sanhaja union and recover their lost dominions. In the early 1050s, the Lamtuna, under the joint leadership of Yahya ibn Umar and Abdallah ibn Yasin—soon calling themselves the &quot;al-Murabitin&quot; (Almoravids)—set out on a campaign to bring their neighbors over to their cause.

== Almohads (c. 1121–1269) ==


The Almohad Caliphate (; or or from ) was a North African Berber Muslim empire founded in present day Morocco at the 12th century. At its height, it controlled much of the Iberian Peninsula (Al Andalus) and North Africa (the Maghreb). The Almohad doctrine was founded by Ibn Tumart among the Berber Masmuda tribes, a Berber tribal confederation of the Atlas Mountains of southern Morocco. At the time, Morocco, western Algeria and Spain (al-Andalus), were under the rule of the Almoravids, a Sanhaja Berber dynasty. Around 1120, Ibn Tumart first established a Berber state in Tinmel in the Atlas Mountains.

Early in his life, Ibn Tumart went to Spain to pursue his studies, and thereafter to Baghdad to deepen them. In Baghdad, Ibn Tumart attached himself to the theological school of al-Ash&#x27;ari, and came under the influence of the teacher al-Ghazali. He soon developed his own system, combining the doctrines of various masters. Ibn Tumart&#x27;s main principle was a strict unitarianism (&quot;tawhid&quot;), which denied the independent existence of the attributes of God as being incompatible with His unity, and therefore a polytheistic idea. Ibn Tumart represented a revolt against what he perceived as anthropomorphism in Muslim orthodoxy. His followers would become known as the &quot;al-Muwaḥḥidūn&quot; (&quot;Almohads&quot;), meaning those who affirm the unity of God.

Around 1124, Ibn Tumart erected the ribat of Tinmel, in the valley of the Nfis in the High Atlas, an impregnable fortified complex, which would serve both as the spiritual center and military headquarters of the Almohad movement. For the first eight years, the Almohad rebellion was limited to a guerilla war along the peaks and ravines of the High Atlas. In early 1130, the Almohads finally descended from the mountains for their first sizeable attack in the lowlands. It was a disaster. The Almohads swept aside an Almoravid column that had come out to meet them before Aghmat, and then chased their remnant all the way to Marrakesh. They laid siege to Marrakesh for forty days until, in April (or May) 1130, the Almoravids sallied from the city and crushed the Almohads in the bloody Battle of al-Buhayra (named after a large garden east of the city). The Almohads were thoroughly routed, with huge losses. Half their leadership was killed in action, and the survivors only just managed to scramble back to the mountains.Ibn Tumart died shortly after, in August 1130. That the Almohad movement did not immediately collapse after such a devastating defeat and the death of their charismatic Mahdi, is likely due to the skills of his successor, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min. Ibn Tumart&#x27;s death was kept a secret for three years, a period which Almohad chroniclers described as a &quot;ghayba&quot; or &quot;occultation&quot;. This period likely gave Abd al-Mu&#x27;min time to secure his position as successor to the political leadership of the movement. Although a Zenata Berber from Tagra (Algeria), and thus an alien among the Masmuda of southern Morocco, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min nonetheless saw off his principal rivals and hammered wavering tribes back to the fold. Three years after Ibn Tumart&#x27;s death he was officially proclaimed &quot;Caliph&quot;.

===Conquests===
Abd al-Mu&#x27;min then came forward as the lieutenant of the Mahdi Ibn Tumart. Between 1130 and his death in 1163, Abd al-Mu&#x27;min not only rooted out the Murabits (Almoravids), but extended his power over all northern Africa as far as Egypt, becoming amir of Marrakesh in 1149.

Al-Andalus followed the fate of Africa. Between 1146 and 1173, the Almohads gradually wrested control from the Murabits over the Moorish principalities in Iberia. The Almohads transferred the capital of Muslim Iberia from Córdoba to Seville. They founded a great mosque there; its tower, the Giralda, was erected in 1184 to mark the accession of Ya&#x27;qub I. The Almohads also built a palace there called Al-Muwarak on the site of the modern day Alcázar of Seville.

The Almohad princes had a longer and more distinguished career than the Murabits. The successors of Abd al-Mumin, Abu Yaqub Yusuf (Yusuf I, ruled 1163–1184) and Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur (Yaʻqūb I, ruled 1184–1199), were both able men. Initially their government drove many Jewish and Christian subjects to take refuge in the growing Christian states of Portugal, Castile, and Aragon. Ultimately they became less fanatical than the Murabits, and Ya&#x27;qub al-Mansur was a highly accomplished man who wrote a good Arabic style and protected the philosopher Averroes. His title of &quot;al-Manṣūr&quot; (&quot;the Victorious&quot;) was earned by his victory over Alfonso VIII of Castile in the Battle of Alarcos (1195).

From the time of Yusuf II, however, the Almohads governed their co-religionists in Iberia and central North Africa through lieutenants, their dominions outside Morocco being treated as provinces. When Almohad emirs crossed the Straits it was to lead a jihad against the Christians and then return to Morocco.

===Holding years===
In 1212, the Almohad Caliph Muhammad &#x27;al-Nasir&#x27; (1199–1214), the successor of al-Mansur, after an initially successful advance north, was defeated by an alliance of the four Christian kings of Castile, Aragón, Navarre, and Portugal, at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena. The battle broke the Almohad advance, but the Christian powers remained too disorganized to profit from it immediately.

Before his death in 1213, al-Nasir appointed his young ten-year-old son as the next caliph Yusuf II &quot;al-Mustansir&quot;. The Almohads passed through a period of effective regency for the young caliph, with power exercised by an oligarchy of elder family members, palace bureaucrats and leading nobles. The Almohad ministers were careful to negotiate a series of truces with the Christian kingdoms, which remained more-or-less in place for next fifteen years (the loss of Alcácer do Sal to the Kingdom of Portugal in 1217 was an exception).

In early 1224, the youthful caliph died in an accident, without any heirs. The palace bureaucrats in Marrakesh, led by the &quot;wazir&quot; Uthman ibn Jam&#x27;i, quickly engineered the election of his elderly grand-uncle, Abd al-Wahid I &#x27;al-Makhlu&#x27;, as the new Almohad caliph. But the rapid appointment upset other branches of the family, notably the brothers of the late al-Nasir, who governed in al-Andalus. The challenge was immediately raised by one of them, then governor in Murcia, who declared himself Caliph Abdallah al-Adil. With the help of his brothers, he quickly seized control of al-Andalus. His chief advisor, the shadowy Abu Zayd ibn Yujjan, tapped into his contacts in Marrakesh, and secured the deposition and assassination of Abd al-Wahid I, and the expulsion of the al-Jami&#x27;i clan.

This coup has been characterized as the pebble that finally broke al-Andalus. It was the first internal coup among the Almohads. The Almohad clan, despite occasional disagreements, had always remained tightly knit and loyally behind dynastic precedence. Caliph al-Adil&#x27;s murderous breach of dynastic and constitutional propriety marred his acceptability to other Almohad &quot;sheikhs&quot;. One of the recusants was his cousin, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi (&quot;the Baezan&quot;), the Almohad governor of Jaén, who took a handful of followers and decamped for the hills around Baeza. He set up a rebel camp and forged an alliance with the hitherto quiet Ferdinand III of Castile. Sensing his greater priority was Marrakesh, where recusant Almohad &quot;sheikh&quot;s had rallied behind Yahya, another son of al-Nasir, al-Adil paid little attention to this little band of misfits.

=== Reconquista ===

In 1225, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi&#x27;s band of rebels, accompanied by a large Castilian army, descended from the hills, besieging cities such as Jaén and Andújar. They raided throughout the regions of Jaén, Cordova and Vega de Granada and, before the end of the year, al-Bayyasi had established himself in the city of Cordova. Sensing a power vacuum, both Alfonso IX of León and Sancho II of Portugal opportunistically ordered raids into Andalusian territory that same year. With Almohad arms, men and cash dispatched to Morocco to help Caliph al-Adil impose himself in Marrakesh, there was little means to stop the sudden onslaught. In late 1225, with surprising ease, the Portuguese raiders reached the environs of Seville. Knowing they were outnumbered, the Almohad governors of the city refused to confront the Portuguese raiders, prompting the disgusted population of Seville to take matters into their own hands, raise a militia, and go out in the field by themselves. The result was a veritable massacre – the Portuguese men-at-arms easily mowed down the throng of poorly armed townsfolk. Thousands, perhaps as much as 20,000, were said to have been slain before the walls of Seville. A similar disaster befell a similar popular levy by Murcians at Aspe that same year. But Christian raiders had been stopped at Cáceres and Requena. Trust in the Almohad leadership was severely shaken by these events – the disasters were promptly blamed on the distractions of Caliph al-Adil and the incompetence and cowardice of his lieutenants, the successes credited to non-Almohad local leaders who rallied defenses.

But al-Adil&#x27;s fortunes were briefly buoyed. In payment for Castilian assistance, al-Bayyasi had given Ferdinand III three strategic frontier fortresses: Baños de la Encina, Salvatierra (the old Order of Calatrava fortress near Ciudad Real) and Capilla. But Capilla refused to hand them over, forcing the Castilians to lay a long and difficult siege. The brave defiance of little Capilla, and the spectacle of al-Bayyasi&#x27;s shipping provisions to the Castilian besiegers, shocked Andalusians and shifted sentiment back towards the Almohad caliph. A popular uprising broke out in Cordova – al-Bayyasi was killed and his head dispatched as a trophy to Marrakesh. But Caliph al-Adil did not rejoice in this victory for long – he was assassinated in Marrakesh in October 1227, by the partisans of Yahya, who was promptly acclaimed as the new Almohad caliph Yahya &quot;al-Mu&#x27;tasim&quot;.

The Andalusian branch of the Almohads refused to accept this turn of events. Al-Adil&#x27;s brother, then in Seville, proclaimed himself the new Almohad caliph Abd al-Ala Idris I &#x27;al-Ma&#x27;mun&#x27;. He promptly purchased a truce from Ferdinand III in return for 300,000 &quot;maravedis&quot;, allowing him to organize and dispatch the greater part of the Almohad army in Spain across the straits in 1228 to confront Yahya.

That same year, Portuguese and Leonese renewed their raids deep into Muslim territory, basically unchecked. Feeling the Almohads had failed to protect them, popular uprisings took place throughout al-Andalus. City after city deposed their hapless Almohad governors and installed local strongmen in their place. A Murcian strongman, Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Hud al-Judhami, who claimed descendance from the Banu Hud dynasty that had once ruled the old taifa of Saragossa, emerged as the central figure of these rebellions, systematically dislodging Almohad garrisons through central Spain. In October 1228, with Spain practically all lost, al-Ma&#x27;mun abandoned Seville, taking what little remained of the Almohad army with him to Morocco. Ibn Hud immediately dispatched emissaries to distant Baghdad to offer recognition to the Abbasid Caliph, albeit taking up for himself a quasi-caliphal title, &#x27;al-Mutawwakil&#x27;.
The departure of al-Ma&#x27;mun in 1228 marked the end of the Almohad era in Spain. Ibn Hud and the other local Andalusian strongmen were unable to stem the rising flood of Christian attacks, launched almost yearly by Sancho II of Portugal, Alfonso IX of León, Ferdinand III of Castile and James I of Aragon. The next twenty years saw a massive advance in the Christian reconquista – the old great Andalusian citadels fell in a grand sweep: Mérida and Badajoz in 1230 (to Leon), Majorca in 1230 (to Aragon), Beja in 1234 (to Portugal), Cordova in 1236 (to Castile), Valencia in 1238 (to Aragon), Niebla-Huelva in 1238 (to Leon), Silves in 1242 (to Portugal), Murcia in 1243 (to Castile), Jaén in 1246 (to Castile), Alicante in 1248 (to Castile), culminating in the fall of the greatest of Andalusian cities, the ex-Almohad capital of Seville, into Christian hands in 1248. Ferdinand III of Castile entered Seville as a conqueror on 22 December 1248.

The Andalusians were helpless before this onslaught. Ibn Hudd had attempted to check the Leonese advance early on, but most of his Andalusian army was destroyed at the battle of Alange in 1230. Ibn Hud scrambled to move remaining arms and men to save threatened or besieged Andalusian citadels, but with so many attacks at once, it was a hopeless endeavor. After Ibn Hud&#x27;s death in 1238, some of the Andalusian cities, in a last-ditch effort to save themselves, offered themselves once again to the Almohads, but to no avail. The Almohads would not return.

With the departure of the Almohads, the Nasrid dynasty (&quot;Banū Naṣr&quot;, ) rose to power in Granada. After the great Christian advance of 1228–1248, the Emirate of Granada was practically all that remained of old al-Andalus. Some of the captured citadels (e.g. Murcia, Jaen, Niebla) were reorganized as tributary vassals for a few more years, but most were annexed by the 1260s. Granada alone would remain independent for an additional 250 years, flourishing as the new center of al-Andalus.

===Collapse in the Maghreb===
In their African holdings, the Almohads encouraged the establishment of Christians even in Fez, and after the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa they occasionally entered into alliances with the kings of Castile. They were successful in expelling the garrisons placed in some of the coast towns by the Norman kings of Sicily. The history of their decline differs from that of the Almoravids, whom they had displaced. They were not assailed by a great religious movement, but lost territories, piecemeal, by the revolt of tribes and districts. Their most effective enemies were the Banu Marin (Marinids) who founded the next dynasty. The last representative of the line, Idris II, &#x27;al-Wathiq&#x27;, was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269.

==Marinids dynasty (c. 1244–1465)==
Although the Marinids claimed Arab ancestry through a North Arabian tribe, they were of Berber origin. Following the arrival of the Arab Bedouins in North Africa in the middle of the eleventh century, the Marinids were obliged to leave their lands in the region of Biskra, in present-day Algeria. They first frequented the area between Sijilmasa and Figuig, present-day Morocco, at times reaching as far as the , present-day Algeria. They would move seasonally from the Figuig oasis to the Moulouya River basin. Following the arrival of Arab tribes in the area in the 11th-12th centuries, the Marinids moved to the north-west of present-day Algeria, before entering &quot;en-masse&quot; into Morocco by the beginning of the 13th century.

The Marinids took their name from their ancestor, Marin ibn Wartajan al-Zenati.

===Rise===
After arriving in present-day Morocco, they initially submitted to the Almohad dynasty, which was at the time the ruling house. After successfully contributing to the Battle of Alarcos, in central Spain, the tribe started to assert itself as a political power. Starting in 1213, they began to tax farming communities of today&#x27;s north-eastern Morocco (the area between Nador and Berkane). The relationship between them and the Almohads became strained and starting in 1215, there were regular outbreaks of fighting between the two parties. In 1217, they tried to occupy the eastern part of present-day Morocco, but they were expelled, pulling back and settling in the eastern Rif mountains where they remained for nearly 30 years. During their stay in the Rif, the Almohad state suffered huge blows, losing large territories to the Christians in Spain, while the Hafsids of Ifriqia broke away in 1229, followed by the Zayyanid dynasty of Tlemcen in 1235.

Between 1244 and 1248 the Marinids were able to take Taza, Rabat, Salé, Meknes and Fez from the weakened Almohads. The Marinid leadership installed in Fes declared war on the Almohads, fighting with the aid of Christian mercenaries. Abu Yusuf Yaqub (1259–1286) captured Marrakech in 1269.

===Apogee===
After the Nasrids of Granada ceded the town of Algeciras to the Marinids, Abu Yusuf went to Al-Andalus to support the ongoing struggle against the Kingdom of Castile. The Marinid dynasty then tried to extend its control to include the commercial traffic of the Strait of Gibraltar.

It was in this period that the Spanish Christians were first able to take the fighting to mainland present-day Morocco: in 1260 and 1267 they attempted an invasion, but both attempts were defeated. After gaining a foothold in Spain, the Marinids became active in the conflict between Muslims and Christians in Iberia. To gain absolute control of the trade in the Strait of Gibraltar, from their base at Algeciras they started the conquest of several Spanish towns: by the year 1294 they had occupied Rota, Tarifa and Gibraltar.

In 1276 they founded Fes Jdid, which they made their administrative and military centre. While Fes had been a prosperous city throughout the Almohad period, even becoming the largest city in the world during that time, it was in the Marinid period that Fes reached its golden age, a period which marked the beginning of an official, historical narrative for the city. It is from the Marinid period that Fes&#x27; reputation as an important intellectual centre largely dates, they established the first madrasas in the city and country. The principal monuments in the medina, the residences and public buildings, date from the Marinid period.

Despite internal infighting, Abu Said Uthman II (r. 1310–1331) initiated huge construction projects across the land. Several madrasas were built, the Al-Attarine Madrasa being the most famous. The building of these madrasas were necessary to create a dependent bureaucratic class, in order to undermine the marabouts and Sharifian elements.

The Marinids also strongly influenced the policy of the Emirate of Granada, from which they enlarged their army in 1275. In the 13th century, the Kingdom of Castile made several incursions into their territory. In 1260, Castilian forces raided Salé and, in 1267, initiated a full-scale invasion, but the Marinids repelled them.

At the height of their power, during the rule of Abu al-Hasan Ali (r. 1331–1348), the Marinid army was large and disciplined. It consisted of 40,000 Zenata cavalry, while Arab nomads contributed to the cavalry and Andalusians were included as archers. The personal bodyguard of the sultan consisted of 7,000 men, and included Christian, Kurdish and Black African elements. Under Abu al-Hasan another attempt was made to reunite the Maghreb. In 1337 the Abdalwadid kingdom of Tlemcen was conquered, followed in 1347 by the defeat of the Hafsid empire in Ifriqiya, which made him master of a huge territory, which spanned from southern present-day Morocco to Tripoli. However, within the next year, a revolt of Arab tribes in southern Tunisia made them lose their eastern territories. The Marinids had already suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of a Portuguese-Castilian coalition in the Battle of Río Salado in 1340, and finally had to withdraw from Andalusia, only holding on to Algeciras until 1344.

In 1348 Abu al-Hasan was deposed by his son Abu Inan Faris, who tried to reconquer Algeria and Tunisia. Despite several successes, he was strangled by his own vizir in 1358, after which the dynasty began to decline.

===Decline===
After the death of Abu Inan Faris in 1358, the real power lay with the viziers, while the Marinid sultans were paraded and forced to succeed each other in quick succession. The county was divided and political anarchy set in, with different viziers and foreign powers supporting different factions. In 1359 Hintata tribesmen from the High Atlas came down and occupied Marrakesh, capital of their Almohad ancestors, which they would govern independently until 1526. To the south of Marrakesh, Sufi mystics claimed autonomy, and in the 1370s Azemmour broke off under a coalition of merchants and Arab clan leaders of the Banu Sabih. To the east, the Zianid and Hafsid families reemerged and to the north, the Europeans were taking advantage of this instability by attacking the coast. Meanwhile, unruly wandering Arab Bedouin tribes increasingly spread anarchy, which accelerated the decline of the empire.

In the 15th century, it was hit by a financial crisis, after which the state had to stop financing the different marabouts and Sharifian families, which had previously been useful instruments in controlling different tribes. The political support of these marabouts and Sharifians halted, and it splintered into different entities. In 1399 Tetouan was taken and its population was massacred and in 1415 the Portuguese captured Ceuta. After the sultan Abdalhaqq II (1421–1465) tried to break the power of the Wattasids, he was executed.

Marinid rulers after 1420 came under the control of the Wattasids, who exercised a regency as Abd al-Haqq II became Sultan one year after his birth. The Wattasids however refused to give up the Regency after Abd al-Haqq came to age.

In 1459, Abd al-Haqq II managed a massacre of the Wattasid family, breaking their power. His reign, however, brutally ended as he was murdered during the 1465 revolt. This event saw the end of the Marinid dynasty as Muhammad ibn Ali Amrani-Joutey, leader of the Sharifs, was proclaimed Sultan in Fes. He was in turn overthrown in 1471 by Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya, one of the two the surviving Wattasids from the 1459 massacre, who instigated the Wattasid dynasty.

==Wattasid dynasty (c. 1472–1554)==
Morocco was in decline when the Berber Wattasids assumed power. The Wattasid family had been the autonomous governors of the eastern Rif since the late 13th century, ruling from their base in Tazouta (near present-day Nador). They had close ties to the Marinid sultans and provided many of the bureaucratic elite. While the Marinid dynasty tried to repel the Portuguese and Spanish invasions and help the kingdom of Granada to outlive the Reconquista, the Wattasids accumulated absolute power through political maneuvering. When the Marinids became aware of the extent of the conspiracy, they slaughtered the Wattasids, leaving only Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya alive. He went on to found the Kingdom of Fez and establish the dynasty to be succeeded by his son, Mohammed al-Burtuqali, in 1504.

The Wattasid rulers failed in their promise to protect Morocco from foreign incursions and the Portuguese increased their presence on Morocco&#x27;s coast. Mohammad al-Chaykh&#x27;s son attempted to capture Asilah and Tangier in 1508, 1511 and 1515, but without success.

In the south, a new dynasty arose, the Saadian dynasty, which seized Marrakesh in 1524 and made it their capital. By 1537 the Saadis were in the ascendent when they defeated the Portuguese Empire at Agadir. Their military successes contrasts with the Wattasid policy of conciliation towards the Catholic kings to the north.

As a result, the people of Morocco tended to regard the Saadians as heroes, making it easier for them to retake the Portuguese strongholds on the coast, including Tangiers, Ceuta and Maziɣen. The Saadians also attacked the Wattasids who were forced to yield to the new power. In 1554, as Wattasid towns surrendered, the Wattasid sultan, Ali Abu Hassun, briefly retook Fez. The Saadis quickly settled the matter by killing him and, as the last Wattasids fled Morocco by ship, they too were murdered by pirates. The Wattasid did little to improve general conditions in Morocco following the &quot;Reconquista&quot;. While the Saadians managed to reestablish and curbed the expansionist ambitions of the kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula.

== Saadi dynasty (1549–1659) ==

Beginning in 1549, the region was ruled by successive Arab dynasties known as the Sharifian dynasties, who claimed descent from the prophet Muhammad. The first of these polities was the Saadi dynasty, which ruled Morocco from 1549 to 1659. From 1509 to 1549, the Saadi rulers had control of only the southern areas. While still recognizing the Wattasids as Sultans until 1528, Saadians&#x27; growing power led the Wattasids to attack them and, after an indecisive battle, to recognize their rule over southern Morocco through the Treaty of Tadla.

In 1590, Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur sent an expedition to the Songhai Empire, which resulted in a victory and collapse of the empire, Pashalik of Timbuktu was established to take control over the territory centered on Timbuktu.

In 1659, Mohammed al-Hajj ibn Abu Bakr al-Dila&#x27;i, the head of the zaouia of Dila, was proclaimed sultan of Morocco after the fall of the Saadi dynasty.

== Republic of Salé (1624–1668) ==
The republic traces its origins back to the beginning of the 17th century, with the arrival of approximately 3,000 wealthy Moriscos from Hornachos in western Spain, who anticipated the 1609 expulsion edicts ordered by Philip III of Spain. After 1609, approximately 10,000 down-and-out expelled Moriscos arrived from Spain. Cultural and language differences between the native Saletin people and the Morisco refugees led the newcomers to settle in the old medina of Rabat, on the opposite bank of the Bou Regreg.

Pirates based on the western bank thrived and expanded their operations throughout the Mediterranean and the Atlantic Ocean. In 1624, the Dutchman Jan Janszoon (also known as Murad Reis) became the &quot;Grand Admiral&quot; and President of the Corsair Republic of Salé.
After Janszoon left Salé in 1627, the Moriscos ceased to recognize the authority of the Sultan Zidan al-Nasir, and refused to pay his tithe on their incomes. They proclaimed a Republic, ruled by a council or &quot;Diwan&quot;, a sort of government cabinet formed by 12 to 14 notable people whose members annually elected a Governor and a &quot;Captain General of the Fortalesa&quot; during the month of May. In the early years of the republic (between 1627 and 1630), the &quot;Diwan&quot; was controlled only by Hornacheros, whose grip on power was resented by the growing population of non-Hornachero Moriscos, called Andalusians. After bloody clashes in 1630, an agreement was reached: the election of a &quot;Qaid&quot; by Andalusians and a new &quot;Diwan&quot; of 16 members of whom 8 were Andalusians and 8 Hornacheros.

In 1641 the Zaouia of Dila, which controlled much of Morocco, imposed a religious hegemony over Salé and its parent republic. By the early 1660s the republic was embroiled in civil war with the zawiya, and eventually Sultan Al-Rashid of Morocco of the Alawi dynasty, which still rules Morocco into the 21st century, seized Rabat and Salé, ending its independence. It ended up under the control of the Sultan of Morocco after 1668, when Moulay al Rashid finally vanquished the Dilaites.

== Alawi dynasty (since 1666) ==
The Alawi dynasty is the current Moroccan royal family. The name &quot;Alawi&quot; comes from the &quot;‘Alī&quot; of ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, whose descendant Sharif ibn Ali became Prince of Tafilalt in 1631. His son Mulay Al-Rashid (1664–1672) was able to unite and pacify the country. The Alawi family claim descent from Muhammad through his daughter Fāṭimah az-Zahrah and her husband ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib.

The Alawi kingdom was consolidated by Ismail Ibn Sharif (1672–1727), who began to create a unified state in the face of opposition from local tribes. Since the Alawis, in contrast to previous dynasties, did not have the support of a single Berber or Bedouin tribe, Isma&#x27;īl controlled Morocco through an army of slaves. With these soldiers he reoccupied Tangiers in 1684 after the English abandoned it and drove the Spanish from Larache in 1689. The kingdom he established did not survive his death — in the ensuing power struggles the tribes became a political and military force once again, and it was only with Muhammad III (1757–1790) that the kingdom was unified again. The idea of centralization was abandoned and the tribes allowed to preserve their autonomy. On 20 December 1777, Morocco became one of the first states to recognize the sovereignty of a newly independent United States.

During the reigns of Muhammad IV (1859–1873) and Hassan I (1873–1894), the Alawis tried to foster trade links, especially with European countries and the United States. The army and administration were also modernized to consolidate control over the Berber and Bedouin tribes. In 1859, Morocco went to war with Spain. The independence of Morocco was guaranteed at the Conference of Madrid in 1880, with France also gaining significant influence over Morocco. Germany attempted to counter the growing French influence, leading to the First Moroccan Crisis of 1905–1906, and the Second Moroccan Crisis of 1911. Morocco became a French protectorate through the Treaty of Fez in 1912.

==European influence (c. 1830 – 1956)==
The successful Portuguese efforts to control the Atlantic coast in the 15th century did not affect the interior of Morocco. After the Napoleonic Wars, North Africa became increasingly ungovernable from Istanbul by the Ottoman Empire. As a result, it became the resort of pirates under local beys. The Maghreb also had far greater known wealth than the rest of Africa, and its location near the entrance to the Mediterranean gave it strategic importance. France showed a strong interest in Morocco as early as 1830. The Alawi dynasty succeeded in maintaining the independence of Morocco in the 18th and 19th centuries, in the face of Ottoman and European encroachment.

In 1844, after the French conquered Algeria, the Franco-Moroccan War took place, with the bombardment of Tangiers, the Battle of Isly, and the bombardment of Mogador.

In 1856, Sultan Abd al-Rahman&#x27;s Makhzen signed the Anglo-Moroccan treaty, which was negotiated with the British diplomat John Hay Drummond Hay. The treaty granted several rights to British subjects in Morocco, and lowered Moroccan customs tariffs to 10%. The treaty prolonged Moroccan independence while opening up the country to foreign trade, along with reducing the Makhzen&#x27;s control over the Moroccan economy.

The Hispano-Moroccan War took place from 1859 to 1860, and the subsequent Treaty of Wad Ras led the Moroccan government to take a massive British loan larger than its national reserves to pay off its war debt to Spain.

In the mid 19th century, Moroccan Jews started migrating from the interior to coastal cities such as Essaouira, Mazagan, Asfi, and later Casablanca for economic opportunity, participating in trade with Europeans and the development of those cities. The Alliance Israélite Universelle opened its first school in Tetuan in 1862.

In the latter part of the 19th century Morocco&#x27;s instability resulted in European countries intervening to protect investments and to demand economic concessions. Sultan Hassan I called for the Madrid Conference of 1880 in response to France and Spain&#x27;s abuse of the &quot;protégé&quot; system, but the result was an increased European presence in Morocco—in the form of advisors, doctors, businessmen, adventurers, and even missionaries.

More than half of the Makhzen&#x27;s expenditures went abroad to pay war indemnities and buy weapons, military equipment, and manufactured goods. From 1902 to 1909, Morocco&#x27;s trade deficit increased 14 million francs annually, and the Moroccan rial depreciated 25% from 1896 to 1906. In June 1904, after a failed attempt to impose a flat tax, France bailed out the already indebted Makhzen with 62.5 million francs, guaranteed by a portion of customs revenue.

In the 1890s, the French administration and military in Algiers called for the annexation of the Touat, the Gourara and the Tidikelt, a complex that had been part of the Moroccan Empire for many centuries prior to the arrival of the French in Algeria. The first years of the 20th century saw major diplomatic efforts by European powers, especially France, to further its interests in the region.

Morocco nominally was ruled by its sultan, the young Abd al-Aziz, through his regent, Ba Ahmed. By 1900, Morocco was the scene of multiple local wars started by pretenders to the sultanate, by bankruptcy of the treasury, and by multiple tribal revolts. The French Foreign Minister Théophile Delcassé saw the opportunity to stabilize the situation and expand the French overseas empire.

General Hubert Lyautey wanted a more aggressive military policy using his French army based in Algeria. France decided to use both diplomacy and military force. The French colonial authorities would establish control over the Sultan, ruling in his name and extending French influence. The British acceded to any French designs in Morocco in the &quot;Entente Cordiale&quot; of 1904. The Germans, however, who had no established presence in the region, strongly protested against the French plan. The Kaiser&#x27;s dramatic intervention in Morocco in March 1905 in support of Moroccan independence became a turning point on the road to the First World War. The international Algeciras Conference of 1906 formalized France&#x27;s &quot;special position&quot; and entrusted policing of Morocco jointly to France and Spain. Germany was outmaneuvered diplomatically, and France took full control of Morocco.

Morocco experienced a famine from 1903 to 1907, as well as insurrections led by El-Rogui (Bou Hmara) and Mulai Ahmed er Raisuni. 
=== French and Spanish protectorate (1912–1956) ===

==== Hafidiya ====
In 1907, the French took the murder of Émile Mauchamp in Marrakesh as a pretext to invade Oujda in the east, as they took an uprising against their appropriation of customs revenue in Casablanca as an opportunity to bombard and invade that city in the west. Months later, there was a brief fratricidal civil war referred to as the Hafidiya, in which Abd al-Hafid, at first supported by southern aristocrats based in Marrakesh such as the and later conditionally supported by the &quot;ulama&quot; of Fes, wrested the throne from his brother Abd al-Aziz, who was supported by the French.

The Agadir Crisis increased tensions among the powerful European countries, and resulted in the Treaty of Fez (signed on 30 March 1912), which made Morocco a protectorate of France. In a second treaty signed by the French and Spanish heads of state, Spain was granted a Zone of influence in northern and southern Morocco on 27 November 1912. The northern part became the Spanish protectorate in Morocco, while the southern part was ruled from El Aaiun as a buffer zone between the Spanish Colony of Saguia El Hamra and Morocco. The treaty of Fez triggered the 1912 Fez riots. By the Tangier Protocol signed in December 1923, Tangier received special status and became an international zone, although, during World War II, it was occupied from 1940 to 1945 by Francoist Spain.

The treaties nominally assured Morocco of its legal status as a sovereign state, with the sultan as its figurehead. In practice, the sultan had no real power and the country was ruled by the colonial administration. French civil servants allied themselves with the French settlers and with their supporters in France to prevent any moves in the direction of Moroccan autonomy. As &quot;pacification&quot; proceeded, with the Zaian War and the Rif War, the French government focused on the exploitation of Morocco&#x27;s mineral wealth, and particularly its phosphates; the creation of a modern transportation system with trains and buses; and the development of a modern agricultural sector geared to the French market. Tens of thousands of &quot;colons&quot;, or colonists, entered Morocco and acquired large tracts of the rich agricultural land.

Morocco was home to half a million Europeans, most of whom settled in Casablanca, where they formed almost half the population. Since the kingdom&#x27;s independence in 1956, and particularly after Hassan II&#x27;s 1973 Moroccanization policies, the European element has largely departed.

The Spanish coup of July 1936, which gave way to the Spanish Civil War, began with the &quot;Ejército de África&quot; in Spanish occupied Morocco.

=== Nationalism and transnational anti-colonial resistance ===
Morocco has been a key transnational hub in the struggle against colonialism in the Middle-east region. The end of World War II that had weakened European colonial powers, the start of the US-URSS search for influence and the establishment of the United Nations in 1945 praising universal equality, represented an impetus for anti-colonial and nationalist movements in Morocco.

Through its special international status and the French and US presence in Tangier, the city became a hub for anti-colonial activism. Fromout Tanger, a link was established between the inside resistance and activists from other countries. By creating a transnational network of supporters and public advocates (i.e. cultural elites, politicians, public figures, academics, medias), the nationalist movement aimed to bring the Moroccan cause to the forefront of the international community debate.

In order to gain influence at a global level, Moroccan nationalist movements globalised their cause by seeking to unite with the pan-arabism movement and the Arab League, extending their activism networks to Cairo. Another example is Paris, that became an important European city from where cultural elites advocated for the independence cause and brought the protectorate question to the forefront of the public debate. The independence movement eventually managed to bring their national claim for independence to the UN for the first time in 1951, gaining a vote of 20 states in favour and 23 against.

=== Opposition to European control ===
Led by Abd el-Krim, the independent Republic of the Rif existed from 1921 to 1926, based in the central part of the Rif (in the Spanish Protectorate), while also extending, for some months, to some parts of the tribal lands of the Ghomara, the Eastern Rif, Jbala, the Ouergha valley and the north of Taza. After proclaiming independence on 18 September 1921, the polity developed state and governing institutions such as tax collection, law enforcement and the organisation of an army. However, since 1925 the Spanish and French troops managed to quell the resistance and Abd el-Krim surrendered in May 1926.

In December 1934, a small group of nationalists, members of the newly formed &quot;Comité d&#x27;Action Marocaine&quot;, or Moroccan Action Committee (CAM), proposed a Plan of Reforms that called for a return to indirect rule as envisaged by the Treaty of Fez, admission of Moroccans to government positions, and establishment of representative councils. CAM used petitions, newspaper editorials, and personal appeals to French officials to further its cause, but these proved inadequate, and the tensions created in the CAM by the failure of the plan caused it to split. The CAM was reconstituted as a nationalist political party to gain mass support for more radical demands, but the French suppressed the party in 1937.

Nationalist political parties, which subsequently arose under the French protectorate, based their arguments for Moroccan independence on declarations such as the Atlantic Charter, a joint United States-British statement that set forth, among other things, the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they live. The French regime also faced the opposition of the tribes — when the Berber were required to come under the jurisdiction of French courts in 1930, it increased support for the independence movement.

Many Moroccan Goumiers, or indigenous soldiers in the French army, assisted the Allies in both World War I and World War II. During World War II, the badly divided nationalist movement became more cohesive. However, the nationalists belief that an Allied victory would pave the way for independence was disappointed. In January 1944, the Istiqlal (Independence) Party, which subsequently provided most of the leadership for the nationalist movement, released a manifesto demanding full independence, national reunification, and a democratic constitution. The Sultan Muhammad V (1927–1961) had approved the manifesto before its submission to the French resident general, who answered that no basic change in the protectorate status was being considered. The general sympathy of the sultan for the nationalists became evident by the end of the war, although he still hoped to see complete independence achieved gradually. On 10 April 1947, in spite of a massacre instigated by French forces in Casablanca, Sultan Muhammad V delivered a momentous speech in Tangier appealing for independence and territorial unity of Morocco, having travelled from French Morocco and through Spanish Morocco to reach the Tangier International Zone. The &quot;résidence&quot;, supported by French economic interests and vigorously backed by most of the &quot;colons&quot;, adamantly refused to consider even reforms short of independence.

Although Zionism in Morocco dates back to the early 20th century, the significant emigration of Moroccan Jews only began after the establishment of the State of Israel in the 1948 Palestine war. This emigration was organized and facilitated by Zionist groups from outside of Morocco; about 60,000 migrated through &quot;Cadima&quot; (1949–1956) and about 90,000 in Operation Yachin (1961–1964).In December 1952, a riot broke out in Casablanca over the assassination of the Tunisian labour leader Farhat Hached; this event marked a watershed in relations between Moroccan political parties and French authorities. In the aftermath of the rioting, the residency outlawed the new Moroccan Communist Party and the Istiqlal Party.

France&#x27;s exile of the highly respected Sultan Mohammed V to Madagascar on Eid al-Adha of 1953, and his replacement by the unpopular Mohammed Ben Aarafa, sparked active opposition to the French protectorate both from nationalists and those who saw the sultan as a religious leader. In retribution, Muhammad Zarqtuni bombed Casablanca&#x27;s &quot;Marché Central&quot; in the European &quot;ville nouvelle&quot; on Christmas of that year. A month after his replacement, Allal ben Abdallah, a Moroccan nationalist attempted to assassinate the sultan on his way to the friday prayers at Great Mosque of Fes el-Jdid. Two years later, faced with a united Moroccan demand for the sultan&#x27;s return and rising violence in Morocco, as well as a deteriorating situation in Algeria, the French government brought Mohammed V back to Morocco, and the following year began the negotiations that led to Moroccan independence. So, with the triumphant return of Sultan Mohammed ben Youssef, the beginning of the end of the colonial era was marked.

==Independent Morocco (since 1956)==

In late 1955, in the middle of what came to be known as the Revolution of the King and the People, Sultan Mohammed V successfully negotiated the gradual restoration of Moroccan independence within a framework of French-Moroccan interdependence. The sultan agreed to institute reforms that would transform Morocco into a constitutional monarchy with a democratic form of government. As the French Foreign Minister Antoine Pinay had expressed, there was a willingness to grant Morocco its independence to &quot;turn Morocco into a modern, democratic and sovereign state&quot;. In February 1956, Morocco acquired limited home rule. Further negotiations for full independence culminated in the French-Moroccan Agreement signed in Paris on 22 March 1956.

On 7 April 1956, France officially relinquished its protectorate in Morocco. The internationalized city of Tangier was reintegrated with the signing of the Tangier Protocol on 29 October 1956. The abolition of the Spanish protectorate and the recognition of Moroccan independence by Spain were negotiated separately and made final in the Joint Declaration of April 1956. Through this agreement with Spain in 1956 and another in 1958, Moroccan control over certain Spanish-ruled areas was restored. Attempts to claim other Spanish possessions through military action were less successful.

In the months that followed independence, Mohammed V proceeded to build a modern governmental structure under a constitutional monarchy in which the sultan would exercise an active political role. He acted cautiously, intent on preventing the Istiqlal from consolidating its control and establishing a one-party state. He assumed the monarchy on 11 August 1957, and from that date, the country officially became known as &#x27;The Kingdom of Morocco&#x27;.

===Reign of Hassan II (1961–1999)===

Mohammed V&#x27;s son Hassan II became King of Morocco on 3 March 1961. His rule saw significant political unrest, and the ruthless government response earned the period the name &quot;the years of lead&quot;. Hassan took personal control of the government as prime minister and named a new cabinet. Aided by an advisory council, he drew up a new constitution, which was approved overwhelmingly in a December 1962 referendum. Under its provisions, the king remained the central figure in the executive branch of the government, but legislative power was vested in a bicameral parliament, and an independent judiciary was guaranteed.

In May 1963, legislative elections took place for the first time, and the royalist coalition secured a small plurality of seats. However, following a period of political upheaval in June 1965, Hassan II assumed full legislative and executive powers under a &quot;state of exception,&quot; which remained in effect until 1970. Subsequently, a reform constitution was approved, restoring limited parliamentary government, and new elections were held. However, dissent remained, revolving around complaints of widespread corruption and malfeasance in government. In July 1971 and again in August 1972, the regime was challenged by two attempted military coups.

After neighbouring Algeria&#x27;s 1962 independence from France, border skirmishes in the Tindouf area of southwestern Algeria escalated in 1963 into what is known as the Sand War. The conflict ended after Organisation of African Unity mediation, with no territorial changes.

On 3 March 1973, Hassan II announced the policy of Moroccanization, in which state-held assets, agricultural lands, and businesses that were more than 50 percent foreign-owned—and especially French-owned—were transferred to political loyalists and high-ranking military officers. The Moroccanization of the economy affected thousands of businesses and the proportion of industrial businesses in Morocco that were Moroccan-owned immediately increased from 18% to 55%. 2/3 of the wealth of the Moroccanized economy was concentrated in 36 Moroccan families.

The patriotism engendered by Morocco&#x27;s participation in the Middle East conflict and Western Sahara events contributed to Hassan&#x27;s popularity. The king had dispatched Moroccan troops to the Sinai front after the outbreak of the Arab-Israeli War in October 1973. Although they arrived too late to engage in hostilities, the action won Morocco goodwill among other Arab states. Soon after, the attention of the government turned to the acquisition of Western Sahara from Spain, an issue on which all major domestic parties agreed.

Following years of discontent and inequality during the 1980s, on 14 December 1990, a general strike was called by two major trade unions in the country to demand an increase in the minimum wage and other measures. In Fez, this broke into protests and rioting led by university students and youths. The death of one of the students further inflamed protests, resulting in buildings being burned and looted, particularly symbols of wealth. While the official death toll was 5 people, the New York Times reported a toll of 33 people and quoted an anonymous source claiming the real death toll was likely higher. The government denied reports that the deaths were due to the intervention of security forces and armoured vehicles. Many of those arrested were later released and the government promised to investigate and raise wages, though some of these measures were dismissed by skeptical opposition parties.

===Western Sahara conflict (1974–1991)===
The Spanish enclave of Ifni in the south became part of the new state of Morocco in 1969, but other Spanish possessions in the north, including Ceuta, Melilla and Plaza de soberanía, remained under Spanish control, with Morocco viewing them as occupied territory.

In August 1974, Spain formally acknowledged the 1966 United Nations (UN) resolution calling for a referendum on the future status of Western Sahara and requested that a plebiscite be conducted under UN supervision. A UN visiting mission reported in October 1975 that an overwhelming majority of the Saharan people desired independence. Morocco protested the proposed referendum and took its case to the International Court of Justice at The Hague, which ruled that despite historical &quot;ties of allegiance&quot; between Morocco and the tribes of Western Sahara, there was no legal justification for departing from the UN position on self-determination. Spain, meanwhile, had declared that even in the absence of a referendum, it intended to surrender political control of Western Sahara, and Spain, Morocco, and Mauritania convened a tripartite conference to resolve the territory&#x27;s future. Spain also announced that it was opening independence talks with the Algerian-backed Saharan independence movement known as the Polisario Front.

In early 1976, Spain ceded the administration of Western Sahara to Morocco and Mauritania. Morocco assumed control over the northern two-thirds of the territory and conceded the remaining portion in the south to Mauritania. An assembly of Saharan tribal leaders duly acknowledged Moroccan sovereignty. However, buoyed by the increasing defection of tribal chiefs to its cause, the Polisario drew up a constitution and announced the formation of the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), and itself formed government-in-exile.

The Moroccan government eventually sent a large portion of its combat forces into Western Sahara to confront the Polisario&#x27;s forces, which were relatively small but well-equipped, highly mobile, and resourceful. The Polisario used Algerian bases for quick strikes against targets deep inside Morocco and Mauritania, as well as for operations in Western Sahara. In August 1979, after suffering military losses, Mauritania renounced its claim to Western Sahara and signed a peace treaty with the Polisario. In 1984, Morocco withdrew from the Organisation of African Unity due to the admission of the SADR as a member. Morocco then annexed the entire territory and, in 1985 built a 2,500-kilometer sand berm around three-quarters of Western Sahara.

In 1988, Morocco and the Polisario Front agreed on a United Nations (UN) peace plan, and a cease-fire and settlement plan went into effect in 1991. Even though the UN Security Council created a peacekeeping force to implement a referendum on self-determination for Western Sahara, it has yet to be held, periodic negotiations have failed, and the status of the territory remains unresolved.

The war against the Polisario guerrillas put severe strains on the economy, and Morocco found itself increasingly isolated diplomatically. Gradual political reforms in the 1990s culminated in the constitutional reform of 1996, which created a new bicameral legislature with expanded, although still limited, powers. Elections for the Chamber of Representatives were held in 1997, reportedly marred by irregularities.

===Reign of Mohammed VI (since 1999)===
With the death of Hassan II in 1999, the more liberal Crown Prince Sidi Mohammed took the throne, assuming the title Mohammed VI. He enacted successive reforms to modernize Morocco, and the human-rights record of the country improved markedly. One of the new king&#x27;s first acts was to free approximately 8,000 political prisoners and reduce the sentences of another 30,000. He also established a commission to compensate families of missing political activists and others subjected to arbitrary detention. In 1999, the First Sahrawi Intifada took place. Internationally, Morocco has maintained strong ties to the West. It was one of the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States.

In September 2002, new legislative elections were held, and the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP) won a plurality. International observers regarded the elections as free and fair, noting the absence of the irregularities that had plagued the 1997 elections. In May 2003, in honor of the birth of a son, the king ordered the release of 9,000 prisoners and the reduction of 38,000 sentences. Also in 2003, Berber-language instruction was introduced in primary schools, prior to introducing it at all educational levels. In March 2000, women&#x27;s groups organized demonstrations in Rabat proposing reforms to the legal status of women in the country. 200,000 to 300,000 women attended, calling for a ban on polygamy, and the introduction of civil divorce law. Although a counter-demonstration attracted 200,000 to 400,000 participants, the movement was influential on King Mohammed, and he enacted a new &quot;Mudawana&quot;, or family law, in early 2004, meeting some of the demands of women&#x27;s rights activists.

In July 2002, a crisis broke out with Spain over a small, uninhabited island lying just less than 200 meters from the Moroccan coast, named Toura or Leila by Moroccans and Perejil by Spain. After mediation by the United States, both Morocco and Spain agreed to return to the status quo, under which the island remains deserted.

In May 2003, Islamist suicide bombers simultaneously struck a series of sites in Casablanca, killing 45 and injuring more than 100 others. The Moroccan government responded with a crackdown against Islamist extremists, ultimately arresting several thousand, prosecuting 1,200, and sentencing about 900. Additional arrests followed in June 2004. That same month, the United States designated Morocco a major non-North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, stating that it was in recognition of its efforts to thwart international terrorism. In May 2005, the Second Sahrawi Intifada took place. On 1 January 2006, a comprehensive bilateral free trade agreement between the United States and Morocco took effect. The agreement had been signed in 2004 along with a similar agreement with the European Union, Morocco&#x27;s main trade partner.

In February 2011, thousands of people rallied in Rabat and other cities calling for political reform and a new constitution curbing the powers of the king. Two months later, a bombing in Marrakesh occurred, killing 17 people – mainly foreigners. It was the deadliest attack in Morocco in eight years. The Maghrebi arm of al-Qaeda denied involvement. In July 2011 King Mohammed introduced a constitutional referendum proposed in order to placate &quot;Arab Spring&quot; protests. In article 5 of the 2011 constitution, Amazigh was recognized as an official language.
In October 2016, large-scale protests erupted after a fish seller in al-Hoceima was crushed to death in a rubbish truck as he tried to retrieve fish confiscated by police. The protests became known as the Hirak Rif Movement. The 2016 election witnessed the victory of the Justice and Development Party (PJD), attaining a plurality of seats for a second consecutive time. On 30 January 2017, Morocco rejoined the African Union as a member state, 33 years after leaving. The 2018 consumer boycott targeted the market-dominating fuel, bottled water, and dairy brands.

The COVID-19 pandemic in Morocco was first confirmed on 2 March 2020. Eight days later, on 10 March 2020, Morocco recorded its first COVID-19-related death. On 10 December 2020, President Donald Trump announced that the United States would officially recognize Morocco&#x27;s claims over Western Sahara as part of the Israel–Morocco normalization agreement, which saw Morocco reestablishing diplomatic relations with Israel. A joint declaration between the three countries was signed on 22 December 2020.

On 17 May 2021, an incident occurred between the borders of Spain and Morocco, part of a diplomatic crisis between both nations. On 24 August 2021, neighbouring Algeria cut diplomatic relations with Morocco, accusing Morocco of supporting a separatist group and &quot;hostile actions against Algeria&quot;. Morocco called the decision &quot;unjustified&quot;.

The 2021 election was held on 8 September 2021, which witnessed an electoral wipeout of the PJD, having lost more than 90% of its seats and ending in eighth place. The National Rally of Independents won a plurality of seats in the elections, and Aziz Akhannouch was later named the 17th Prime Minister of Morocco. On 24 June 2022, a migration incident occurred resulting in the deaths of 23 migrants.

On 3 May 2023, King Mohammed VI declared Amazigh New Year as an official national holiday to be celebrated yearly.

On 8 September 2023, a 6.8 magnitude earthquake hit Morocco killing more than 2,800 people and injuring thousands. The epicentre of the quake was around 70 km southwest of the city of Marrakech.

==See also==
*History of North Africa
*Imperial cities of Morocco
*List of Kings of Morocco
*Politics of Morocco
* History of cities in Morocco:
** Casablanca history and timeline
** Fez history and timeline
** Marrakesh history and timeline
** Rabat history and timeline
** Tangier history and timeline

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* Abun-Nasr, Jamil M. &quot;A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1987. .
* Chandler, James A. &quot;Spain and Her Moroccan Protectorate, 1898–1927,&quot; &quot;Journal of Contemporary History&quot; 10 (April 1975): 301–22.
* Pennell, C. R. &quot;Morocco Since 1830: A History&quot;, New York University Press, 2000. 
* Pennell, C. R. &quot;Morocco: From Empire to Independence&quot;, Oneworld Publications, 2013. (preview)
* Stenner, David. &quot;Globalizing Morocco: Transnational Activism and the Postcolonial State&quot; (Stanford UP, 2019). online review
* Terrasse, Henri. &quot;History of Morocco&quot;, Éd. Atlantides, 1952. 
* Woolman, David. &quot;Rebels in the Rif: Abd-el-Krim and the Rif Rebellion&quot; (Stanford UP, 1967)
* Yolanda Aixelà-Cabré. &quot;Spain&#x27;s African Colonial Legacies: Morocco and Equatorial Guinea Compared&quot; (Brill, 2022) online review

===In French===
*David Bensoussan, &quot;Il était une fois le Maroc : témoignages du passé judéo-marocain&quot;, Éd. du Lys, 2010. .
*Bernard Lugan, &quot;Histoire du Maroc&quot;, Éd. Perrin, 2000. 
*Michel Abitbol, &quot;Histoire du Maroc&quot;, Éd. Perrin, 2009. 

==External links==
*A short history of Morocco
*Early Twentiethth Century Timelines : Moroccan crises, 1903–1914
*The History of Morocco
*Historical map of Morocco – c. 1600
*Z. Brakez et al. &quot;Human mitochondrial DNA sequence variation in the Moroccan population of the Souss area&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="35" end="42" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="108" end="120" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470903" start="153" end="167" title="Iberomaurusian" label="Iberomaurusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167862" start="187" end="195" title="Taforalt" label="Taforalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="232" end="242" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="261" end="267" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="328" end="343" title="Idrisid dynasty" label="Idrisid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="497" end="505" title="hominidae" label="hominids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="558" end="565" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="582" end="591" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="662" end="665" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="702" end="720" title="Berbers" label="indigenous Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="790" end="812" title="Ancient Carthage" label="city-state of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="1003" end="1012" title="Mauretania" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244742" start="1063" end="1070" title="Mauretania Tingitana" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1078" end="1090" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="1137" end="1144" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1176" end="1192" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="1229" end="1253" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="conquered by the Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="1307" end="1324" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q759998" start="1335" end="1348" title="Berber Revolt" label="Berber Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="1421" end="1436" title="Idrisid dynasty" label="Idrisid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="1442" end="1455" title="Saadi dynasty" label="Saadi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129036" start="1509" end="1515" title="Alawi dynasty" label="Alawis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1720" end="1732" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="1871" end="1875" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1923" end="1935" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="1960" end="1972" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="2360" end="2370" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="2450" end="2457" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="2593" end="2600" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q766150" start="2746" end="2761" title="Capsian culture" label="Capsian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2775" end="2784" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035710" start="3099" end="3114" title="Cardium pottery" label="Cardium pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3153" end="3166" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="3226" end="3239" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="3334" end="3346" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="3378" end="3392" title="Beaker culture" label="Beaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="3503" end="3512" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314811" start="3878" end="3885" title="Chellah" label="Chellah"/>
<link wikidata="Q923835" start="3887" end="3892" title="Lixus (ancient city)" label="Lixus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="3897" end="3904" title="Mogador" label="Mogador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="4011" end="4032" title="Ancient Carthage" label="the state of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="4088" end="4096" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="4347" end="4353" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4369" end="4382" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="4443" end="4450" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841456" start="4525" end="4529" title="Baga (king)" label="Baga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="4646" end="4655" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="4661" end="4673" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q526000" start="4976" end="4997" title="Ptolemy of Mauretania" label="Ptolemy of Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5431" end="5443" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244742" start="5457" end="5477" title="Mauretania Tingitana" label="Mauretania Tingitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q391215" start="5496" end="5505" title="Volubilis" label="Volubilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5559" end="5567" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q315670" start="5624" end="5631" title="Juba II" label="Juba II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="5936" end="5946" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403368" start="5962" end="5966" title="Anfa" label="Anfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q315670" start="6037" end="6044" title="Juba II" label="Juba II"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="6069" end="6077" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095436" start="6139" end="6161" title="Iulia Constantia Zilil" label="Iulia Constantia Zilil"/>
<link wikidata="Q733798" start="6163" end="6184" title="Iulia Valentia Banasa" label="Iulia Valentia Banasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849065" start="6190" end="6212" title="Iulia Campestris Babba" label="Iulia Campestris Babba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932303" start="6400" end="6411" title="Roman roads in Morocco" label="Roman roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="6516" end="6521" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="6623" end="6630" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="6982" end="6992" title="schism (religion)" label="Schismatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6997" end="7006" title="Heresy#Christianity" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="7209" end="7239" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7295" end="7303" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb#Completion of the conquest" label="achieved"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7370" end="7375" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="7417" end="7431" title="Caliphate" label="Islamic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="7493" end="7501" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="7564" end="7572" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="7638" end="7651" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="7792" end="7801" title="Kharijite" label="Kharijite"/>
<link wikidata="Q759998" start="7842" end="7850" title="Berber Revolt" label="revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="7870" end="7887" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="8070" end="8078" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="8129" end="8136" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="8201" end="8209" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="8339" end="8348" title="Berghwata" label="Berghwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="8350" end="8360" title="Sijilmassa" label="Sijilmassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709337" start="8365" end="8370" title="Emirate of Nekor" label="Nekor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="8387" end="8394" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q565568" start="8399" end="8405" title="Tahert" label="Tahert"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="8429" end="8436" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q672740" start="8510" end="8520" title="Banu Ifran" label="Banu Ifran"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="8607" end="8616" title="Berghwata" label="Berghwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="8636" end="8651" title="Syncretism" label="syncretic faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="8687" end="8697" title="Barghawata" label="Barghawata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="8799" end="8806" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637239" start="8854" end="8859" title="Sufri" label="Sufri"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="8860" end="8869" title="Kharijite" label="Kharijite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="8883" end="8890" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="8903" end="8910" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q183405" start="9020" end="9024" title="Safi, Morocco" label="Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="9029" end="9033" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981135" start="9058" end="9075" title="Tarif al-Matghari" label="Tarif al-Matghari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292856" start="9120" end="9136" title="Midrarid dynasty" label="Midrarid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="9229" end="9238" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="9296" end="9304" title="entrepôt" label="entrepôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207053" start="9388" end="9397" title="Ziz River" label="River Ziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017333" start="9405" end="9413" title="Tafilalt" label="Tafilalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27536174" start="9437" end="9444" title="Rissani" label="Rissani"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="9516" end="9522" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="9602" end="9626" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Sahara trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="9682" end="9689" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709337" start="9754" end="9770" title="Kingdom of Nekor" label="Kingdom of Nekor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189898" start="9778" end="9785" title="emirate" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="9802" end="9805" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901397" start="9860" end="9868" title="Temsaman (region)" label="Temsaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537816" start="9888" end="9893" title="Nekor" label="Nekor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404494" start="9931" end="9949" title="Salih I ibn Mansur" label="Salih I ibn Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="9960" end="9966" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="10007" end="10013" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="10029" end="10034" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="10304" end="10311" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q431575" start="10561" end="10576" title="Idrisid dynasty" label="Idrisid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q438601" start="10671" end="10679" title="Idriss I" label="Idriss I"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="10705" end="10718" title="Hasan ibn Ali" label="Hasan ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="10940" end="10947" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="11020" end="11037" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="11048" end="11055" title="Kharijites" label="Khariji"/>
<link wikidata="Q759998" start="11060" end="11074" title="Berber Revolt" label="Berber revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="11104" end="11121" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="11356" end="11377" title="Barghawata" label="Barghwata Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292856" start="11408" end="11424" title="Midrarid dynasty" label="Midrarid Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="11428" end="11437" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q438601" start="11479" end="11497" title="Idris ibn Abdallah" label="Idris ibn Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="11541" end="11558" title="Ali ibn Abi Talib" label="Ali ibn Abi Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="11583" end="11590" title="Fatimah" label="Fatimah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="11625" end="11633" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="11666" end="11679" title="Hasan ibn Ali" label="Hasan ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403042" start="11691" end="11707" title="Battle of Fakhkh" label="Battle of Fakhkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="11714" end="11719" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="11733" end="11741" title="Abbasids" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="11783" end="11799" title="Muhammad" label="prophet Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="11861" end="11868" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q391215" start="11947" end="11956" title="Volubilis" label="Volubilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639343" start="12000" end="12014" title="Awraba" label="Awraba Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="12067" end="12071" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794524" start="12129" end="12136" title="Kusayla" label="Kusayla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="12165" end="12172" title="Ummayad" label="Ummayad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="12463" end="12470" title="Khariji" label="Khariji"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="12825" end="12836" title="Fes" label="Medinat Fas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="13227" end="13235" title="Abbasids" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="13417" end="13424" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="13813" end="13822" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q922653" start="14031" end="14039" title="Idris II of Morocco" label="Idris II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="14072" end="14075" title="Fes" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="14232" end="14240" title="Aghlabid" label="Aghlabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055244" start="14392" end="14396" title="Sous" label="Sous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="14493" end="14502" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="14504" end="14514" title="Barghawata" label="Barghawata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537816" start="14519" end="14524" title="Nekor" label="Nekor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737233" start="14707" end="14715" title="Muhammad ibn Idris" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21084376" start="14984" end="14991" title="Tamasna" label="Tamesna"/>
<link wikidata="Q894940" start="15009" end="15019" title="Bou Regreg" label="Bou Regreg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314811" start="15037" end="15044" title="Chellah" label="Chellah"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="15415" end="15421" title="Asilah" label="Asilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836401" start="15563" end="15575" title="Ali ibn Umar" label="Ali ibn Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746373" start="15706" end="15722" title="Ali ibn Muhammad" label="Ali ibn Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q681523" start="15894" end="15912" title="Yahya ibn Muhammad" label="Yahya ibn Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="15980" end="15985" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="15992" end="16006" title="Arabic culture" label="Arabic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="16070" end="16089" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q378014" start="16308" end="16321" title="University of al-Qarawiyyin" label="al-Qarawiyyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324925" start="16326" end="16341" title="Andalusian Mosque" label="al-Andalusiyyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="16507" end="16523" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="17146" end="17153" title="Khariji" label="Khariji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637239" start="17154" end="17159" title="Sufri" label="Sufri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423557" start="17191" end="17198" title="Miknasa" label="Miknasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009308" start="17280" end="17286" title="Sefrou" label="Sefrou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080314" start="17385" end="17390" title="Yahya ibn al-Qasim" label="Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141238" start="17746" end="17770" title="Yahya ibn Idris ibn Umar" label="Yahya ibn Idris ibn Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="17854" end="17862" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423557" start="17951" end="17958" title="Miknasa" label="Miknasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829222" start="18269" end="18286" title="Hassan I al-Hajam" label="Hassan I al-Hajam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639824" start="18580" end="18593" title="Hajar an-Nasar" label="Hajar an-Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="18744" end="18763" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Umayyads of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q610512" start="19373" end="19378" title="Jbala" label="Jbala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="19529" end="19548" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Umayyads of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q190418" start="19556" end="19573" title="Abd al-Rahman III" label="Abd ar-Rahman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829268" start="19605" end="19637" title="Al-Qasim Guennoun" label="Al-Qasim al-Gannoun ibn Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827459" start="19736" end="19751" title="Abul-Aish Ahmad" label="Abul-&amp;#x27;Aysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280309" start="19928" end="19936" title="Basra, Morocco" label="al-Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q253605" start="20061" end="20090" title="Al-Hasan ibn Kannun" label="Hasan ibn al-Qasim al-Gannoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q559554" start="20157" end="20163" title="Jawhar (general)" label="Jawhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004719" start="20735" end="20752" title="Buluggin ibn Ziri" label="Buluggin ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="20837" end="20842" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334861" start="21061" end="21070" title="Almanzor" label="al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="21371" end="21378" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="21379" end="21389" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="21416" end="21424" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="21436" end="21439" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="21441" end="21450" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826842" start="21455" end="21461" title="Aghmat" label="Aghmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q672740" start="21472" end="21482" title="Banu Ifran" label="Banu Ifran"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="21503" end="21507" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137950" start="21527" end="21532" title="Tadla" label="Tadla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033421" start="21819" end="21828" title="Hammudid dynasty" label="Hammudids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="21883" end="21890" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="21904" end="21909" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q593222" start="21937" end="21950" title="Moulay Idriss Zerhoun" label="Moulay Idriss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066334" start="22105" end="22130" title="Zawiya of Moulay Idris II" label="Zawiya of Moulay Idris II"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="22354" end="22371" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269600" start="22407" end="22414" title="Lamtuna" label="Lamtuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="22423" end="22429" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="22453" end="22460" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q369981" start="22676" end="22693" title="Yusuf ibn Tashfin" label="Yusuf ibn Tashfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217177" start="22743" end="22748" title="taifa" label="taifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="22766" end="22776" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="22890" end="22900" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328537" start="23170" end="23187" title="battle of Ourique" label="battle of Ourique"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="23224" end="23232" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="23262" end="23271" title="Marrakech" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895891" start="23370" end="23382" title="Banu Ghaniya" label="Banu Ghaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="23437" end="23444" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727150" start="23466" end="23474" title="Tamazgha" label="Tamazgha"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="23557" end="23563" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="23586" end="23593" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="23692" end="23698" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427023" start="23770" end="23776" title="Kutama" label="Kutama"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="23815" end="23822" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="23863" end="23876" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="23888" end="23896" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="23976" end="23983" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972560" start="24038" end="24043" title="Lamta" label="Lamta"/>
<link wikidata="Q486636" start="24051" end="24062" title="Draa valley" label="Draa valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q574853" start="24088" end="24098" title="Anti-Atlas" label="Anti-Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="24145" end="24151" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269600" start="24175" end="24182" title="Lamtuna" label="Lamtuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="24255" end="24265" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569" start="24297" end="24310" title="Senegal River" label="Senegal River"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="24355" end="24360" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q209703" start="24522" end="24527" title="Sudan (region)" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="24555" end="24573" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q616309" start="24676" end="24685" title="Awdaghust" label="Awdaghust"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="24710" end="24729" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q206789" start="24806" end="24818" title="Ghana empire" label="Ghana empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="24879" end="24887" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="24891" end="24901" title="Sijilmassa" label="Sijilmassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368541" start="25229" end="25246" title="Yahya ibn Ibrahim" label="Yahya ibn Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="25324" end="25334" title="Hajj" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="25338" end="25343" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="25374" end="25382" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="25386" end="25394" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818646" start="25409" end="25426" title="Abu Imran al-Fasi" label="Abu Imran al-Fasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="25440" end="25443" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="25476" end="25481" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="25482" end="25488" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="25540" end="25545" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q293658" start="25552" end="25570" title="al-Muizz ibn Badis" label="al-Muizz ibn Badis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="25615" end="25627" title="Shi&amp;#x27;ite" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ite"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="25628" end="25635" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="25936" end="25947" title="Sharia" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055244" start="26103" end="26107" title="Sous" label="Sous"/>
<link wikidata="Q552693" start="26223" end="26241" title="Abdallah ibn Yasin" label="Abdallah ibn Yasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230014" start="26372" end="26378" title="Ya Sin" label="Ya Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="26408" end="26412" title="Sura" label="Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="26420" end="26431" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="26683" end="26694" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="26704" end="26722" title="Sunnah" label="Orthodox tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11955467" start="27414" end="27439" title="Yahya ibn Umar al-Lamtuni" label="Yahya ibn Umar al-Lamtuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="28678" end="28690" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="28692" end="28698" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="28699" end="28705" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="28806" end="28823" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="28825" end="28835" title="Al Andalus" label="Al Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="28841" end="28853" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="28859" end="28866" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733867" start="28873" end="28889" title="Almohad doctrine" label="Almohad doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q455925" start="28905" end="28915" title="Ibn Tumart" label="Ibn Tumart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="28933" end="28940" title="Masmuda" label="Masmuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="28951" end="28957" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="28986" end="29001" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="29036" end="29043" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="29053" end="29060" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="29072" end="29082" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="29112" end="29122" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="29126" end="29133" title="Sanhaja" label="Sanhaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948981" start="29210" end="29216" title="Tinmel" label="Tinmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="29224" end="29239" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="29327" end="29334" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q316349" start="29420" end="29435" title="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="29481" end="29491" title="al-Ghazali" label="al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q174495" start="29637" end="29643" title="tawhid" label="tawhid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="29698" end="29715" title="God in Islam" label="attributes of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="29850" end="29866" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333989" start="30058" end="30063" title="ribat" label="ribat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948981" start="30067" end="30073" title="Tinmel" label="Tinmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826842" start="30594" end="30600" title="Aghmat" label="Aghmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="30647" end="30656" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q54874867" start="30809" end="30829" title="Battle of al-Buhayra" label="Battle of al-Buhayra"/>
<link wikidata="Q127301" start="31403" end="31409" title="Occultation (Islam)" label="ghayba"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="31584" end="31590" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="32061" end="32071" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="32132" end="32137" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="32156" end="32165" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="32176" end="32186" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="32398" end="32405" title="Córdoba, Andalusia" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="32409" end="32416" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q834479" start="32468" end="32475" title="Giralda" label="Giralda"/>
<link wikidata="Q498261" start="32624" end="32642" title="Alcázar of Seville" label="Alcázar of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q335489" start="32759" end="32774" title="Abu Yaqub Yusuf" label="Abu Yaqub Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q455739" start="32806" end="32831" title="Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur" label="Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="33022" end="33028" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="33160" end="33166" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="33203" end="33211" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="33308" end="33331" title="Alfonso VIII of Castile" label="Alfonso VIII of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481920" start="33339" end="33356" title="Battle of Alarcos" label="Battle of Alarcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142023" start="33383" end="33391" title="Yusuf II" label="Yusuf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="33526" end="33533" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="33618" end="33623" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q715749" start="33724" end="33753" title="Muhammad an-Nasir" label="Muhammad &amp;#x27;al-Nasir&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="33899" end="33906" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="33908" end="33914" title="Aragón" label="Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="33916" end="33923" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="33946" end="33975" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686362" start="33983" end="33996" title="Sierra Morena" label="Sierra Morena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="34203" end="34209" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142023" start="34210" end="34243" title="Yusuf II, Almohad Caliph" label="Yusuf II &amp;quot;al-Mustansir&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="34295" end="34302" title="regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65173868" start="34587" end="34609" title="Siege of Alcácer do Sal" label="loss of Alcácer do Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="34617" end="34636" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="34766" end="34775" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="34794" end="34799" title="Vizier" label="wazir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627497" start="34889" end="34925" title="Abdul-Wahid I, Almohad Caliph" label="Abd al-Wahid I &amp;#x27;al-Makhlu&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="35075" end="35085" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="35157" end="35163" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q307610" start="35193" end="35209" title="Abdallah al-Adil" label="Abdallah al-Adil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260782" start="35390" end="35400" title="deposition (politics)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="35478" end="35482" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="35490" end="35494" title="coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="35867" end="35873" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q488555" start="35951" end="35956" title="Baeza, Spain" label="Baeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15681" start="35990" end="35994" title="Jaén, Spain" label="Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q243122" start="36139" end="36163" title="Ferdinand III of Castile" label="Ferdinand III of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708034" start="36530" end="36534" title="Siege of Jaén (1225)" label="Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36539" end="36546" title="Siege of Andújar" label="Andújar"/>
<link wikidata="Q476807" start="36553" end="36557" title="raid (military)" label="raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q95025" start="36586" end="36590" title="Province of Jaén (Spain)" label="Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q81972" start="36592" end="36599" title="Province of Córdoba (Spain)" label="Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116489" start="36604" end="36619" title="Vega de Granada" label="Vega de Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="36703" end="36710" title="Córdoba, Andalusia" label="Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q316115" start="36741" end="36759" title="Alfonso IX of León" label="Alfonso IX of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q203996" start="36764" end="36785" title="Sancho II of Portugal" label="Sancho II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="37102" end="37109" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="37629" end="37635" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770153" start="37641" end="37645" title="Aspe" label="Aspe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678" start="37704" end="37711" title="Cáceres, Spain" label="Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q302099" start="37716" end="37723" title="Requena, Valencia" label="Requena"/>
<link wikidata="Q587590" start="38156" end="38174" title="Baños de la Encina" label="Baños de la Encina"/>
<link wikidata="Q756910" start="38197" end="38215" title="Order of Calatrava" label="Order of Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q15093" start="38230" end="38241" title="Ciudad Real" label="Ciudad Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639065" start="38247" end="38254" title="Capilla, Badajoz" label="Capilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083966" start="38859" end="38893" title="Yahya, Almohad Caliph" label="Yahya &amp;quot;al-Mu&amp;#x27;tasim&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361969" start="39056" end="39101" title="Idris I, Almohad Caliph" label="Abd al-Ala Idris I &amp;#x27;al-Ma&amp;#x27;mun&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="39127" end="39132" title="truce" label="truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248202" start="39180" end="39188" title="maravedi" label="maravedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="39292" end="39299" title="Straits of Gibraltar" label="straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118661" start="39359" end="39366" title="Leonese Country" label="Leonese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39660" end="39697" title="Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Hud al-Judhami" label="Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Hud al-Judhami"/>
<link wikidata="Q33058" start="39732" end="39740" title="Banu Hud" label="Banu Hud"/>
<link wikidata="Q33061" start="39777" end="39795" title="taifa of Zaragoza" label="taifa of Saragossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="40121" end="40128" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="40157" end="40164" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="40165" end="40171" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q203996" start="40471" end="40492" title="Sancho II of Portugal" label="Sancho II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316115" start="40494" end="40512" title="Alfonso IX of León" label="Alfonso IX of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q243122" start="40514" end="40538" title="Ferdinand III of Castile" label="Ferdinand III of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q212052" start="40543" end="40560" title="James I of Aragon" label="James I of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="40623" end="40634" title="reconquista" label="reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="40662" end="40669" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="40694" end="40700" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679" start="40705" end="40712" title="Badajoz" label="Badajoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="40732" end="40739" title="Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q213251" start="40761" end="40765" title="Beja (Portugal)" label="Beja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="40789" end="40796" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="40819" end="40827" title="Valencia, Spain" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828723" start="40849" end="40855" title="Niebla, Huelva" label="Niebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12246" start="40856" end="40862" title="Huelva" label="Huelva"/>
<link wikidata="Q749180" start="40882" end="40888" title="Silves Municipality, Portugal" label="Silves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="40912" end="40918" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15681" start="40941" end="40945" title="Jaén, Spain" label="Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708040" start="40946" end="40953" title="Siege of Jaén (1245-46)" label="in 1246"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="40968" end="40976" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="41087" end="41094" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41372" end="41388" title="battle of Alange" label="battle of Alange"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="41807" end="41821" title="Nasrid dynasty" label="Nasrid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="41865" end="41872" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="41926" end="41944" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="41986" end="41996" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="42387" end="42390" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="42406" end="42435" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="42495" end="42502" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="42593" end="42599" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="42609" end="42615" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="42671" end="42681" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="42884" end="42891" title="Marinid" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822103" start="42961" end="42992" title="Idris II, Almohad Caliph" label="Idris II, &amp;#x27;al-Wathiq&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="43027" end="43036" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="43147" end="43151" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q312759" start="43382" end="43388" title="Biskra" label="Biskra"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="43405" end="43412" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="43453" end="43462" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q425646" start="43467" end="43473" title="Figuig" label="Figuig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="43487" end="43494" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="43542" end="43549" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146608" start="43607" end="43621" title="Moulouya River" label="Moulouya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="43654" end="43658" title="Banu Hilal" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="43758" end="43765" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="44019" end="44034" title="Almohad dynasty" label="Almohad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481920" start="44115" end="44132" title="Battle of Alarcos" label="Battle of Alarcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="44321" end="44326" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q820813" start="44331" end="44338" title="Berkane" label="Berkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="44708" end="44711" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="44815" end="44822" title="Hafsids" label="Hafsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="44870" end="44886" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Zayyanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="44890" end="44897" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q574469" start="44961" end="44965" title="Taza" label="Taza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="44967" end="44972" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="44974" end="44978" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="44980" end="44986" title="Meknes" label="Meknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="44991" end="44994" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="45128" end="45139" title="mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q335496" start="45141" end="45156" title="Abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Abd Al-Haqq" label="Abu Yusuf Yaqub"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="45178" end="45187" title="Marrakech" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="45221" end="45228" title="Nasrid dynasty" label="Nasrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="45229" end="45239" title="Emirate of Granada" label="of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="45258" end="45267" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="45303" end="45313" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="45358" end="45376" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Kingdom of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="45472" end="45491" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15907" start="45994" end="45998" title="Rota, Spain" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q222702" start="46000" end="46006" title="Tarifa" label="Tarifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="46011" end="46020" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445622" start="46044" end="46052" title="Fes Jdid" label="Fes Jdid"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="46525" end="46532" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702240" start="46816" end="46835" title="Al-Attarine Madrasa" label="Al-Attarine Madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="47064" end="47082" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="47228" end="47237" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="47252" end="47256" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q335620" start="47386" end="47402" title="Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Othman" label="Abu al-Hasan Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q335620" start="47716" end="47728" title="Abu al-Hasan &amp;#x27;Ali" label="Abu al-Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="47769" end="47776" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="47790" end="47800" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Abdalwadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="47801" end="47819" title="kingdom of Tlemcen" label="kingdom of Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="47873" end="47879" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="47890" end="47898" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="47994" end="48001" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792643" start="48228" end="48248" title="Battle of Río Salado" label="Battle of Río Salado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066445" start="48307" end="48330" title="Siege of Algeciras (1342–44)" label="holding on to Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q336990" start="48388" end="48402" title="Abu Inan Faris" label="Abu Inan Faris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898224" start="48882" end="48889" title="Hintata" label="Hintata"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="48943" end="48952" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q178172" start="49115" end="49123" title="Azemmour" label="Azemmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="49391" end="49398" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888296" start="49888" end="49913" title="Conquest of Ceuta" label="Portuguese captured Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="50074" end="50082" title="Wattasid" label="Wattasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q307564" start="50112" end="50126" title="Abd al-Haqq II" label="Abd al-Haqq II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549804" start="50406" end="50417" title="1465 Moroccan revolt" label="1465 revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50468" end="50498" title="Muhammad ibn Ali Amrani-Joutey" label="Muhammad ibn Ali Amrani-Joutey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10411663" start="50514" end="50520" title="Sharif" label="Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="50548" end="50551" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q508985" start="50590" end="50632" title="Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya" label="Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="50663" end="50672" title="Wattasids" label="Wattasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="50716" end="50732" title="Wattasid dynasty" label="Wattasid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="50904" end="50907" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="50989" end="50994" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="51095" end="51110" title="Marinid dynasty" label="Marinid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="51187" end="51194" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="51210" end="51221" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q508985" start="51404" end="51446" title="Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya" label="Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="51478" end="51492" title="Kingdom of Fez" label="Kingdom of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="51511" end="51518" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="51787" end="51793" title="Asilah" label="Asilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="51798" end="51805" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="51921" end="51930" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432140" start="52017" end="52025" title="Fall of Agadir" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="52030" end="52047" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="52051" end="52057" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="52147" end="52155" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="52350" end="52355" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="52360" end="52367" title="El Jadida" label="Maziɣen"/>
<link wikidata="Q997320" start="52514" end="52528" title="Ali Abu Hassun" label="Ali Abu Hassun"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162351" start="52538" end="52548" title="Capture of Fez (1554)" label="retook Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="52772" end="52783" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="53087" end="53095" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="53133" end="53146" title="Saadi dynasty" label="Saadi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837247" start="53477" end="53492" title="Treaty of Tadla" label="Treaty of Tadla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="53504" end="53510" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q400911" start="53511" end="53526" title="Ahmad al-Mansur" label="Ahmad al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="53553" end="53567" title="Songhai Empire" label="Songhai Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119106" start="53589" end="53596" title="Saadian invasion of the Songhai Empire" label="victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360048" start="53625" end="53645" title="Pashalik of Timbuktu" label="Pashalik of Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="53709" end="53717" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217674" start="53729" end="53773" title="Mohammed al-Hajj ibn Abu Bakr al-Dila&amp;#x27;i" label="Mohammed al-Hajj ibn Abu Bakr al-Dila&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225399" start="53791" end="53805" title="zaouia of Dila" label="zaouia of Dila"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="54036" end="54044" title="Moriscos" label="Moriscos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446441" start="54050" end="54059" title="Hornachos" label="Hornachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345573" start="54103" end="54119" title="Expulsion of the Moriscos" label="expulsion edicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="54131" end="54150" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="54229" end="54234" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128906" start="54368" end="54374" title="Medina quarter" label="medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q894940" start="54413" end="54423" title="Bou Regreg" label="Bou Regreg"/>
<link wikidata="Q544509" start="54573" end="54585" title="Jan Janszoon" label="Jan Janszoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031919" start="54792" end="54806" title="Zidan al-Nasir" label="Zidan al-Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="54831" end="54836" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q830104" start="54911" end="54916" title="Divan" label="Diwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839917" start="55410" end="55414" title="Qaid" label="Qaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225399" start="55537" end="55551" title="Zaouia of Dila" label="Zaouia of Dila"/>
<link wikidata="Q303729" start="55749" end="55769" title="Al-Rashid of Morocco" label="Al-Rashid of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129036" start="55777" end="55790" title="Alawi dynasty" label="Alawi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q303729" start="55961" end="55977" title="Al-Rashid of Morocco" label="Moulay al Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129036" start="56049" end="56062" title="Alawi dynasty" label="Alawi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="56163" end="56181" title="Ali" label="‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050987" start="56200" end="56214" title="Sharif ibn Ali" label="Sharif ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017333" start="56232" end="56240" title="Tafilalt" label="Tafilalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q303729" start="56258" end="56273" title="Al-Rashid of Morocco" label="Mulay Al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="56364" end="56372" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="56394" end="56411" title="Fatimah" label="Fāṭimah az-Zahrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131429368" start="56453" end="56466" title="Alawi Sultanate" label="Alawi kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q276938" start="56487" end="56504" title="Ismail Ibn Sharif" label="Ismail Ibn Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="56699" end="56706" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378393" start="56807" end="56815" title="English Tangiers" label="Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="56834" end="56841" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q606775" start="56882" end="56889" title="Larache" label="Larache"/>
<link wikidata="Q548563" start="57067" end="57079" title="Mohammed III of Morocco" label="Muhammad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q962860" start="57369" end="57380" title="Mohammed IV of Morocco" label="Muhammad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q496845" start="57397" end="57405" title="Hassan I of Morocco" label="Hassan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540737" start="57625" end="57664" title="Hispano-Moroccan War (1859–60)" label="In 1859, Morocco went to war with Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q167455" start="57881" end="57902" title="First Moroccan Crisis" label="First Moroccan Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="57925" end="57947" title="Second Moroccan Crisis" label="Second Moroccan Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="57981" end="57993" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q931982" start="58006" end="58019" title="Treaty of Fez" label="Treaty of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="58119" end="58127" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="58204" end="58219" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="58272" end="58280" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="58288" end="58302" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="58361" end="58364" title="bey" label="bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="58480" end="58493" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="58703" end="58710" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629782" start="58765" end="58782" title="French conquest of Algeria" label="conquered Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062439" start="58788" end="58807" title="Franco-Moroccan War" label="Franco-Moroccan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940515" start="58829" end="58852" title="bombardment of Tangiers" label="bombardment of Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q348998" start="58858" end="58872" title="Battle of Isly" label="Battle of Isly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940505" start="58882" end="58904" title="bombardment of Mogador" label="bombardment of Mogador"/>
<link wikidata="Q508848" start="58923" end="58943" title="Abd al-Rahman of Morocco" label="Abd al-Rahman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536718" start="58963" end="58984" title="Anglo-Moroccan Treaty of 1856" label="Anglo-Moroccan treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15966641" start="59033" end="59054" title="John Hay Drummond Hay" label="John Hay Drummond Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684735" start="59281" end="59288" title="Makhzen" label="Makhzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q615580" start="59313" end="59329" title="Economy of Morocco" label="Moroccan economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540737" start="59336" end="59356" title="Hispano-Moroccan War (1859–60)" label="Hispano-Moroccan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089641" start="59406" end="59423" title="Treaty of Wad Ras" label="Treaty of Wad Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802431" start="59470" end="59482" title="1861 British loan to Morocco" label="British loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="59532" end="59540" title="War reparations" label="war debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="59577" end="59590" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="59653" end="59662" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="59664" end="59671" title="Mazagan" label="Mazagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183405" start="59673" end="59677" title="Asfi" label="Asfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="59689" end="59699" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316546" start="59805" end="59835" title="Alliance Israélite Universelle" label="Alliance Israélite Universelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185157" start="59863" end="59869" title="Tétouan" label="Tetuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q496845" start="60055" end="60063" title="Hassan I of Morocco" label="Hassan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883475" start="60079" end="60096" title="Treaty of Madrid (1880)" label="Madrid Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905250" start="60157" end="60183" title="Protégé system" label="&amp;quot;protégé&amp;quot; system"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="60399" end="60414" title="War reparations" label="war indemnities"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="60510" end="60523" title="Balance of trade" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430025" start="60570" end="60583" title="Moroccan rial" label="Moroccan rial"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="60584" end="60595" title="Inflation" label="depreciated"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="60778" end="60785" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="60852" end="60859" title="French Algeria" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q909981" start="60893" end="60898" title="Touat" label="Touat"/>
<link wikidata="Q909981" start="60904" end="60911" title="Gourara" label="Gourara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60920" end="60928" title="Tidikelt" label="Tidikelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q307132" start="61246" end="61257" title="Abdelaziz of Morocco" label="Abd al-Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q125829" start="61279" end="61287" title="Ba Ahmed" label="Ba Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q503827" start="61474" end="61492" title="Théophile Delcassé" label="Théophile Delcassé"/>
<link wikidata="Q265104" start="61588" end="61602" title="Hubert Lyautey" label="Hubert Lyautey"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="61931" end="61947" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente Cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="61967" end="61974" title="German Empire" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q167455" start="62094" end="62140" title="First Moroccan Crisis" label="dramatic intervention in Morocco in March 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q163573" start="62254" end="62274" title="Algeciras Conference" label="Algeciras Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q894939" start="62564" end="62572" title="Bou Hmara" label="El-Rogui"/>
<link wikidata="Q401625" start="62589" end="62611" title="Mulai Ahmed er Raisuni" label="Mulai Ahmed er Raisuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588652" start="62725" end="62739" title="Émile Mauchamp" label="Émile Mauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="62776" end="62781" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="62870" end="62880" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q30744449" start="62902" end="62930" title="Bombardment of Casablanca (1907)" label="bombard and invade that city"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358280" start="63017" end="63025" title="Hafidiya" label="Hafidiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q276936" start="63036" end="63048" title="Abd al-Hafid of Morocco" label="Abd al-Hafid"/>
<link wikidata="Q96630704" start="63134" end="63157" title="Conditioned Bay&amp;#x27;ah" label="conditionally supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q307132" start="63227" end="63238" title="Abdelaziz of Morocco" label="Abd al-Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="63278" end="63291" title="Agadir Crisis" label="Agadir Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q931982" start="63370" end="63383" title="Treaty of Fez" label="Treaty of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="63432" end="63444" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15294337" start="63461" end="63474" title="Treaty Between France and Spain Regarding Morocco" label="second treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="63645" end="63676" title="Spanish protectorate in Morocco" label="Spanish protectorate in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538846" start="63688" end="63701" title="Cabo Juby" label="southern part"/>
<link wikidata="Q689837" start="63755" end="63788" title="Spanish Sahara" label="Spanish Colony of Saguia El Hamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16130700" start="63834" end="63848" title="1912 Fes riots" label="1912 Fez riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497642" start="63857" end="63873" title="Tangier Protocol" label="Tangier Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497642" start="63945" end="63963" title="Tangier International Zone" label="international zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q86756565" start="64003" end="64029" title="Occupation of Tangier (1940–1945)" label="occupied from 1940 to 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="64033" end="64048" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064768" start="64476" end="64485" title="Zaian War" label="Zaian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q766437" start="64494" end="64501" title="Rif War" label="Rif War"/>
<link wikidata="Q501605" start="64608" end="64618" title="OCP Group" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815809" start="64672" end="64678" title="ONCF" label="trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989899" start="64683" end="64688" title="Compagnie de Transports au Maroc" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="64970" end="64980" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181735" start="65120" end="65135" title="Moroccanization" label="Moroccanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436825" start="65194" end="65219" title="Spanish coup of July 1936" label="Spanish coup of July 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="65243" end="65260" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862878" start="65277" end="65307" title="Army of Africa (Spain)" label="&amp;quot;Ejército de África&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="65311" end="65335" title="Spanish protectorate in Morocco" label="Spanish occupied Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q202650" start="66930" end="66941" title="Abd el-Krim" label="Abd el-Krim"/>
<link wikidata="Q37102" start="66959" end="66978" title="Republic of the Rif" label="Republic of the Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="67039" end="67042" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q266223" start="67154" end="67161" title="Ghomaras" label="Ghomara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054242" start="67191" end="67205" title="Ouergha River" label="Ouergha valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q574469" start="67223" end="67227" title="Taza" label="Taza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67657" end="67682" title="Moroccan Action Committee" label="Moroccan Action Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20423479" start="67701" end="67716" title="Moroccan Plan of Reforms" label="Plan of Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q181978" start="68420" end="68436" title="Atlantic Charter" label="Atlantic Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602100" start="68800" end="68816" title="Moroccan Goumier" label="Moroccan Goumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="68890" end="68901" title="Allies of World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="68906" end="68918" title="Allies of World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q477273" start="69133" end="69162" title="Istiqlal Party" label="Istiqlal (Independence) Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q60845731" start="69256" end="69293" title="Proclamation of Independence of Morocco" label="manifesto demanding full independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193874" start="69361" end="69371" title="Mohammed V of Morocco" label="Muhammad V"/>
<link wikidata="Q107433642" start="69747" end="69755" title="1947 Casablanca massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030186" start="69839" end="69856" title="Tangier Speech" label="speech in Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="69940" end="69954" title="French protectorate in Morocco" label="French Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="69967" end="69982" title="Spanish protectorate in Morocco" label="Spanish Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497642" start="69996" end="70022" title="Tangier International Zone" label="Tangier International Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131860714" start="70223" end="70241" title="Zionism in Morocco" label="Zionism in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406851" start="70296" end="70306" title="Migration of Moroccan Jews to Israel" label="emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="70310" end="70323" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="70345" end="70381" title="establishment of the State of Israel" label="establishment of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49097" start="70389" end="70407" title="1948 Palestine war" label="1948 Palestine war"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378503" start="70534" end="70540" title="Cadima" label="Cadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511085" start="70579" end="70595" title="Operation Yachin" label="Operation Yachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q762261" start="70710" end="70723" title="Farhat Hached" label="Farhat Hached"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366226" start="70891" end="70915" title="Moroccan Communist Party" label="Moroccan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q477273" start="70924" end="70938" title="Istiqlal Party" label="Istiqlal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q193874" start="70985" end="71002" title="Sultan Mohammed V" label="Sultan Mohammed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="71006" end="71016" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="71020" end="71031" title="Eid al-Adha" label="Eid al-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q604530" start="71078" end="71097" title="Mohammed Ben Aarafa" label="Mohammed Ben Aarafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319071" start="71243" end="71260" title="Muhammad Zarqtuni" label="Muhammad Zarqtuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q42342878" start="71286" end="71312" title="Central Market (Casablanca)" label="&amp;quot;Marché Central&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764284" start="71529" end="71556" title="Great Mosque of Fes el-Jdid" label="Great Mosque of Fes el-Jdid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755512" start="72079" end="72116" title="Revolution of the King and the People" label="Revolution of the King and the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="72877" end="72884" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497642" start="72926" end="72942" title="Tangier Protocol" label="Tangier Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640107" start="73277" end="73335" title="Ifni War" label="to claim other Spanish possessions through military action"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="73471" end="73494" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="73661" end="73676" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="73877" end="73886" title="Hassan II of Morocco" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851214" start="74044" end="74057" title="Years of Lead (Morocco)" label="years of lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136770" start="75049" end="75061" title="1971 Moroccan coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="In July 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q742728" start="75066" end="75086" title="1972 Moroccan coup attempt" label="again in August 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="75167" end="75174" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q231151" start="75238" end="75250" title="Tindouf Province" label="Tindouf area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891008" start="75319" end="75327" title="Sand War" label="Sand War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="75354" end="75383" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181735" start="75476" end="75491" title="Moroccanization" label="Moroccanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="76181" end="76186" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="76219" end="76235" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Arab-Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="76440" end="76454" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="77008" end="77022" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="77484" end="77491" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q763141" start="77495" end="77499" title="Ifni" label="Ifni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="77616" end="77621" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="77623" end="77630" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191011" start="77635" end="77653" title="Plaza de soberanía" label="Plaza de soberanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="77716" end="77724" title="military occupation" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="77906" end="77916" title="plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576834" start="77954" end="77973" title="United Nations visiting mission to Spanish Sahara" label="UN visiting mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="78140" end="78170" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="78174" end="78183" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="78552" end="78562" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q549912" start="78574" end="78595" title="Madrid Accords" label="tripartite conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="78764" end="78779" title="Polisario Front" label="Polisario Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="79231" end="79264" title="Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="79291" end="79310" title="government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="79858" end="79887" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q510052" start="79997" end="80022" title="Moroccan Wall" label="2,500-kilometer sand berm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="80259" end="80271" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q120498094" start="80924" end="80942" title="Death and funeral of Hassan II of Morocco" label="death of Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="81032" end="81043" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="81105" end="81117" title="human-rights" label="human-rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838537" start="81438" end="81460" title="First Sahrawi Intifada" label="First Sahrawi Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="81602" end="81624" title="9/11 terrorist attacks" label="9/11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297130" start="81712" end="81745" title="Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires" label="Socialist Union of Popular Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="82059" end="82074" title="Berber-language" label="Berber-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="82236" end="82241" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226373" start="82352" end="82369" title="Polygamy in Morocco" label="a ban on polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284674" start="82401" end="82412" title="divorce law" label="divorce law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293666" start="82564" end="82572" title="Mudawana" label="Mudawana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079683" start="82689" end="82705" title="Perejil Island crisis" label="crisis broke out"/>
<link wikidata="Q191750" start="82813" end="82861" title="Perejil Island" label="Toura or Leila by Moroccans and Perejil by Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="83024" end="83038" title="suicide bomber" label="suicide bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q569394" start="83055" end="83093" title="2003 Casablanca bombings" label="struck a series of sites in Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="83413" end="83447" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136379" start="83556" end="83579" title="Second Sahrawi Intifada" label="Second Sahrawi Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="83637" end="83657" title="free trade agreement" label="free trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="83787" end="83801" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144666" start="83857" end="83884" title="2011–2012 Moroccan protests" label="thousands of people rallied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586661" start="84015" end="84035" title="2011 Marrakesh bombing" label="bombing in Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635966" start="84144" end="84168" title="Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb" label="Maghrebi arm of al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969170" start="84229" end="84254" title="2011 Moroccan constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="84290" end="84301" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598268" start="84357" end="84364" title="Standard Moroccan Amazigh" label="Amazigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q310350" start="84474" end="84484" title="Al Hoceima" label="al-Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q30242458" start="84610" end="84628" title="Hirak Rif Movement" label="Hirak Rif Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21029686" start="84634" end="84647" title="2016 Moroccan general election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255232" start="84677" end="84706" title="Justice and Development Party (Morocco)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="84817" end="84830" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869643" start="84878" end="84899" title="2018 Boycott in Morocco" label="2018 consumer boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q87058723" start="84975" end="85003" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Morocco" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="85159" end="85171" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q104102352" start="85289" end="85327" title="Israel–Morocco normalization agreement" label="Israel–Morocco normalization agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q106882471" start="85493" end="85554" title="2021 Morocco–Spain border incident" label="an incident occurred between the borders of Spain and Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q84035221" start="85842" end="85855" title="2021 Moroccan general election" label="2021 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026688" start="85905" end="85922" title="electoral wipeout" label="electoral wipeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630297" start="86006" end="86036" title="National Rally of Independents" label="National Rally of Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638114" start="86084" end="86099" title="Aziz Akhannouch" label="Aziz Akhannouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842743" start="86125" end="86150" title="Prime Minister of Morocco" label="Prime Minister of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q112725255" start="86169" end="86189" title="2022 Melilla incident" label="a migration incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572171" start="86281" end="86297" title="Yennayer" label="Amazigh New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="86393" end="86403" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q106032" start="86475" end="86484" title="Epicenter" label="epicentre"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="86540" end="86549" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q375719" start="86566" end="86589" title="History of North Africa" label="History of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q720077" start="86591" end="86617" title="Imperial cities of Morocco" label="Imperial cities of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q257009" start="86619" end="86643" title="List of Kings of Morocco" label="List of Kings of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153937" start="86645" end="86664" title="Politics of Morocco" label="Politics of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775597" start="86711" end="86718" title="History of Casablanca" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394447" start="86723" end="86731" title="Timeline of Casablanca" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="86739" end="86746" title="Fez, Morocco" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894982" start="86751" end="86759" title="Timeline of Fez" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865439" start="86773" end="86780" title="History of Marrakesh" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394450" start="86785" end="86793" title="Timeline of Marrakesh" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86803" end="86810" title="Rabat#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394460" start="86815" end="86823" title="Timeline of Rabat" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86835" end="86842" title="Tangier#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18464412" start="86847" end="86855" title="Timeline of Tangier" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197809" start="87943" end="87956" title="Bernard Lugan" label="Bernard Lugan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19293" wikidata="Q1977556" url="?curid=19293" title="Geography of Morocco">
<text>Morocco is the northwesternmost country which spans from the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean on the north and the west respectively, into large mountainous areas in the interior, to the Sahara desert in the far south. Morocco is a Northern African country, located in the extreme northwest of Africa on the edge of continental Europe. The Strait of Gibraltar separates Spain from Morocco with a span of water. Morocco borders the North Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the western Mediterranean Sea to the north, and has borders with Algeria and disputed Western Sahara.

The terrain of Morocco is largely mountainous. The Atlas Mountains stretch from the central north to the southwest. It expands to about and is the dorsal spine of the country. To the north of the Atlas Mountains, there are the Rif Mountains, a chain that makes part of the Sierra Nevada mountain range in Andalusia, Spain. The massive range expands to about from Tangier in the west to Nador eastward.

In the west of the country, along the Atlantic coast, the Moroccan Plateau stretches from Tangier to essaouira and get inward to Saiss Plains near Fes and Tansift-Alhaouz near Marrakech. These vast plains promotes fertile agricultural lands and support 15% of the local economy.

In the extreme southeast of the country, the lands are arid due to their proximity to the Sahara Desert. Palm trees oasis are developed in many regions, notably in Figuig and Zagora.

==Geography statistics==
Coordinates:
Coordinates:
Area:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
446,550 km²
&lt;br&gt;&quot;land:&quot;
446,302 km² (or 712,200 km²)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;water:&quot;
250 km²

Land boundaries:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
2,018.9 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;border countries:&quot;
Algeria 1 559 km, Western Sahara 444 km, Spain (Ceuta) 6.3 km, Spain (Melilla) 9.6 km

Coastline:
1835 km

Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Territorial sea:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;Contiguous zone:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;Exclusive economic zone:&quot;
 with 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Continental shelf:&quot;
200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

==Climate==
Morocco&#x27;s climate can be divided into two parts: The northwest and the southeast. In the southeast, the climate is arid and poorly populated. The northwest has a mild climate, and 95% of the Moroccan population lives in these regions.

The largely populated areas of the northwest of the country mostly have a Mediterranean climate, but since the country is heavily mountainous, continental and alpine influence is evident, as well as the oceanic influence along the Atlantic coastline. And finally, the semi-arid lands, that cover few regions in the northeast, the central-south, and the southwest.

Along the Mediterranean coast, the climate is typically Mediterranean and supports all types of typical Mediterranean vegetation. The summers are moderately hot and the winters are mild. Further away from the coast, into the Rif Mountain range, the climate starts to become more continental in character, with colder winters and hotter summers. At elevations above , the climate is alpine with warm summers and cold winters. Rainfall is much higher on the west side than it is on the east side. The average annual precipitation is between , and respectively. Snow is abundant at higher elevations.

# Typical Mediterranean climate cities: Tangier, Tétouan, Al Hoceima, Nador
# Typical continental-influenced cities: Chefchaouen, Issaguen, Targuist, Taza
# Typical alpine-influenced cities: Bab Berred

Along the Atlantic coast, the climate is the Mediterranean with oceanic influence. The imprint of the oceanic climate differs along the coastline from region to region. It is generally presented from Asilah to Essaouira. The summers are warm to moderately hot, and winters are cooler than on the Mediterranean coast. Further away from the coastal lands, into the Atlas Mountain range, the climate starts to become more continental in character, with colder winters and hotter summers. At elevations above , the climate is typically alpine, with warm summers and cold winters. Rainfall is generally high. The average annual precipitations is between on the north, but as you move southward, the average drops by about . Snow is abundant at higher elevations. There are two ski stations, one in the middle-Atlas Mischliffen, and the other in the High-Atlas Oukaïmeden.

# Typical oceanic-influenced cities: Rabat, Casablanca, Essaouira, Larache
# Typical continental-influenced cities: Fès, Meknès, Khenifra, Beni Mellal
# Typical alpine-influenced cities: Ifrane, Azrou, Midelt, Imouzzer Kandar

The southern regions of the northwest are semi-arid. Rainfall is lower, and is between annually. Although temperature ranges generally do not change in comparison with the upper provinces, a slight increase in high averages is not to be dismissed. Largely due to the lower latitudes where they fall.

Typical cities with such climate are Agadir and Marrakesh.


=== Climate change ===

As of 2020, Morocco has been hit with unseasonal heatwaves 

==Physical geography==

The northern coast and interior are mountainous with large areas of bordering plateaus, intermontane valleys, and rich coastal plains. The northern mountains are geologically unstable and subject to earthquakes.

Morocco occupies a strategic location along the Strait of Gibraltar, the waterway connecting the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean.

Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Lowest point:&quot;
Sebkha Tah −55 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Highest point:&quot;
Toubkal mountain 4,165 m

Longest river: Draa River (1,100 km)

==Land use and natural resources==
Natural resources:
Phosphates, Iron ore, Manganese, Lead, Zinc, Fish, Salt

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Arable land:&quot;
17.5%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Permanent crops:&quot;
2.9%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Permanent pastures:&quot;
47.1%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Forests:&quot;
11.5%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;Other:&quot;
21.61% (2011)

Irrigated land:
14,850 km² (2004)

Total renewable water resources:
29 km3 (2011)

Natural hazards:
periodic droughts

==Environment==

===Ecoregions===
====Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub====
* Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe
* Mediterranean woodlands and forests
* Mediterranean Acacia-Argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets

====Temperate coniferous forests====
* Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests

====Montane grasslands and shrublands====
* Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe

====Deserts and xeric shrublands====
* North Saharan steppe and woodlands

====Freshwater ecoregions====
* Permanent Maghreb
* Temporary Maghreb

====Marine ecoregions====
* Alboran Sea
* Saharan Upwelling

===Current environmental issues===
Land degradation/desertification (soil erosion resulting from farming of marginal areas, overgrazing, destruction of vegetation); water supplies contaminated by raw sewage; siltation of reservoirs; oil pollution of coastal waters.

===International environmental agreements===
&quot;Morocco is party to:&quot;
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Wetlands, Whaling
&lt;br&gt;&quot;signed, but not ratified:&quot;
Environmental Modification

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Morocco, the points that are farther north, east or west than any other location.
* Northernmost point – Pointe Leona, Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima region
* Easternmost point – unnamed point on the border with Algeria immediately east of the town of Iche, Oriental region
* Westernmost point – the point at which the border with Western Sahara enters the Atlantic Ocean, Guelmim-Oued Noun region
** &quot;Note: Morocco does not have a southernmost point, its southern border with Western Sahara following latitude 27° 40′ north.&quot;

==See also==
* Climate of Morocco
* List of rivers of Morocco

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==

* European Digital Archive on the Soil Maps of the world Soil Maps of Morocco
* CIA Factbook: Morocco</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="0" end="7" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="61" end="78" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="83" end="97" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="191" end="197" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="223" end="230" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="236" end="251" title="Northern Africa" label="Northern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="344" end="363" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="435" end="455" title="North Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="485" end="502" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="538" end="545" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="559" end="573" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="627" end="642" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="772" end="787" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="803" end="816" title="Rif Mountains" label="Rif Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q26955" start="849" end="862" title="Sierra Nevada (Spain)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="939" end="946" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="962" end="967" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="1126" end="1129" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="1155" end="1164" title="Marrakech" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q425646" start="1423" end="1429" title="Figuig" label="Figuig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843386" start="1434" end="1440" title="Mount Zagora" label="Zagora"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="1468" end="1479" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="1481" end="1492" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="1733" end="1740" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="1751" end="1765" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1774" end="1779" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="1781" end="1786" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="1803" end="1810" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="1953" end="1976" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="Exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="2404" end="2425" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="2473" end="2484" title="continental climate" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="2489" end="2495" title="alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="2533" end="2540" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="3334" end="3341" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185157" start="3343" end="3350" title="Tétouan" label="Tétouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310350" start="3352" end="3362" title="Al Hoceima" label="Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="3364" end="3369" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q676778" start="3411" end="3422" title="Chefchaouen" label="Chefchaouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737756" start="3424" end="3432" title="Issaguen" label="Issaguen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544562" start="3434" end="3442" title="Targuist" label="Targuist"/>
<link wikidata="Q574469" start="3444" end="3448" title="Taza" label="Taza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877663" start="3485" end="3495" title="Bab Berred" label="Bab Berred"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="3697" end="3703" title="Asilah" label="Asilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="3707" end="3716" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q120245566" start="4307" end="4318" title="Mischliffen" label="Mischliffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090623" start="4352" end="4362" title="Oukaïmeden" label="Oukaïmeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="4402" end="4407" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="4409" end="4419" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="4421" end="4430" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q606775" start="4432" end="4439" title="Larache" label="Larache"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="4481" end="4484" title="Fès" label="Fès"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="4486" end="4492" title="Meknès" label="Meknès"/>
<link wikidata="Q990115" start="4494" end="4502" title="Khenifra" label="Khenifra"/>
<link wikidata="Q817279" start="4504" end="4515" title="Beni Mellal" label="Beni Mellal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001887" start="4552" end="4558" title="Ifrane" label="Ifrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q794128" start="4560" end="4565" title="Azrou" label="Azrou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501809" start="4567" end="4573" title="Midelt" label="Midelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556989" start="4575" end="4590" title="Imouzzer Kandar" label="Imouzzer Kandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="4930" end="4936" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="4941" end="4950" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="5324" end="5343" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476951" start="5468" end="5478" title="Sebkha Tah" label="Sebkha Tah"/>
<link wikidata="Q503433" start="5522" end="5529" title="Toubkal" label="Toubkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q486636" start="5563" end="5573" title="Draa River" label="Draa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="5640" end="5650" title="Phosphates" label="Phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="5652" end="5656" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="5662" end="5671" title="Manganese" label="Manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="5673" end="5677" title="Lead" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="5679" end="5683" title="Zinc" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="5685" end="5689" title="Fish" label="Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="5691" end="5695" title="Salt" label="Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q144012" start="6078" end="6121" title="Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub" label="Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888780" start="6128" end="6166" title="Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe" label="Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616731" start="6169" end="6204" title="Mediterranean woodlands and forests" label="Mediterranean woodlands and forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890828" start="6207" end="6272" title="Mediterranean Acacia-Argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets" label="Mediterranean Acacia-Argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q144019" start="6278" end="6306" title="Temperate coniferous forests" label="Temperate coniferous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969096" start="6313" end="6352" title="Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests" label="Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q144005" start="6358" end="6391" title="Montane grasslands and shrublands" label="Montane grasslands and shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q102173570" start="6398" end="6437" title="Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe" label="Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246061" start="6443" end="6471" title="Deserts and xeric shrublands" label="Deserts and xeric shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41285" start="6478" end="6512" title="North Saharan steppe and woodlands" label="North Saharan steppe and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169218" start="6546" end="6563" title="Permanent Maghreb" label="Permanent Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6566" end="6583" title="Temporary Maghreb" label="Temporary Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q199408" start="6613" end="6624" title="Alboran Sea" label="Alboran Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6627" end="6644" title="Saharan Upwelling" label="Saharan Upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="6698" end="6713" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="6770" end="6781" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="6991" end="7003" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="7005" end="7019" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="7021" end="7050" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="7052" end="7067" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="7069" end="7087" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="7089" end="7105" title="Hazardous Wastes" label="Hazardous Wastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="7107" end="7121" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="7123" end="7137" title="Marine Dumping" label="Marine Dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="7139" end="7161" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="7179" end="7191" title="MARPOL 73/78" label="MARPOL 73/78"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="7194" end="7202" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="7204" end="7211" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="7260" end="7286" title="Environmental Modification" label="Environmental Modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="7350" end="7357" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7455" end="7467" title="Pointe Leona" label="Pointe Leona"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951300" start="7469" end="7494" title="Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima" label="Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="7557" end="7564" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7597" end="7601" title="Iche, Morocco" label="Iche"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048167" start="7603" end="7611" title="Oriental, Morocco" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="7676" end="7690" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="7702" end="7716" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951051" start="7718" end="7735" title="Guelmim-Oued Noun" label="Guelmim-Oued Noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977556" start="7898" end="7916" title="Climate of Morocco" label="Climate of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099667" start="7919" end="7944" title="List of rivers of Morocco" label="List of rivers of Morocco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19294" wikidata="Q2593833" url="?curid=19294" title="Demographics of Morocco">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Morocco include population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. All figures are from the Haut-Commissariat au Plan of Morocco or the United Nations Demographic Yearbooks, unless otherwise indicated.

The population of Morocco in 2021 is 37.271 million. Moroccans are primarily of Arab and Berber origin. Socially, there are two contrasting groups of Moroccans: those living in the cities and those in the rural areas. Among the rural, several classes have formed such as landowners, peasants, and tenant farmers. Moroccans live mainly in the north and west portions of Morocco. However, they prefer living in the more fertile regions near the Mediterranean Sea.

Between the Nile and the Red Sea were living Arab tribes expelled from Arabia for their turbulence, Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, who often plundered farming areas in the Nile Valley. According to Ibn Khaldun, whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and camping equipment. These tribes, along with others, who mass arrived in the region of Morocco in colossal numbers around the 12th-13th centuries, and later the Ma&#x27;qil in the 14th century, contributed to a more extensive ethnic, cultural, and linguistic Arabization of Morocco over time, especially beyond the major urban centres and the northern regions well into the countryside. The descendants of the original Arab settlers who continue to speak Arabic as a first language currently form the single largest population group in North Africa.

About 99% of Moroccans are considered to be Sunni Muslims religiously or culturally. The numbers of the Jewish minority has decreased significantly since the creation of the State of Israel in 1948. Today there are 2,500 Moroccan Jews inside the country. Thousands of Moroccan Jews living in Europe, Israel and North America visit the country regularly. There is a small but apparently growing minority of Moroccan Christians made of local Moroccan converts (not Europeans). In 2014, most of the 86,206 foreign residents are French people, Spaniards, Algerians and sub-Saharan African students.

== Population size and structure==

===Main populated areas===
Most Moroccans live west and north of the Atlas Mountains, a range that insulates the country from the Sahara Desert. Casablanca is the largest city and the centre of business and industry, and has the leading seaport and airport. Rabat is the seat of government. Tangier and Nador are the two major northern seaports on the Mediterranean. Fez is a cultural, religious and industrial centre. Marrakesh and Agadir are the two major tourist centres. Oujda is the largest city of eastern Morocco. Meknes houses the military academy. Kenitra has the largest military airbase. Mohammedia has the largest oil refineries and other major industrial installations.

=== Structure of the population ===
Structure of the population (Census 2004):

According to 2004 census
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Based on the results of the 2004 Population Census.) :
Structure of the population (Census 2014) :
According to 2014 census
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Projections based on the results of national survey on population and health conducted between 2010 and 2011, and especially population and housing census 2014.):
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2023):


== Vital statistics ==

Source: Haut-Commissariat au Plan (HCP)
===Demographic and Health Surveys===

Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):
===Life expectancy===


Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

== Ethnic groups ==

Moroccans are primarily of Arab and Berber origin as in other neighbouring countries in the Maghreb. Arabs comprise 67% of the population of Morocco, while Berbers make up 31% and Sahrawis make up 2%. However, according to &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 44% of Moroccans are Arab, 24% are Arabized Berbers, 21% are Berbers, and 10% are Mauritanian Moors.

The Arab population of Morocco is a result of the inflow of nomadic Arab tribes from the Arabian Peninsula since the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb in the 7th century with a major wave in the 11th century. The major migration to the region by Arab tribes was in the 11th century when the tribes of Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, along with others, were sent by the Fatimids to defeat a Berber rebellion and then settle in the Maghreb. Between the Nile and the Red Sea were Arab tribes expelled from Arabia for their turbulence, Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, who often plundered farming areas in the Nile Valley. According to Ibn Khaldun, whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and camping equipment. These tribes, who arrived in the region of Morocco around the 12th-13th centuries, and later the Ma&#x27;qil in the 14th century, contributed to a more extensive ethnic, genetic, cultural, and linguistic Arabization of Morocco over time, especially beyond the major urban centres and the northern regions which were the main sites of Arabization up to that point.

The Berber population mainly lives in the mountainous regions of Morocco where some preserve Berber culture, and are split into three groups; Rifians, Shilha, and Zayanes. The Rifians inhabit the Rif mountains, the Shilha inhabit the Anti-Atlas mountains, and the Zayanes inhabit the Middle Atlas mountains. The Arabized Berbers who constitute about a quarter of the population are the Berbers who were Arabized mainly as a result of the Arab nomad inflow, and have adopted Arab culture and the Arabic language as their native language, especially those who sought the protection of the Bedouin. Some parts of the population are descendants of refugees who fled Spain after the Reconquista in the 15th century. The Trans-Saharan slave trade brought a population of Sub-Saharan Africans to Morocco. After the founding of Israel and start of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1948, many Jews felt compelled to leave Morocco especially after the anti-Jewish riots in Oujda, and many fled to Israel, Europe, and North America, and by 1967 250,000 Jews left Morocco. In a 2021 survey on 1,200 Moroccan adults, 68% were Arab, 25.6% were Berber, 3.6% were Sahrawi, and 2.7% were others.

===Immigration===
==Languages==
Arabic and Berber are the official languages of Morocco. The majority spoken language in Morocco is Arabic which is spoken by 92.7% of the population and includes the dialects of Moroccan Arabic (Hilalian dialects), spoken by 91.9%, and Hassaniya Arabic, spoken by 0.8%. Berber languages are spoken by 24.8% of the population in three varieties (3.2% speak Tarifit, 14.2% speak Shilha, and 7.4% speak Tamazight). According to the 2024 Moroccan census, 99.2%, or almost the entire literate population of Morocco, could read and write in Arabic, while 1.5% of the population could read and write in Berber. The census also indicated that 80.6% of Moroccans consider Arabic to be their native language, while 18.9% regard any of the various Berber languages as their mother tongue.

French is an implicitly &quot;official language&quot; of government and big business, and is taught throughout school and still serves as Morocco&#x27;s primary language of business, economics, and scientific university education. French is also widely used in the media. Morocco is a member of La Francophonie. Berber activists have struggled since the 1960s for the recognition of their language as an official language of Morocco, which was achieved in July 2011 following the February 20th 2011 uprising. About 20,000 Moroccans in the northern part of the country speak some Spanish.

English, while still far behind French in terms of the number of proficient speakers, is rapidly becoming a foreign language of choice among educated youth and business people. It has been taught to Moroccan students after the fourth year of elementary school since the education reforms of 2002.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Results of the 2004 census
* Results of the 2014 census
* Results of the 2004 census by Douars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="42" end="49" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="58" end="76" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="78" end="87" title="ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="365" end="369" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="374" end="380" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="760" end="764" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="773" end="780" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="819" end="825" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="848" end="858" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="863" end="874" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="917" end="928" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="943" end="954" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883552" start="1182" end="1193" title="Maqil" label="Ma&amp;#x27;qil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="1280" end="1291" title="Arabization" label="Arabization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1476" end="1482" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="1616" end="1629" title="Sunni Muslims" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="1676" end="1691" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Jewish minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1746" end="1761" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078455" start="1978" end="1997" title="Christianity in Morocco" label="Moroccan Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="2097" end="2110" title="French people" label="French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="2273" end="2288" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="2334" end="2347" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="2349" end="2359" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="2462" end="2467" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="2495" end="2502" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="2507" end="2512" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2556" end="2569" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="2571" end="2574" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="2623" end="2632" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="2637" end="2643" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="2679" end="2684" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="2725" end="2731" title="Meknes" label="Meknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q478207" start="2761" end="2768" title="Kenitra" label="Kenitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q647417" start="2803" end="2813" title="Mohammedia" label="Mohammedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891793" start="3722" end="3731" title="Moroccans" label="Moroccans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3749" end="3753" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="3758" end="3764" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="3814" end="3821" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3823" end="3828" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="3878" end="3885" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="3902" end="3910" title="Sahrawi people" label="Sahrawis"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="3951" end="3974" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514516" start="4017" end="4032" title="Arabized Berber" label="Arabized Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="4173" end="4190" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="4201" end="4231" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="4382" end="4392" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="4397" end="4408" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="4446" end="4454" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="4467" end="4473" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4528" end="4532" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="4541" end="4548" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="4580" end="4586" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="4609" end="4619" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="4624" end="4635" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4678" end="4689" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="4704" end="4715" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883552" start="4899" end="4910" title="Maqil" label="Ma&amp;#x27;qil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="5006" end="5017" title="Arabization" label="Arabization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541828" start="5309" end="5316" title="Rifians" label="Rifians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267932" start="5318" end="5324" title="Shilha people" label="Shilha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574946" start="5330" end="5337" title="Zayanes" label="Zayanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="5363" end="5376" title="Rif" label="Rif mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q574853" start="5401" end="5421" title="Anti-Atlas" label="Anti-Atlas mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433137" start="5451" end="5473" title="Middle Atlas" label="Middle Atlas mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514516" start="5479" end="5494" title="Arabized Berber" label="Arabized Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="5570" end="5578" title="Arabization" label="Arabized"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="5754" end="5761" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="5845" end="5856" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778119" start="5882" end="5907" title="Trans-Saharan slave trade" label="Trans-Saharan slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="5932" end="5950" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="5975" end="5993" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="founding of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="6011" end="6032" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab-Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6047" end="6051" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020716" start="6105" end="6131" title="1948 Anti-Jewish riots in Oujda and Jerada" label="anti-Jewish riots in Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="6150" end="6156" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="6158" end="6164" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="6170" end="6183" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="6311" end="6318" title="Sahrawi people" label="Sahrawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="6375" end="6381" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598268" start="6386" end="6392" title="Standard Moroccan Amazigh" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="6475" end="6481" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56426" start="6554" end="6569" title="Moroccan Arabic" label="Moroccan Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192053" start="6571" end="6588" title="Hilalian dialects" label="Hilalian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="6612" end="6628" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="6646" end="6662" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34174" start="6732" end="6739" title="Tarifit" label="Tarifit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34152" start="6753" end="6759" title="Shilha language" label="Shilha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49741" start="6776" end="6785" title="Central Atlas Tamazight" label="Tamazight"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7155" end="7161" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7328" end="7336" title=":Category:Companies of Morocco" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q615580" start="7338" end="7347" title="Economy of Morocco" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="7450" end="7465" title="La Francophonie" label="La Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="7734" end="7741" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7744" end="7751" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7776" end="7782" title="French language" label="French"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19295" wikidata="Q1153937" url="?curid=19295" title="Politics of Morocco">
<text>Politics of Morocco take place in a framework of an official parliamentary semi-constitutional monarchy, whereby the prime minister of Morocco is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament, the Assembly of Representatives of Morocco and the Assembly of Councillors. The Moroccan Constitution provides for a monarchy with a Parliament and an independent judiciary.

On June 17, 2011, King Mohammed VI announced a series of reforms that would transform Morocco into a constitutional monarchy.

==Executive branch==
|King
|Mohammed VI
|23 July 1999
|Prime Minister
|Aziz Akhannouch
|RNI
|10 September 2021
|}
The constitution grants the king extensive powers; he is both the secular political leader and the &quot;Commander of the Faithful&quot; as a direct descendant of the Prophet Mohammed. He presides over the Council of Ministers; appoints the prime minister following legislative elections, and on recommendations from the latter, appoints the members of the government. While the constitution theoretically allows the king to terminate the tenure of any minister, and after consultation with the heads of the higher and lower Assemblies, to dissolve the Parliament, suspend the constitution, call for new elections, or rule by decree, the only time this happened was in 1965. The King is formally the chief of the military. Upon the death of his father Mohammed V, King Hassan II succeeded to the throne in 1961. He ruled Morocco for the next 38 years until he died in 1999. His son, the King Mohammed VI, assumed the throne in July 1999.

Following the March 1998 elections, a coalition government headed by opposition socialist Abderrahmane Youssoufi and composed largely of ministers drawn from opposition parties, was formed. Prime Minister Youssoufi&#x27;s government is the first government drawn primarily from opposition parties in decades, and also represents the first opportunity for a coalition of socialist, left-of-centre, and nationalist parties to be included in the government until October 2002. It was also the first time in the modern political history of the Arab world that the opposition assumed power following an election. The current government is headed by Aziz Akhannouch, who was appointed by King Mohammed VI after his party won a plurality of seats in the September 2021 general election. His cabinet was sworn in on 7 October.
==Legislative branch==

The House of Representatives: The House of Representatives consisted of 395 members elected by direct suffrage through a list system vote as follows:
*305 members at local constituencies level
*90 members at national constituencies level: 60 of whom are women, and 30 are youths.
The House of Councilors: The House of Councilors consists of 120 members elected according to the following regulations and procedures:
*72 members from local communes
*20 members from professional chambers
*8 members from professional organizations of employers
*20 members from the representatives of the wage earners

==Political parties and elections==
On 26 November 2011, the initial results of the parliamentary elections were released. The moderate Islamist party, the Justice and Development Party (PJD), was projected to win the largest number of seats. However, the electoral rules were structured such that no political party could win more than 20 percent of the seats in the parliament.

The Justice and Development Party (PJD) remained the largest party, winning 125 of the 395 seats in the House of Representatives, a gain of 18 seats compared to the 2011 elections. Abdelillah Benkirane was reappointed Prime Minister by the King on 10 October. The Authenticity and Modernity Party (PAM) won 102 seats, and the rest of the seats were split among smaller parties.

In the September 2021 general election, the moderate Islamist PJD suffered an electoral wipeout, with the liberal National Rally of Independents becoming the largest party in Parliament. Its leader, Aziz Akhannouch, subsequently formed a coalition government with the Authenticity and Modernity Party and Istiqlal Party.

==Judicial branch==
The highest court in the judicial structure is the Supreme Court, whose judges are appointed by the King. The Youssoufi government continued to implement a reform program to develop greater judicial independence and impartiality.

==Administrative divisions==
Since 2015 Morocco officially administers 12 regions: Béni Mellal-Khénifra, Casablanca-Settat, Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab, Drâa-Tafilalet, Fès-Meknès, Guelmim-Oued Noun, Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra, Marrakech-Safi, Oriental, Rabat-Salé-Kénitra, Souss-Massa and Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima. The regions are administered by Walis and governors appointed by the King.

Morocco is divided also into 13 prefectures and 62 provinces. Prefectures: Agadir-Ida Ou Tanane, Casablanca, Fès, Inezgane-Aït Melloul, Marrakesh, Meknès, Mohammedia, Oujda-Angad, Rabat, Safi, Salé, Skhirate-Témara and Tangier-Assilah.
Provinces: Al Haouz, Al Hoceïma, Aousserd, Assa-Zag, Azilal, Benslimane, Béni-Mellal, Berkane, Berrechid, Boujdour, Boulemane, Chefchaouen, Chichaoua, Chtouka Aït Baha, Driouch, El Hajeb, El Jadida, El Kelâa des Sraghna, Errachidia, Es Semara, Essaouira, Fahs-Anjra, Figuig, Fquih Ben Salah, Guelmim, Guercif, Ifrane, Jerada, Kénitra, Khémisset, Khénifra, Khouribga, Laâyoune, Larache, Médiouna, Midelt, Moulay Yacoub, Nador, Nouaceur, Ouarzazate, Oued Ed-Dahab, Ouezzane, Rehamna, Safi, Sefrou, Settat, Sidi Bennour, Sidi Ifni, Sidi Kacem, Sidi Slimane, Tan-Tan, Taounate, Taourirt, Tarfaya, Taroudannt, Tata, Taza, Tétouan, Tinghir, Tiznit, Youssoufia and Zagora.

==International organization affiliations==
ABEDA, ACCT (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, EBRD, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITF, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC, OPCW, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO.

==Notable persons==

*Ahmed Ameziane, politician

==References==
==External links==
*Government at the official portal of Morocco
*Morocco list at the CIA Chiefs of State and Cabinet Members, March 17, 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153937" start="0" end="19" title="Politics of Morocco" label="Politics of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="61" end="74" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="75" end="103" title="constitutional monarchy" label="semi-constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842743" start="117" end="142" title="Prime Minister of Morocco" label="prime minister of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="150" end="168" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="179" end="197" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="199" end="214" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="247" end="264" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="287" end="297" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572773" start="338" end="376" title="Assembly of Representatives of Morocco" label="Assembly of Representatives of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718576" start="385" end="408" title="Assembly of Councillors" label="Assembly of Councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="414" end="422" title="Morocco" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="451" end="459" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004884" start="467" end="477" title="Parliament of Morocco" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="497" end="506" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q257009" start="527" end="531" title="List of rulers of Morocco" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="532" end="543" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="610" end="633" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q257009" start="658" end="662" title="List of rulers of Morocco" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="664" end="675" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842743" start="691" end="705" title="Prime Minister of Morocco" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638114" start="707" end="722" title="Aziz Akhannouch" label="Aziz Akhannouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630297" start="724" end="727" title="National Rally of Independents" label="RNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081829" start="855" end="880" title="Commander of the Faithful" label="Commander of the Faithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="991" end="1005" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q193874" start="1502" end="1512" title="Mohammed V of Morocco" label="Mohammed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="1519" end="1528" title="Hassan II" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="1642" end="1653" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1769" end="1778" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q470946" start="1779" end="1801" title="Abderrahmane Youssoufi" label="Abderrahmane Youssoufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638114" start="2333" end="2348" title="Aziz Akhannouch" label="Aziz Akhannouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q84035221" start="2436" end="2467" title="2021 Moroccan general election" label="September 2021 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255232" start="3289" end="3318" title="Justice and Development Party (Morocco)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255232" start="3518" end="3547" title="Justice and Development Party (Morocco)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572773" start="3618" end="3642" title="House of Representatives (Morocco)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757124" start="3679" end="3693" title="Moroccan general election, 2011" label="2011 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q307921" start="3695" end="3715" title="Abdelillah Benkirane" label="Abdelillah Benkirane"/>
<link wikidata="Q784586" start="3778" end="3810" title="Authenticity and Modernity Party" label="Authenticity and Modernity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255232" start="3955" end="3958" title="Justice and Development Party (Morocco)" label="PJD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026688" start="3971" end="3988" title="electoral wipeout" label="electoral wipeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630297" start="4007" end="4037" title="National Rally of Independents" label="National Rally of Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638114" start="4092" end="4107" title="Aziz Akhannouch" label="Aziz Akhannouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q784586" start="4161" end="4193" title="Authenticity and Modernity Party" label="Authenticity and Modernity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q477273" start="4198" end="4212" title="Istiqlal Party" label="Istiqlal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953016" start="4549" end="4569" title="Béni Mellal-Khénifra" label="Béni Mellal-Khénifra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19843788" start="4571" end="4588" title="Casablanca-Settat" label="Casablanca-Settat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21235104" start="4590" end="4610" title="Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab" label="Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19950954" start="4612" end="4626" title="Drâa-Tafilalet" label="Drâa-Tafilalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951027" start="4628" end="4638" title="Fès-Meknès" label="Fès-Meknès"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951051" start="4640" end="4657" title="Guelmim-Oued Noun" label="Guelmim-Oued Noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951088" start="4659" end="4682" title="Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra" label="Laâyoune-Sakia El Hamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951125" start="4684" end="4698" title="Marrakech-Safi" label="Marrakech-Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048167" start="4700" end="4708" title="Oriental (Morocco)" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951239" start="4710" end="4728" title="Rabat-Salé-Kénitra" label="Rabat-Salé-Kénitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20652586" start="4730" end="4741" title="Souss-Massa" label="Souss-Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951300" start="4746" end="4771" title="Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima" label="Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="4924" end="4944" title="Agadir" label="Agadir-Ida Ou Tanane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="4946" end="4956" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="4958" end="4961" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fès"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662264" start="4963" end="4983" title="Inezgane-Aït Melloul" label="Inezgane-Aït Melloul"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="4985" end="4994" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408890" start="4996" end="5002" title="Meknès Prefecture" label="Meknès"/>
<link wikidata="Q647417" start="5004" end="5014" title="Mohammedia" label="Mohammedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="5016" end="5027" title="Oujda" label="Oujda-Angad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="5029" end="5034" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183405" start="5036" end="5040" title="Safi, Morocco" label="Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="5042" end="5046" title="Salé" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q737483" start="5048" end="5063" title="Skhirate-Témara Prefecture" label="Skhirate-Témara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392485" start="5068" end="5083" title="Tangier-Assilah" label="Tangier-Assilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150989" start="5096" end="5104" title="Al Haouz Province" label="Al Haouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969619" start="5106" end="5116" title="Al Hoceïma Province" label="Al Hoceïma"/>
<link wikidata="Q972665" start="5118" end="5126" title="Aousserd Province" label="Aousserd"/>
<link wikidata="Q180994" start="5128" end="5136" title="Assa-Zag Province" label="Assa-Zag"/>
<link wikidata="Q793763" start="5138" end="5144" title="Azilal Province" label="Azilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15198365" start="5146" end="5156" title="Benslimane Province" label="Benslimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019461" start="5158" end="5169" title="Béni-Mellal Province" label="Béni-Mellal"/>
<link wikidata="Q820802" start="5171" end="5178" title="Berkane Province" label="Berkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395317" start="5180" end="5189" title="Berrechid Province" label="Berrechid"/>
<link wikidata="Q895028" start="5191" end="5199" title="Boujdour Province" label="Boujdour"/>
<link wikidata="Q895063" start="5201" end="5210" title="Boulemane Province" label="Boulemane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354922" start="5212" end="5223" title="Chefchaouen Province" label="Chefchaouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072085" start="5225" end="5234" title="Chichaoua Province" label="Chichaoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424820" start="5236" end="5252" title="Chtouka Aït Baha Province" label="Chtouka Aït Baha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440552" start="5254" end="5261" title="Driouch Province" label="Driouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540509" start="5263" end="5271" title="El Hajeb Province" label="El Hajeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q599606" start="5273" end="5282" title="El Jadida Province" label="El Jadida"/>
<link wikidata="Q970179" start="5284" end="5304" title="El Kelâa des Sraghna Province" label="El Kelâa des Sraghna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024447" start="5306" end="5316" title="Errachidia Province" label="Errachidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366420" start="5318" end="5327" title="Es Semara Province" label="Es Semara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368543" start="5329" end="5338" title="Essaouira Province" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013946" start="5340" end="5350" title="Fahs-Anjra Province" label="Fahs-Anjra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412034" start="5352" end="5358" title="Figuig Province" label="Figuig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408359" start="5360" end="5375" title="Fquih Ben Salah Province" label="Fquih Ben Salah"/>
<link wikidata="Q923219" start="5377" end="5384" title="Guelmim Province" label="Guelmim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408363" start="5386" end="5393" title="Guercif Province" label="Guercif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301648" start="5395" end="5401" title="Ifrane Province" label="Ifrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687516" start="5403" end="5409" title="Jerada Province" label="Jerada"/>
<link wikidata="Q284878" start="5411" end="5418" title="Kénitra Province" label="Kénitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740735" start="5420" end="5429" title="Khémisset Province" label="Khémisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820589" start="5431" end="5439" title="Khénifra Province" label="Khénifra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740686" start="5441" end="5450" title="Khouribga Province" label="Khouribga"/>
<link wikidata="Q631610" start="5452" end="5460" title="Laâyoune Province" label="Laâyoune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759567" start="5462" end="5469" title="Larache Province" label="Larache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957680" start="5471" end="5479" title="Médiouna Province" label="Médiouna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408385" start="5481" end="5487" title="Midelt Province" label="Midelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950226" start="5489" end="5502" title="Moulay Yacoub Province" label="Moulay Yacoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q367864" start="5504" end="5509" title="Nador Province" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q516261" start="5511" end="5519" title="Nouaceur Province" label="Nouaceur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629229" start="5521" end="5531" title="Ouarzazate Province" label="Ouarzazate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410368" start="5533" end="5546" title="Oued Ed-Dahab Province" label="Oued Ed-Dahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408330" start="5548" end="5556" title="Ouezzane Province" label="Ouezzane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408399" start="5558" end="5565" title="Rehamna Province" label="Rehamna"/>
<link wikidata="Q637778" start="5567" end="5571" title="Safi Province" label="Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969535" start="5573" end="5579" title="Sefrou Province" label="Sefrou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523840" start="5581" end="5587" title="Settat Province" label="Settat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408408" start="5589" end="5601" title="Sidi Bennour Province" label="Sidi Bennour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672941" start="5603" end="5612" title="Sidi Ifni Province" label="Sidi Ifni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969542" start="5614" end="5624" title="Sidi Kacem Province" label="Sidi Kacem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408411" start="5626" end="5638" title="Sidi Slimane Province" label="Sidi Slimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q972535" start="5640" end="5647" title="Tan-Tan Province" label="Tan-Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969671" start="5649" end="5657" title="Taounate Province" label="Taounate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165392" start="5659" end="5667" title="Taourirt Province" label="Taourirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15125620" start="5669" end="5676" title="Tarfaya Province" label="Tarfaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092298" start="5678" end="5688" title="Taroudannt Province" label="Taroudannt"/>
<link wikidata="Q546437" start="5690" end="5694" title="Tata Province" label="Tata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819589" start="5696" end="5700" title="Taza Province" label="Taza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257443" start="5702" end="5709" title="Tétouan Province" label="Tétouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408414" start="5711" end="5718" title="Tinghir Province" label="Tinghir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339589" start="5720" end="5726" title="Tiznit Province" label="Tiznit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408420" start="5728" end="5738" title="Youssoufia Province" label="Youssoufia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265471" start="5743" end="5749" title="Zagora Province" label="Zagora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783148" start="5796" end="5801" title="ABEDA" label="ABEDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826590" start="5803" end="5807" title="Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique" label="ACCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="5821" end="5825" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137381" start="5827" end="5832" title="Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development" label="AFESD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="5834" end="5836" title="Arab League" label="AL"/>
<link wikidata="Q624307" start="5838" end="5841" title="Arab Monetary Fund" label="AMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="5843" end="5846" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="AMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="5848" end="5852" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="5854" end="5857" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="5859" end="5862" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="5864" end="5868" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="5870" end="5874" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="5876" end="5880" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="5882" end="5886" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="5888" end="5892" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="5894" end="5899" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="5901" end="5905" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="5907" end="5910" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41230" start="5912" end="5915" title="Islamic Development Bank" label="IDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="5917" end="5921" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="5923" end="5926" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="5928" end="5933" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="5935" end="5938" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="IHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="5957" end="5960" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="5962" end="5965" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="5967" end="5970" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="5972" end="5980" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="5982" end="5990" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="5992" end="5995" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="5997" end="6000" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="6002" end="6005" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337904" start="6007" end="6010" title="International Transport Forum" label="ITF"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="6012" end="6015" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="6017" end="6020" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="6022" end="6025" title="Organization of American States" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="6038" end="6041" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="6043" end="6047" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="6049" end="6053" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6065" end="6067" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="6069" end="6075" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="6077" end="6083" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="6085" end="6090" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="6092" end="6097" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="6099" end="6102" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="6104" end="6107" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="6109" end="6112" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="6114" end="6118" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="6120" end="6123" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="6125" end="6129" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="6131" end="6135" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695751" start="6160" end="6174" title="Ahmed Ameziane" label="Ahmed Ameziane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19296" wikidata="Q615580" url="?curid=19296" title="Economy of Morocco">
<text>The economy of Morocco is considered relatively liberal, governed by the law of supply and demand. Since 1993, in line with many Western world changes, Morocco has followed a policy of privatisation. Morocco has become a major player in African economic affairs, and is the 6th largest African economy by GDP (PPP). The World Economic Forum placed Morocco as the most competitive economy in North Africa, in its African Competitiveness Report 2014–2015.

The economic system of the country demonstrated resilience to the climate, commodity, and pandemic shocks of the early 2020s. As of 2022, Morocco had the eighth-highest GDP in the Arab world, despite not being a significant oil-producing country. Since the early-1980s, the Moroccan government has pursued an economic programme toward accelerating economic growth with the support of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the Paris Club of creditors. From 2018, the country&#x27;s currency, the Moroccan dirham, is fully convertible for current account transactions; reforms of the financial sector have been implemented; and state enterprises are being privatised.

The services sector accounts for just over half of the GDP. The industry sector– consisting of mining, construction and manufacturing – is an additional quarter. The sectors that recorded the highest growth are the tourism, telecommunications, and textile sectors. Morocco, however, still depends to an inordinate degree on agriculture, which accounts for around 14% of GDP but employs 40–45% of the Moroccan population. With a semi-arid climate, it is difficult to assure good rainfall and Morocco&#x27;s GDP varies depending on the weather. Fiscal prudence has allowed for consolidation, with both the budget deficit and debt falling as a percentage of GDP. The major resources of the Moroccan economy are agriculture, phosphate minerals, and tourism. Sales of fish and seafood are important as well. Industry and mining contribute about one-third of the annual GDP. Morocco is the world&#x27;s third-largest producer of phosphates (after the United States and China), and the price fluctuations of phosphates on the international market greatly influence Morocco&#x27;s economy. Tourism and workers&#x27; remittances have played a critical role since independence. The production of textiles and clothing is part of a growing manufacturing sector that accounted for approximately 34% of total exports in 2002, employing 40% of the industrial workforce. The government wishes to increase 3 exports from $1.27 billion in 2001 to $3.29 billion in 2010 and has raised this to 5.7 billion in 2019.

The high cost of imports, especially of petroleum imports, is a major problem. Morocco suffers both from structural unemployment and a large external debt. The youth unemployment rate was 27.2% in 2021. About 80% of jobs are informal and the income gaps are very high. In 2022, Morocco ranked 120th out of 191 countries in the world on the Human Development Index (HDI), behind Algeria (93rd) and Tunisia (101st). It is the most unequal country in North Africa according to the NGO Oxfam.

==Macro-economic trend==
Morocco is a fairly stable economy with continuous growth over the past half-century. Current GDP per capita grew 47% in the 1960s, reaching a peak growth of 274% in the 1970s. However, this proved unsustainable and growth scaled back sharply to just 8.2% in the 1980s and 8.9% in the 1990s.

This is a chart of the trend of gross domestic product of Morocco at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Moroccan dirhams.
For purchasing power parity comparisons, the U.S. Dollar is exchanged at over 8 Dirhams. Mean wages were $2.88 per man-hour in 2009.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2022. Inflation below 5% is in green.

==History==
Over the years, Morocco implemented a series of development plans, enacted economic reforms, and encountered various challenges that have influenced its economic trajectory. From the 1960s to the present day, the country has sought to achieve sustained economic growth, reduce unemployment rates, and improve the living standards of its population.

===1960–1989===
Morocco instituted a series of development plans to modernize the economy and increase production during the 1960s. Net investment under the five-year plan for 1960–64 was about $1.3 billion. The plan called for a growth rate of 6.2%, but by 1964 the growth rate had only reached 3%. The main emphasis of the plan was on the development and modernization of the agricultural sector. The five-year development plan for 1968–72 called for increased agriculture and irrigation. The development of the tourist industry also figured prominently in the plan. The objective was to attain an annual 5% growth rate in GDP; the real growth rate actually exceeded 6%.

Investment during the 1970s included industry and tourism development. The five-year plan for 1973–77 envisaged a real economic growth of 7.5% annually. Industries singled out for development included chemicals (especially phosphoric acid), phosphate production, paper products, and metal fabrication. In 1975, King Hassan II announced a 50% increase in investment targets to allow for the effects of inflation. The 1978–80 plan was one of stabilization and retrenchment, designed to improve Morocco&#x27;s balance-of-payments position.

The ambitious five-year plan for 1981–85, estimated to cost more than $18 billion, aimed at achieving a growth rate of 6.5% annually. The plan&#x27;s principal priority was to create some 900,000 new jobs and to train managers and workers in modern agricultural and industrial techniques. Other major goals were to increase production in agriculture and fisheries to make the country self-sufficient in food, and to develop energy, industry, and tourism to enable Morocco to lessen its dependence on foreign loans. The plan called for significant expansion of irrigated land, for increased public works projects such as hospitals and schools, and for economic decentralization and regional development through the construction of 25 new industrial parks outside the crowded Casablanca-Kénitra coastal area. Large industrial projects included phosphoric acid plants, sugar refineries, mines to exploit cobalt, coal, silver, lead, and copper deposits, and oil-shale development.

===1990–2000s===
Moroccan economic policies brought macroeconomic stability to the country in the early 1990s but did not spur growth sufficient to reduce unemployment despite Moroccan Government&#x27;s ongoing efforts to diversify the economy. Drought conditions depressed activity in the key agricultural sector, and contributed to an economic slowdown in 1999. Favourable rainfalls have led Morocco to a growth of 6% for 2000. Formidable long-term challenges included: servicing the external debt; preparing the economy for freer trade with the EU; and improving education and attracting foreign investment to improve living standards and job prospects for Morocco&#x27;s youthful population.

Macroeconomic stability coupled with relatively slow economic growth characterized the Moroccan economy over the period 2000–2005. The government introduced a number of important economic reforms in that period. The economy, however, remained overly dependent on the agricultural sector. Morocco&#x27;s primary economic challenge was to accelerate growth in order to reduce high levels of unemployment. The government continued liberalizing the telecommunications sector in 2002, as well as the rules for oil and gas exploration. This process started with the sale of a second GSM license in 1999. The government in 2003 was using revenue from privatizations to finance increased spending. Although Morocco&#x27;s economy grew in the early 2000s, it was not enough to significantly reduce poverty.

Through a foreign exchange rate anchor and well-managed monetary policy, Morocco held inflation rates to industrial country levels over the past decade. Inflation in 2000 and 2001 were below 2%. Despite criticism among exporters that the dirham has become badly overvalued, the current account deficit remains modest. Foreign exchange reserves were strong, with more than $7 billion in reserves at the end of 2001. The combination of strong foreign exchange reserves and active external debt management gave Morocco the capacity to service its debt. Current external debt stands at about $16.6 billion. Africa:: Morocco — The World Factbook - Central Intelligence Agency 

Economic growth, however, has been erratic and relatively slow, partially as a result of an over-reliance on the agricultural sector. Agriculture production is extremely susceptible to rainfall levels and ranges from 13% to 20% of GDP. Given that 36% of Morocco&#x27;s population depends directly on agriculture production, droughts have a severe knock-on effect to the economy. Two successive years of drought led to a 1% incline in real GDP in 1999 and stagnation in 2000. Better rains during the 2000 to 2001 growing season led to a 6.5% growth rate in 2001. Growth in 2006 went above 9%, this was achieved by a booming real estate market.

The government introduced a series of structural reforms in recent years. The most promising reforms have been in the liberalization of the telecommunications sector. In 2001, the process continued with the privatization of 35% of the state operator Maroc Telecom. Morocco announced plans to sell two fixed licenses in 2002. Morocco also has liberalized rules for oil and gas exploration and has granted concessions for many public services in major cities. The tender process in Morocco is becoming increasingly transparent. Many believe, however, that the process of economic reform must be accelerated in order to reduce urban unemployment below the current rates above 20%.

==Recent developments==

Morocco&#x27;s sound economic management in recent years has yielded strong growth and investment grade status and it is weathering the negative impacts of the global crisis impressively well. Morocco is now addressing persistent social problems by reducing absolute poverty rates, investing in human capital through quality education, expanding access to drinking water, and linking rural areas to markets through investment in roads.

Morocco faces challenges on human development outcomes despite progress over the past decade, in particular. Overall illiteracy rates and gender disparity in access to secondary education remain high and the country continues to suffer poor outcomes on infant and maternal mortality. It also needs to diversify its economy, become more competitive, and integrate further into the global economy if it is to reach higher growth levels.

The government has recognized this challenge and has put in place an ambitious process of legal, policy, and institutional modernization that has far-reaching political, economic, and social dimensions. It has designed and is now implementing a comprehensive set of new sector strategies that respond to the overall national vision and that target development challenges with clear, measurable goals and indicators.

Tough government reforms and steady yearly growth in the region of 4–5% from 2000 to 2007, including 4.9% year-on-year growth in 2003–2007 the Moroccan economy is much more robust than just a few years ago. Economic growth is far more diversified, with new service and industrial poles, like Casablanca and Tangier, developing. The agriculture sector is being rehabilitated, which in combination with good rainfalls led to a growth of over 20% in 2009.

===2008===
In a statement, released in July 2008, the IMF called Morocco &quot;a pillar of development in the region&quot; and congratulated King Mohammed VI and the Central Bank on Morocco&#x27;s continued strong economic progress and effective management of monetary policy.

Morocco&#x27;s economy is expected to grow by 6.5% in 2008, according to the Moroccan finance minister. While the forecast is slightly lower than the earlier 6.8% projected growth it still remains quite an achievement considering the circumstances. GDP growth in 2007 was only 2.2% due to a poor harvest caused by prolonged periods of drought; Morocco experienced nonagricultural GDP growth of 6.6 percent in 2007. Inflation is expected to reach 2.9% in 2008 due to the rising costs of energy.
In an increasingly challenging global economic climate, the IMF expects continued nonagricultural expansion of the Moroccan economy.

The global financial crisis affected the Moroccan economy in only a limited way. Morocco may be affected, by the slowdown of international economy, stirred by the global financial crisis, and whose maximum impact on national economy could decrease the GDP growth rate by at least one point in 2009, according to the Bank Al-Maghrib.

In a report issued in July 2008, the IMF noted that Morocco&#x27;s financial sector is sound and resilient to shocks, and that the remarkable fiscal consolidation efforts of recent years have allowed the Moroccan economy to absorb the impact of difficult international economic conditions and increasing global prices for essential commodities such as petroleum and energy.
International economic experts recognize that Morocco&#x27;s exemplary economic performance is beneficial not only to Moroccans, but also for the nearly 90 million people who live the Maghreb.

Morocco is expected to close the year 2008 with a budgetary surplus ranging between MAD 3 billion and MAD3.5 billion ($348 million to $407 million), despite a difficult international context marked by a severe economic crisis. At the end of November 2008, the state&#x27;s budget registered a surplus of MAD 3.2 billion ($372 million), while at the end of November 2009, the budgetary surplus is projected at MAD 6.9 billion ($803 million).

The diversification of the Economy includes a multi-disciplinary approach to the development of non-agricultural sector, including the creation of special sectorial zones in industry, tourism and services outsourcing. In addition, reforms to the higher educational system and business law are also planified in the new program-contract signed in 2009 between the government, the banking sector and some zone-development companies. The approach also include a better sustaining of small-business development and prospection of external markets. The objective is to become an emerging industrial country of the likes of Vietnam by 2015.

US Ambassador to the EU noted that:
:&quot;Morocco stands out as a model of economic reform for the region and for other developing countries. The kind of economic progress that Morocco has made, and which the rest of the Maghreb has the potential to accomplish, is the best antidote to the new threat of terrorism in the region.&quot; 

===2009===
The economy has remained insulated from the worst effects of the world crisis. Due in part to the rebounding of the agricultural sector, which had suffered from a 2007 drought, the economy expanded 5.6% in 2008, with 5.7% growth forecasted for 2009. Morocco&#x27;s economy is the 61st largest in the world, according to the IMF, though its per-capita GDP is low compared to similarly ranked nations. King Mohammed VI has recently launched two national economic strategies: Plan Maroc Vert and Plan Emergence. The first seeks to create 1.5m jobs in the agriculture sector, and add around €7.65 billion to GDP through €10.8 billion of investments by 2020, while the latter will establish new industrial zones and boost training to increase efficiency. Additionally, phosphates production, which accounted for more than a third of 2008 exports, is being restructured for greater value.

Morocco&#x27;s economy is expected to achieve a 6.6% growth in the first quarter of 2009 up from 4.8% in the past quarter thanks to prospects for an agricultural campaign above the average of the past five years.

By the end of December 2008, rainfalls exceeded that of an ordinary year by 106%. This surplus has benefited to all agricultural regions and increased the water stored in dams destined for agriculture to 40.7%. In these conditions and taking into consideration a cereal campaign nearing 70 million quintals, the agricultural value added could increase by 22.2% in the first quarter of 2009, thus contributing 2.9% to the national economic growth.

Due to a decrease of activity among Morocco&#x27;s main commercial partners, foreign demand of goods destined towards Morocco would moderately slow down in 2009 compared to the 9% rise in 2008. This trend could continue in Q1 of 2009 with a growth rate not exceeding 2% due to a lackluster economic growth outlook and the slowdown of international trade.

===2019===
In June 2019, Morocco signed two agreements to obtain a loan worth $237 million from the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development. The loan was taken to fund two investment projects.

===2020===
On the economic front, the shock of COVID-19 has pushed the Moroccan economy into its first recession since 1995. Economic output contracted by 15.1% in the second quarter of 2020, primarily as a result of the lockdown but also of a sharp reduction in exports caused by the pandemic&#x27;s disruption to global value chains and the collapse of receipts from tourism. The shock to supply and demand, triggered by the pandemic, has been compounded by the fall in agricultural production due to a severe drought. Although activity picked up in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, the government&#x27;s preliminary estimates indicate that Morocco&#x27;s real GDP contracted by 7% in 2020, leading to an increase in unemployment from 9.2% to 11.9%.

==Economic growth==
Morocco is a fairly stable economy with continuous growth over the past half-a-century. Current GDP per capita grew 47% in the Sixties reaching a peak growth of 274% in the Seventies. However, this proved unsustainable and growth scaled back sharply to just 8.2% in the Eighties and 8.9% in the Nineties.

Real GDP growth is expected to average 5.5% in the 2009–13 period, seen the prospects in the tourism and the non-agricultural industry, as demand growth in the Eurozone — Morocco&#x27;s key export market and source of tourists is projected to be more subdued. Growth will be well below the 8–10% levels that are widely regarded as necessary to have a major impact on poverty and unemployment. Economic growth will also be intermittently hindered by the impact of periodic droughts on the rain-fed agricultural sector, the country&#x27;s largest employer.

==Agriculture==

Agriculture employs about 40% of Morocco&#x27;s workforce. On the Atlantic coast, where there are extensive plains, olives, citrus fruits, and wine grapes are grown, largely with water supplied by artesian wells. Livestock are raised and forests yield cork, cabinet wood, and building materials. Part of the maritime population fishes for its livelihood. Agadir, Essaouira, El Jadida, and Larache are among the important fishing harbours. In the rainy sections of the northeast, barley, wheat, and other cereals can be raised without irrigation.

Morocco produced in 2018:

* 7.3 million tons of wheat (20th largest producer in the world);
* 3.7 million tonnes of sugar beet, which is used to produce sugar and ethanol;
* 2.8 million tons of barley (15th largest producer in the world);
* 1.8 million tons of potatoes;
* 1.5 million tons of olives (3rd largest producer in the world, behind Spain and Italy);
* 1.4 million tons of tomatoes (15th largest producer in the world);
* 1.2 million tons of tangerines (4th largest producer in the world, behind China, Spain and Turkey);
* 1 million tons of oranges (15th largest producer in the world);
* 954 thousand tons of onions;
* 742 thousand tons of watermelons;
* 696 thousand tons of apples;
* 616 thousand tons of sugarcane;
* 500 thousand tons of melons;
* 480 thousand tons of carrots;
* 451 thousand tons of grapes;
* 319 thousand tons of bananas;
* 256 thousand tons of chilli peppers;
* 128 thousand tons of fig (3rd largest producer in the world, only behind Turkey and Egypt);

In addition to smaller yields of other agricultural products.

===Land===

Morocco is endowed with numerous exploitable resources. With approximately of arable land (one-seventh of which can be irrigated) and its generally temperate Mediterranean climate, Morocco&#x27;s agricultural potential is matched by few other Arab or African countries. It is one of the few Arab countries that has the potential to achieve self-sufficiency in food production. In a normal year, Morocco produces two-thirds of the grains (chiefly wheat, barley, and corn [maize]) needed for domestic consumption.

Morocco exports citrus fruits and early vegetables to the European market. Its wine industry is developed, and the production of commercial crops (cotton, sugarcane, sugar beets, and sunflowers) is expanding. Newer crops such as tea, tobacco, and soybeans have passed the experimental stage, the fertile Gharb plain being favourable for their cultivation. Morocco is actively developing its irrigation potential that ultimately will irrigate more than 2.5 million acres (1 million hectares).

Morocco&#x27;s forestry policy seeks to restore over 600,000 hectares of forest ecosystems, battle soil erosion, control water flow, and boost forestry and tourist revenue. This is supported by the European Investment Bank&#x27;s development branch, EIB Global. The EIB-financed component will reforest about 55,000 hectares, resulting in 30 200 years of temporary work and over 6,800 permanent jobs.

===Drought===
Unreliable rainfall is a chronic problem that produces drought or sudden floods. In 1995, Morocco&#x27;s worst drought in thirty years forced Morocco to import grain and adversely affected the economy. Another drought occurred in 1997, and one in 1999–2000. Reduced incomes due to drought caused GDP to fall by 7.6% in 1995, by 2.3% in 1997, and by 1.5% in 1999. During the years between drought, good rains brought bumper crops to market. Good rainfall in 2001 led to a 5% GDP growth rate.

The danger of drought is ever present and still dramatically affects the Moroccan economy, even though Moroccan decisionmakers have recently stated that the economy becomes more diversified and disconnected from rain falls. Especially, cereal yields still depend on considerable variation in annual precipitation. Cereals constitute the essential of the agricultural value added and their production is very sensitive to rain falls. More important is that cereal yields determine not only the aggregate value added in the agricultural sector but also economic growth in general. According to the Moroccan economist, Brahim MANSOURI (Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia Compared, UNECA, 2008), when drought, measured as a dummy variable computed on the basis of the rate of growth of cereal yield, endangers extremely, the growth rate of real GDP would fall by 10%.

===Cannabis===
Morocco consistently ranks among the world&#x27;s largest producers and exporters of cannabis, and its cultivation and sale provide the economic base for much of northern Morocco. The cannabis is typically processed into hashish. This activity represents 0.57% of Morocco&#x27;s GDP. A UN survey in 2003 estimated cannabis cultivation at about in Morocco&#x27;s five northern provinces. This represented 10% of the total area and 23% of the arable lands of the surveyed territory and 1% of Morocco&#x27;s total arable land.
On May 26, 2021, the Moroccan Parliament voted to legalise the use of cannabis for medical, as well as cosmetic and industrial purposes.

Morocco is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention and in 1992 Morocco passed legislation designed to implement it and its new national strategy against drugs formulated by its National Committee on Narcotics was adopted in 2005. That same year, the International Narcotics Control Board commended the Government of Morocco for its efforts to eradicate cannabis plant cultivation on its territory, which has resulted in the total potential production of cannabis resin in the Rif region decreasing by 10% over the previous year. At the same time, the board called upon the international community to support its efforts where possible.

Since the early 2010s, a growing debate is taking place in Morocco about the decriminalisation of cannabis. Powerful political parties are among advocates of decriminalisation, as the Istiqlal Party and the Authenticity and Modernity Party.

===Fishing===
The fishing industry in Morocco is a leading source of revenue, accounting for 56% of agricultural and 16% of total exports. For a long time, the industry has been an economic pillar for the country. Morocco is considered the largest fish market in Africa, with an estimated total catch of 1,084,638 MT in 2001.

==Industry==

The Moroccan industrial sector looks set to continue the strong growth it has enjoyed in recent years. Industrial activity recorded a 5.5% increase in 2007, a slight rise over 2006, when the sector grew by 4.7%. Added value in the sector increased by 5.6% in 2007. Overall the contribution of industrial activity to GDP fluctuates between about 25% and 35% every year, depending on the performance of the agriculture sector. The industrial sector accounted for about 21.1% of employment in 2007 and the sector is a key component of the government&#x27;s effort to curb unemployment. The sector also attracts high levels of FDI and authorities have announced initiatives to improve the investment climate, with particular attention to off-shoring activities, automotive, aeronautics, electronics, food processing activities, products from the sea and textiles. Other important industrial sectors include mining, chemicals, construction materials and pharmaceuticals. The future of Morocco&#x27;s industrial segment looks bright, particularly as new initiatives make it more globally competitive in a variety of sectors.

===Manufacturing===

Manufacturing accounts for about one-sixth of GDP and is steadily growing in importance in the economy. Two particularly important components of Morocco&#x27;s industrial makeup are processing raw materials for export and manufacturing consumer goods for the domestic market. Many operations date to the colonial period. Until the early 1980s, government involvement was dominant and the major focus was on import substitution. Since then the emphasis has shifted to privatizing state operations and attracting new private investment, including foreign sources.

Processing phosphate ore into fertilizers and phosphoric acid for export is a major economic activity. Food processing for export (canning fish, fresh vegetables, and fruit) as well as for domestic needs (flour milling and sugar refining) is also important, and the manufacture of textiles and clothes using domestically produced cotton and wool is a major source of foreign exchange. Morocco&#x27;s iron and steel manufacturing industry is small but provides a significant share of the country&#x27;s domestic needs.

The manufacturing sector produces light consumer goods, especially foodstuffs, beverages, textiles, matches, and metal and leather products. Heavy industry is largely limited to petroleum refining, chemical fertilizers, automobile and tractor assembly, foundry work, asphalt, and cement. Many of the processed agricultural products and consumer goods are primarily for local consumption, but Morocco exports canned fish and fruit, wine, leather goods, and textiles, as well as such traditional Moroccan handicrafts as carpets and brass, copper, silver, and wood implements.

Ownership in the manufacturing sector is largely private. The government owns the phosphate-chemical fertilizer industry and much of the sugar-milling capacity, through either partnership or joint financing. It is also a major participant in the car and truck assembly industry and in tire manufacturing.

===Automotive===
The automotive sector is already Morocco&#x27;s leading export sector and has made Morocco the leading car manufacturer in Africa. Morocco&#x27;s fast integration into the global economy was also facilitated by numerous free trade agreements with the United States and the European Union. These agreements contributed undoubtedly in a positive way towards the emergence of export activities in the country. 
Foreign direct investment has been expanding as companies are attracted towards the favorable economic situation of the country, government support through their numerous initiatives, such as tax exemptions for the first 5 years and VAT exemptions, modern infrastructure, and a skilled workforce. 
Moreover, the automotive sector has the strongest job creation; 85’000 new jobs were created in the sector between 2014 and 2018, bringing the total jobs in the sector to 158’000.

Morocco has two major &quot;traditional&quot; car manufacturers: Renault and PSA.

The Chinese company BYD is a pioneer when it comes to electric cars and Morocco has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Chinese automaker to set up an electric car factory near Tangier, the first of its kind in the country.

Production and exports are expected to continue to rise thanks to the recent launch of a second production line by Renault. The production of the plants reached 402.000 vehicles in 2018.

Other recent investments in Morocco&#x27;s automotive sector include PSA Peugeot Citroen&#x27;s investment of US$615 million in setting up their manufacturing facility which is expected to be operational in 2019. Production at the PSA plant projects to be 200’000 vehicles and boasting a total production capacity of 700.000 cars.

Morocco could soon welcome new names (in two to three years), such as Toyota and Hyundai, having already shown their interest in the attractive conditions offered. Following the example of Renault, they could take advantage of the skilled work pool that has been created and a network of more than 200 automotive suppliers.

Lear Corporation, The American group, with 11 plants in the country is the leading automotive supplier, followed by Yazaki, Sumitomo, and Leoni and many others such as Denso, Kromberg &amp; Schubert, Takata, Furukawa, Fujikura, TE connectivity, Valeo, Faurecia, Daedong System, Hirschmann, Delphi, Magnetti Marelli, COMSAEMTE, Parker, Clarton Horn, Deltrian, Inergy Automotive System, Varroc Lighting System, JTKET, Processos industriales Del Sur... In the medium term, the goal is to attract nearly 50 other industrialists.

New ecosystems have been established such as wiring, vehicle interior and seats, metal stamping, battery, etc.

However, there are still numerous missing elements: sunroofs, leather seats, instrument panels, foundry, screws, tires, radios and screens.

To boost investment in these activities, Morocco intends to encourage Moroccan capital and joint ventures.

===Textiles===
Textiles form a major industry in Morocco. The European Union is Morocco&#x27;s top client in regards to textiles and clothing, with France importing 46% of hosiery, 28.5% of basic textile and 27.6% of ready-to-wear clothing from Morocco, managing director of the Moroccan Export Development Center underlined. Recalling that Morocco&#x27;s textile and clothing exports totaled some $3.7 billion in 2007, Saad Benabdallah ascribed this performance to the many assets that Morocco enjoys, namely, geographical proximity, flexibility, sourcing skills and the multiple opportunities offered by Free Trade Agreements with the European Union, United States and Turkey.

China&#x27;s share rose to 46% on average in 2010, and several clothing categories, China is more than 50%. In the European market, the share of Chinese products was 37.7% in 2007. A bond that gives cold sweats to Moroccan exporters who have invested heavily in the sector, The President of CEDITH Jean-François Limantour said in an article that Turkey is the second supplier to Europe with a market share of 12.6%. The share of Morocco fell to 3%.

===Mining===

The mining sector is one of the pillars of Morocco&#x27;s economy. It represented a turnover of US$2.7 billion in 2005, including MAD 2.17 billion in exports and 20% of energy consumption. It also employs about 39,000 people with an estimated MAD 571 million in salaries (2005). Morocco produces a number of minerals and metals, most importantly, phosphates, silver and lead. 

Morocco possesses 75 percent of the world&#x27;s phosphate reserves. It is the world&#x27;s first exporter (28% of the global market) and third producer (20% of global production). In 2005, Morocco produced 27.254 million tons of phosphates and 5.895 million tons of phosphate derivatives.

===Construction sector===
The construction and real estate sectors are also a part of the investment boom in the country. Increasing public investment in ports, housing development projects, and roads as well as the boom in the tourism sector have been a big shot in the arm for the construction sector. The rise in construction activities and efforts to improve infrastructure are creating many opportunities for public-private partnerships. The real estate sector has also been seeing record investments. Morocco is being touted as the most popular retirement destination among Europeans because it is inexpensive compared to other European tourist destinations. Most of the demand in Morocco is for moderate housing, and a decrease in lending rates has made home-ownership easier.

==Services==
Services, including government and military expenditures, account for about one-fourth of Morocco&#x27;s GDP. Government spending accounts for fully half of the service economy, despite an ongoing effort on the part of the government to sell much of its assets to private concerns. Since the mid-1980s tourism and associated services have been an increasingly significant sector of the Moroccan economy and by the late 1990s had become Morocco&#x27;s largest source of foreign currency.

During that time the Moroccan government committed significant resources – by way of loans and tax exemptions – to the development of the tourist industry and associated services. The government also made direct capital investments in the development of the service sector, but since the early 1990s it has begun to divest itself of these properties. Several million visitors enter Morocco yearly, most of them from Europe. Tourists also arrive from Algeria, the United States, and East Asia, mainly Japan.

===Tourism===
Morocco is a major touristic destination. Tourism is thus a major contributor to both the economic output and the current account balance, as well as a main job provider. In 2008 8 million tourists have visited Morocco. Tourist receipts in 2007 totalled US$7,55 billion. Morocco has developed an ambitious strategy, dubbed &quot;Vision 2010&quot;, aimed at attracting 10 million tourists by 2010. This strategy provides for creating 160,000 beds, thus bringing the national capacity to 230,000 beds. It also aims to create some 600,000 new jobs.

Marrakech continues to be the market leader, but the case of Fez, showing a 20% increase of visitors in 2004, gives hope that better organisation can bring results in diversifying the sector as a whole. Like other regions, Fez has its Centre Regional du Tourisme (CRT), a local tourism body which coordinates the local industry and the authorities. Fez&#x27;s plan involves a substantial restructuring of the old city and an upgrading of hotel capacity. Improved transport has brought the city into more direct contact with potential visitors. There are now direct flights from France, where previously it was necessary to change plane in Casablanca.

The &quot;Plan Azur&quot;, is a large-scale project initiated by king Mohammed VI, is meant to internationalise Morocco. The plan provides for creating six coastal resorts for holiday-home owners and tourists: five on the Atlantic coast and one on the Mediterranean. The plan also includes other large-scale development projects such as upgrading regional airports to attract budget airlines, and building new train and road links.

Thus, Morocco achieved an 11% rise in tourism in the first five months of 2008 compared with the same period last year, it said, adding that French visitors topped the list with 927,000 followed by Spaniards (587,000) and Britons (141,000).
Morocco, which is close to Europe, has a mix of culture and the exotic that makes it popular with Europeans buying holiday homes.

===Information technology===

The IT sector generated a turnover of Dh7 billion ($910,000m) in 2007, which represented an 11% increase compared to 2006. The number of Moroccan internet subscribers in 2007 amounted to 526,080, representing an increase of 31.6% compared to the previous year and a 100% increase compared to 2005. The national penetration for internet subscription remains low, even though it increased from 0.38% in 2004 to 1.72% in 2007. Yet over 90% of subscribers have a broadband ADSL connection, which is one of the highest ratios in the world. The future of the Moroccan IT sector was laid out in Maroc 2006–12. The plan aims to increase the combined value of the telecoms and IT sector from Dh24 billion ($3.1 billion) in 2004 to Dh60 billion ($7.8 billion) in 2012.

While the telecoms sector remains the big earner, with Dh33 billion ($4.3 billion), the IT and off shore industries should generate Dh21 billion ($2.7 billion) each by 2012. In addition, the number of employees should increase from 40,000 to 125,000. The government hopes that adding more local content to the internet will increase usage. There have also been efforts to add more computers to schools and universities. E-commerce is likely to take off in the next few years, especially as the use of credit cards is gaining more ground in Morocco. Although computer and internet use have made a great leap forward in the past five years, the IT market still finds itself in infancy and offers great potential for further development.

===Retail===
The retail industry represents 12.8% of Morocco&#x27;s GDP and 1.2m people – 13% of the total workforce – are employed in the sector. Organised retail, however, represents only a fraction of domestic trade, as shoppers rely on the country&#x27;s 1151 souks, markets and approximately 700,000 independent groceries and shops. The rapid emergence of a middle class – around 30% of the population – combined with a young and increasingly urban population and a craving for international brands, is rapidly changing the ways Moroccans spend their money. Still average purchasing power remains low overall, forcing retailers to cater to a broad section of the population and to keep prices low. Despite the challenges, the retail sector has strong growth potential. The franchising segment will continue to grow, and while strong local brands are emerging, international brand names will continue to account for the biggest percentage increase in the sector&#x27;s turnover. Changing consumption habits, increasing purchasing power and the growing number of tourists should boost the development of malls and luxury shopping. However, independent stores and markets should continue to account for most domestic trade in the foreseeable future.

===Offshoring===
In 2009 Morocco was ranked among the top thirty countries in the offshoring sector. Morocco opened its doors to offshoring in July 2006, as one component of the development initiative Plan Emergence, and has so far attracted roughly half of the French-speaking call centres that have gone offshore so far and a number of the Spanish ones. According to experts, multinational companies are attracted by Morocco&#x27;s geographical and cultural proximity to Europe, in addition to its time zone. In 2007 the country had about 200 call centres, including 30 of significant size, that employ a total of over 18,000 people.

===Finance===
In 2007 the economic environment remained conducive to further growth of banking activity in Morocco following a very good year for the sector in 2006. In 2007 macroeconomic growth, excluding the agricultural sector, remained quite robust, providing the background for dynamic growth in banking credits. Total assets of the banking sector increased by 21.6% to MAD 654.7 billion ($85.1 billion), which is above the previous year&#x27;s high annual growth rate of 18.1%. The structure of the domestic sector has remained steady in the past two years, with the landscape dominated by three major local banks. The state has started to remove itself from the domestic sector by surrendering part of its share capital in public banks. At end-2007 public capital still held controlling stakes in five banks and four financing companies. Meanwhile, foreign ownership in the local financial sector continues to grow, with foreign institutions controlling five banks and eight financing companies as well as holding significant stakes in four banks and three financing companies.

The financial system, though robust, has to take on excessive quantities of low risk-low return government debt at the expense of riskier, but more productive private sector lending. This crowding–out of private sector investment reduces the profitability and growth incentives of the financial sector.

Fitch Ratings affirmed Morocco&#x27;s long-term local and foreign issuer default ratings of &quot;BBB−&quot; and &quot;BBB&quot;, respectively, with a stable outlook. The credit rating agency attributed its classification in part to the &quot;relative resilience of Morocco&#x27;s economy to the global economic downturn.&quot;

===Insurance===
The insurance sector in Morocco is witnessing dynamic growth, driven foremost by developments in life insurance, which has superseded motor insurance in the past two years as the leading segment of the market with around one-third of total premiums. Behind life and auto insurance, accident, work-related accident, fire and transport insurance were the largest contributors. Total premiums reached Dh17.7 billion ($2.3 billion) in 2007, ranking Morocco as one of the largest insurance markets in the Arab world behind Saudi Arabia and the UAE. The insurance penetration rate is 2.87% of GDP, while the insurance density is $69 per person.

More broadly, the Moroccan insurance sector is already consolidated, with five large players controlling the market. The sector is set to be opened up to foreign competition from 2010 onward, and the consolidation of insurance companies into larger entities should strengthen the local players to better compete with eventual competition from foreign insurers. There is also the possibility that new insurance niches such as takaful (Islamic insurance) and microinsurance products will become part of the Moroccan market in the medium-term, but they are unlikely to appear in the near future.

===Media and advertising===
According to the Moroccan Advertisers Group, Dh3.9 billion ($507 million) was spent in 2007, a near-fourfold increase on the Dh1.1 billion ($143 million) spent in 2000. There is still room for growth, as the market remains underdeveloped by international standards. Advertising expenditure represented just over 0.6% of GDP in 2007, compared with 1% in Egypt and 1.5% to 2% in EU countries. Morocco&#x27;s 10 biggest advertising spenders account for about 35% of the total, with telecoms, consumer goods and services companies making up a large percentage of that amount.

Television retained the lion&#x27;s share of advertising expenditure, with 55% of above-the-line advertising. In a 2006 poll, GAM found that 94% of its members used outdoor advertising, although 81% companied about problems, mainly caused by quality issues and delays. The potential for expansion is huge, and while telecoms should remain the largest advertising segment, fast-growing sectors of the economy such as retail, automobile and real estate are providing advertising companies with new opportunities.

===Communications===
The telecoms sector increased in value from Dh25.6 billion ($3.3 billion) in 2006 to Dh33.3 billion ($4.2 billion) in 2007. With a workforce of some 41,000 employees, the sector contributes 7% to annual GDP and is one of the country&#x27;s leading recipients of foreign direct investment (FDI). Under the development plan, the sector should employ 125,000 people by 2012 and contribute 10% of GDP. With the penetration rates of 69.4% from mobile phones and 8.95% for fixed lines, the Moroccan telecoms industry is set to continue to grow. The call centre industry – partially as a result of offshore initiatives, such as Casanearshore and Rabat Technoplis – will continue to expand. However, the worldwide call centre industry is highly competitive and education is the key to success if Morocco truly intends to become a leading international player in this industry.

===Telephone system===
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the government undertook a major expansion and modernization of the telecommunications system. This nearly quadrupled the number of internal telephone lines and greatly improved international communications. In 1996 the state-owned telecommunications industry was opened up to privatization by a new law that allowed private investment in the retail sector, while the state retained control of fixed assets. In 1998 the government created Maroc Telecom (Ittiṣālāt al-Maghrib), which provides telephone, cellular, and Internet service for the country. Satellite dishes are found on the roofs of houses in even the poorest neighbourhoods, suggesting that Moroccans at every social and economic level have access to the global telecommunications network. The Internet has made steady inroads in Morocco; major institutions have direct access to it, while private individuals can connect via telecommunications &quot;boutiques&quot;, a version of the cyber cafés found in many Western countries, and through home computers.

Morocco has a good system composed of open-wire lines, cables, and microwave radio relay links. The internet is available. The principal switching centers are Casablanca and Rabat. The national network is nearly 100% digital using fiber-optic links. An improved rural service employs microwave radio relay. The international system has seven submarine cables, three satellite earth stations, two Intelsat (over the Atlantic Ocean) and one Arabsat. There is a microwave radio relay to Gibraltar, Spain and the Western Sahara. Coaxial cables and microwave radio relays exist to Algeria. Morocco is a participant in Medarabtel and a fiber-optic cable links from Agadir to Algeria and Tunisia.

*Main lines in use: 3.28 million (2012) : estimation
*Mobile cellular: 47.25 million [135% of the total population] (2015) : estimation
*Internet users: 21.2 million [60.6% of the total population] (2014): estimation

===Radio===
*AM stations: 25;
*FM stations: 31;
*Shortwave: 11 (2007);
*Radio sets: 7.78 million (2007).

===Broadband Internet access===
Operated by Maroc Telecom. The service started as a test in November 2002 before it was launched in October 2003. The service is offered by the subsidiary Menara. As well as Inwi (also known as Wana Co.) and Meditel that turned into Orange.

===Equity markets===
Privatization has stimulated activity on the Casablanca Stock Exchange (Bourse de Casablanca) notably through trade in shares of large former state-owned operation. Founded in 1929, it is one of the oldest stock exchanges in Africa, but it came into reckoning after financial reforms in 1993, making it the third largest in Africa.
The stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Morocco was valued at $75,495 billion in 2007 by the World Bank. That is an increase of 74% compared with the year 2005. Having weathered the global financial meltdown, the Casablanca Stock Exchange is stepping up to its central role of financing the Moroccan economy. Over the next few years, it seeks to double its number of listed companies and more than quadruple its number of investors.

==Government finances==
===Fiscal policies===
Morocco has made great progress toward fiscal consolidation in recent years, under the combined effect of strong revenue performance and efforts to tackle expenditure rigidities, notably the wage bill. The overall fiscal deficit shrank by more than 4 percentage points of GDP during the last four years, bringing the budget close to balance in 2007. However, the overall deficit is projected to widen to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2008, driven by the upward surge in the fiscal cost of Morocco&#x27;s universal subsidy scheme following the sharp increase in world commodity and oil prices.

Fiscal policy decisions so far have been mostly discretionary, as there is no explicit goal for fiscal policy. Looking forward, the question of a possible anchor for medium-term fiscal policy is worth exploring. Morocco&#x27;s low social indicators and large infrastructure needs could justify an increase in social spending and public investment. Further, some nominal tax rates remain high by international standards, possibly warranting a lowering of some rates. At the same time, the relatively high level of public debt remains a constraining factor, particularly as heightened attractiveness to investors is a key component of Morocco&#x27;s strategy of deepening its integration in the global economy.

Morocco has made major progress in recent years to increase economic growth and strengthen the economy&#x27;s resilience to shocks. The gains reflect sound macroeconomic policies and sustained structural reforms, and are reflected in the gradual improvement in living standards and per capita income.

===Debt management===
The turnaround in the fiscal performance is particularly noteworthy. Around the start of the 21st century, Morocco&#x27;s overall deficit stood at 5.3 percent of GDP, and gross total government debt amounted to three-fourths of GDP. In 2007, reflecting a strong improvement in revenue performance and moderate growth in expenditure, the budget was close to balanced. Under the combined effect of a prudent fiscal policy and sizeable privatization receipts, the total debt stock had shrunk by 20 percentage points, and now stands at a little over half of GDP. As a result, perceptions of Morocco&#x27;s creditworthiness have improved.

===Taxation===
Tax revenues provide the largest part of the general budget. Taxes are levied on individuals, corporations, goods and services, and tobacco and petroleum products.

==External trade==

Morocco sends a significant amount of its exports to the European Union. Of its E.U. exports in 2018, 42% went to Spain and 29% went to France. Its main exports to Spain include electronics, clothes, and seafood. The leading origins of goods imported into Morocco as of 2017 are also Spain and France.

In recent years, Morocco has reduced its dependence on phosphate exports, emerging as an exporter of manufactured and agricultural products, and as a growing tourism destination. However, its competitiveness in basic manufactured goods, such as textiles, is hampered by low labour productivity and high wages. Morocco is dependent on imported fuel and its food import requirement can rise substantially in drought years, as in 2007. Although Morocco runs a structural trade deficit, this is typically offset by substantial services earnings from tourism and large remittance inflows from the diaspora, and the country normally runs a small current-account surplus.

Morocco signed in 1996 an agreement of association with the European Union which came into effect in 2000. This agreement, which lies within the scope of the Barcelona Process (euro-Mediterranean partnership) started in 1995 and envisages the progressive implementation of a free trade area planned for 2012.

After a good performance in the 1st half of 2008, exports of goods slowed in the 3rd quarter before plummeting in the 4th quarter (−16.3%), following the fall in foreign sales of phosphates and their derivatives, after a sharp rise in the 1st and 2nd quarters.

===Trade imbalance===
Morocco&#x27;s trade imbalance rose from 86 billion to 118 billion dirhams between 2006 and 2007 – a 26.6% increase bringing the total amount to 17% of GDP. The Caisse de Dépôt et de Gestion forecasts that if imports continue to rise faster than exports, the disparity could reach 21% of GDP. Foreign Trade Minister Abdellatif Maâzouz said earlier in September that members of the government have agreed to a plan focused on four major areas: a concerted export development strategy, the regulation of imports, market and economic monitoring, and the adaptation of regulations and working practices. The plan, Maâzouz said, &quot;will enable us to redress the external trade situation and to reduce Morocco&#x27;s trade deficit.&quot; The minister added that he expects to see a reversal of the imbalance by 2010.

===International agreements===
Morocco was granted an &quot;advanced status&quot; from the EU in 2008, shoring up bilateral trade relations with Europe. Among the various free trade agreements that Morocco has ratified with its principal economic partners, are The Euro-Mediterranean free trade area agreement with the European Union with the objective of integrating the European Free Trade Association at the horizons of 2012; the Agadir Agreement, signed with Egypt, Jordan, and Tunisia, within the framework of the installation of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area; the US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement with United States which came into force on 1 January 2006, and lately the agreement of free exchange with Turkey. (See section below)

==Investment==
Morocco has become an attractive destination for European investors thanks to its relocation sites &quot;Casashore&quot; and &quot;Rabatshore&quot;, and to the very rapid cost escalation in Eastern Europe. The offshoring sector in Morocco is of great importance as it creates high-level jobs that are generally accompanied by an influx of Moroccan immigrants. Noting however that human resources remain the major concern for companies seeking to gain a foothold in Morocco. In this regard, it has been deemed an important decision of the Moroccan government to accelerate training in the required disciplines.

In a bid to promote foreign investments, Morocco in 2007 adopted a series of measures and legal provisions to simplify procedures and secure appropriate conditions for projects launching and completing. Foreign trade minister, Abdellatif Maazouz cited that these measures include financial incentives and tax exemptions provided for in the investment code and the regional investment centres established to accompany projects.
These measures combined with actions carried out by the Hassan II Fund for Development increased foreign investments in Morocco by $544.7 million in 2007. 20% of these investments came from Islamic countries.

Moroccan officials have heralded a significant increase in the amount of money Moroccan expatriates are sending home. Government efforts are underway to encourage Moroccans living abroad to increase their investments at home, and to allay concerns about bureaucracy and corruption. With money sent home by Moroccan migrants reaching $5.7 billion in 2007, Morocco came in second, behind Egypt, on the recent World Bank list of the top 10 MENA remittance recipient countries. Neighbouring Algeria ($2.9 billion) came in at number five. According to the World Bank, remittances constituted 6.4% of GDP in Morocco in 2020 and amounted to more than $7.4 billion. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, remittances from Moroccans residing abroad continued in an upward trend.

The European Investment Bank started making investments in Morocco in 1979, and has since invested €9.6 billion since then, including €2.5 billion since 2017.

===Foreign direct investment===
Foreign Direct Investments in Morocco grew to $2.57 billion in 2007 from $2.4 billion a year earlier to position the country in the fourth rank in Africa among FDI recipients, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Although other studies have shown much higher figures.
Expectations for 2008 were promising noting that 72 projects were approved for a global amount of $9.28 billion. These were due to open 40,023 direct and stable job opportunities. However, keeping with the global trend, FDI dropped 29% to €2.4 billion in 2008, the first decline since 2004.

While the recovery of pre-crisis levels very much hinges on the health of the global economy, Morocco has made steps towards becoming a more attractive FDI destination, according to the World Bank&#x27;s Doing Business 2010 report, ranking second in North African neighbours. The majority of FDI continues to derive from the EU, specifically France. Morocco is also a source of foreign investments. In 2007, it has injected $652 million in projects abroad, which put Morocco in the third position in Africa.

===Investment by country===
Most of the FDIs injected in Morocco came from the European Union with France, the major economic partner of the North African kingdom, topping the list with investments worth $1.86 billion, followed by Spain ($783 million), the report said.
The influx of European countries in Morocco&#x27;s FDI represents 73.5% of the global amount received in 2007. 19.3% of the investments came from Arab countries, whose share in Morocco&#x27;s FDI showed a marked rise, as they only represented 9.9% of the entire FDIs in 2006. A number of Arab countries, mainly from the Persian Gulf region are involved in large-scale projects in Morocco, including the giant Tanger Med port on the Mediterranean. Morocco remains the preferred destination of foreign investors in the Maghreb region (Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia), with a total of $13.6 billion between 2001 and 2007, which puts it largely on the top of the list.

===Investment by sector===
In terms of sectors, tourism has the biggest share of investment with $1.55 billion, that is 33% of the total FDIs, followed by the real estate sector and the industrial sector, with respectively $930 million and $374 million. Moroccan expatriates&#x27; share of the FDI stood at $92 million in 2007, up from $57 million in 2006, and they touch mainly the sectors of real estate, tourism and catering, according to the report.

==Science and technology==
The national system of scientific and technical research is guided by different elements, such as the pronouncements of the king, reports of special commissions, five-year plans, and the creation of a special programme for the support of research. The Moroccan government&#x27;s Five-Year Plan for 2000–2004 articulated the priority lines for research. The declared objectives of this plan were to align S&amp;T research with socio-economic development priorities. Sectors declared as priority areas were: agriculture, health fisheries, drinking water, geology, mining, energy, environment, information and telecommunications technologies, and transport.

This approach highlighted the need for effective institutional coordination, which enabled different parties to work together around common priority socioeconomic objectives. The private sector is the least active player in research activity in Morocco. The REMINEX Corporation (Research on Mines and Exploitation) is the most prominent research performer in the private sector, and is a subsidiary of Omnium Nord Africain, the largest privately owned mining group in Morocco. The most recent figures available on the number of research staff in Morocco are those provided by the Ministry of National Education, Higher Education, Professional Training and Scientific Research in its 2002–2003 annual report. According to this report, Morocco had 17 390 research staff in 2002–2003. The majority (58%) were employed in the university sector.

Research institutions include the Scientific Institute, founded in 1920 in Rabat, which does fundamental research in the natural sciences, and the Scientific Institute of Maritime Fishing, founded in 1947, in Casablanca, which studies oceanography, marine biology, and topics related to development of the fishing industry. Nine universities and colleges offer degrees in basic and applied sciences. In 1987–97, science and engineering students accounted for 41% of college and university enrollments.

==Economy of Western Sahara==

Fishing and phosphate mining are the main activities in Moroccan-administered Western Sahara. Fruits and vegetables are grown in the few oases, while nomadic herders keep camels, sheep and goats.

==Development of the Northern Region==
Historically, the Casablanca-Rabat axis has been more prosperous and has received more government attention than the predominantly mountainous northern provinces and the Western Sahara region. Although the latter region has received government attention since the 1990s because of its phosphate deposits, the northern provinces, which include the Rif Mountains, home to 6 million Moroccans, had been largely neglected. The uneven development among Morocco&#x27;s regions fueled a cycle of rural-urban migration that has shown no signs of slowing down.

In 1998, the government launched a program to develop the northern region, largely with international help. Spain had shown particular interest in the development of the region, because its underdevelopment has fueled illegal immigration and drug trafficking across the Strait of Gibraltar.

When king Hassan II passed on, his son, Mohammed VI, made it his duty to develop the Northern Region, and especially its biggest city, Tangier.

The state-owned railway company will engage some $755 million in investment in the northern region, including building a railway line between Tangier and Tangier-Med port (43 km), improving the Tangier-Casablanca railway line and modernizing many train stations over the next few years.

===Tangier===
Before 1956, Tangier was a city with international status. It had a great image and attracted many artists. After Morocco regained control over Tangier, this attention slacked off. Investment was low and the city lost its economic importance. But when Mohammed VI became king in 1999, he developed a plan for the economic revival of Tangier. New developments include a new airport terminal, a soccer stadium with seating for 45,000 spectators, a high-speed train line and a new highway to connect the city with Casablanca. Additionally, a new train station was constructed, called Tanger-Ville.

The creation of a free economic zone increased the economic output of the city significantly. It allowed Tangier to become an industrial pillar of the country. But the biggest investment was the creation of the new port Tanger-Med. It&#x27;s the largest port in Africa and on the Mediterranean. The city is undergoing an economic boom. This increased the need for a commercial district, Tangier City Center, which was inaugurated in 2016. Since 2012, the city has made it clear that it wants to invested in automobile industry by creating Tangier Automotive city. Today, it is home to the largest Renault car plant in North Africa.

==Infrastructure==


According to the Global Competitiveness Report of 2019, Morocco Ranked 32nd in the world in terms of Roads, 16th in Sea, 45th in Air and 64th in Railways. This gives Morocco the best infrastructure rankings in the African continent.

Modern infrastructure development, such as ports, airports, and rail links, is a top government priority. To meet the growing domestic demand, the Moroccan government invested more than $15 billion from 2010 to 2015 in upgrading its basic infrastructure.

Morocco has one of the best road systems on the continent. Over the past 20 years, the government has built approximately 1770 kilometers of modern roads, connecting most major cities via toll expressways. The Moroccan Ministry of Equipment, Transport, Logistics, and Water aims to build an additional 3380 kilometers of expressway and 2100 kilometers of highway by 2030, at an expected cost of $9.6 billion. While focusing on linking the southern provinces notably the cities of Laayoune and Dakhla to the rest of Morocco.

In 2014, Morocco began the construction of the second high-speed railway system in Africa linking the cities of Tangiers and Casablanca. It was inaugurated in 2018 by the King following over a decade of planning and construction by Moroccan national railway company ONCF. It is the first phase of what is planned to eventually be a 1,500 kilometres (930 mi) high-speed rail network in Morocco. an extension of the line to Marrakesh is already being planned.

Morocco also has the largest port in Africa and the Mediterranean called Tanger-Med, which is ranked the 18th in the world with a handling capacity of over 9 million containers. It is situated in the Tangiers free economic zone and serves as a logistics hub for Africa and the world.

==Economic inequality==
The growth pace that the Moroccan economy witnessed since the beginning of the 1998–2007 decade has generated significant progress in terms of national income, employment and living standards. However, the results obtained show considerable disparities in terms of the distribution of the fruit of this growth, whether between the production factors, the socio-economic groups or the urban and rural areas. In fact, the national income grew at an average annual rate of 5.5% during the 1998–2007 decade. This improvement in the national income however seems to be insufficient to face up to the discrepancies in terms of living standards and the scale of deficits at the social level.

The real income of the population registered, during the last 10 years, an annual increase of 2.5%, taking into consideration the fluctuations relating the climatic conditions, which mainly affect the most vulnerable populations and their living standards. The national survey on Moroccans&#x27; living standards shows that the part of the most well off (10% of the population) in the overall consumption expenses in 2001 reached 12 times that of the most disadvantaged population (10%). Despite the fact that these disparities tend to decrease in urban areas, these data show the importance of the efforts needed to overcome this situation.

==Labour==
Roughly one-third of the population is employed in agriculture, another one-third make their living in mining, manufacturing, and construction, and the remainder are occupied in the trade, finance, and service sectors. Not included in these estimates is a large informal economy of street vendors, domestic workers, and other underemployed and poorly paid individuals. High unemployment is a problem; the official figure is roughly one-tenth of the workforce, but unofficial estimates are much higher, and—in a pattern typical of most Middle Eastern and North African countries—unemployment among university graduates holding nontechnical degrees is especially high. Several trade unions exist in the country; the largest of these, with nearly 700,000 members, is L&#x27;Union Marocaine du Travail, which is affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.

===Unemployment===
Morocco&#x27;s unemployment rate, long a cause for concern, has been dropping steadily in 2008, on the back of job growth in services and construction. Further institutional reforms to bolster competitiveness and financial openness are expected to help the trend to continue.

On the whole, the growth rate of the economy will not reduce the unemployment rate
significantly, also taking account of the constant rise in the number of first entrants on the
labour market. The growth level of the last five years did, however, reduce urban
unemployment from 22% in 1999 to 18.3% in 2005, and the national rate from 13.9% in 1999
to 10.8% in 2005. The State High Planning Commission that Morocco&#x27;s official unemployment rate dropped to 9.1% in Q2 2008, down from 9.6% in Q1. This leaves Morocco with some 1.03m unemployed, compared to 1.06m at the end of March. Unemployment stood at 9.8% at the end of 2007, up 0.1% from the end of 2006.

Urban areas saw particularly strong job growth, and the services and construction sectors were the two leading drivers of job creation. Services generated some 152,000 new jobs, with the business process outsourcing (BPO) and telecoms sector proving particularly dynamic. Meanwhile, government infrastructure projects, as well as heavy private investment in real estate and tourism helped boost the construction sector, which created 80,000 new jobs in the second quarter of 2008.

Evidently, this trend of falling unemployment rates is a positive one. Joblessness has long been a cause for serious concern in North Africa. Morocco has a lower rate than its Maghreb neighbours—Tunisia has a rate of around 13.9%, and in Algeria it is around 12.3%—but the issue is still a pressing one, both for economic and for social reasons. A 2006 government report suggested that the country needed a net increase of 400,000 jobs annually for the next two decades in order to provide enough employment for its people, given the underlying demographic dynamic.

Moreover, with Spanish construction firms facing much harder times, Morocco may soon face the additional challenge of workers returning from across the Gibraltar Straits, potentially putting further pressure on the authorities to create jobs.

With 30.5% of Morocco&#x27;s population of 34.3m aged 14 or younger, according to the CIA, job creation for youths is one of the government&#x27;s major priorities. 2007 data indicate that 17.6% of those in the 15–24 age group are unemployed. This rises to around one third in urban areas—rural communities often employ the young in agriculture, including on the family farm, as soon as they leave school, contributing to relatively high youth employment rates (lower levels of official unemployment registration are also a factor).

=== Child labour ===
==Energy==
Morocco has very few reserves of its own and has been affected by the high oil prices of 2007 and early 2008. The country has to import 96% of its energy requirements and the national oil bill for the first quarter of 2008 was $1.1 billion—69% higher than for the same period in 2007. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) report 2014, Morocco is highly dependent on imported energy with over 91% of energy supplied coming from abroad. Morocco is working to diversify its energy sources, especially to develop renewable energy, with a particular focus on wind energy. Solar power and nuclear energy are also part of the strategy, but development of the former has been slow and there has been minimal progress on the latter, aside from an announcement of collaboration with France in 2007.

In November 2009 Morocco announced a solar energy project worth $9 billion which officials said will account for 38 percent of the North African country&#x27;s installed power generation by 2020. Funding would be from a mix of private and state capital. The ceremony was attended by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and the Moroccan king. The project will involve five solar power generation sites across Morocco and will produce 2,000 megawatts of electricity by 2020. Germany has expressed its willingness to participate in the development of Morocco&#x27;s solar energy project which the country has decided to carry out, as did the World Bank. Germany will also take part in the development of a water-desalination plant.

The government plans to reorganise its subsidy system, which is a heavy burden on government finances. In the short term these subsidies are helping to ease the burden but they cannot keep rising indefinitely, and sooner or later the load will have to be shared out. In the short term, national consumption per capita is expected to rise from the current level of 0.4 tonnes of oil equivalent (toe) to as much as 0.90 toe in 2030, a good indication of development, but a massive challenge as well. The input of renewable energy is a matter of particular importance.

According to a 2006 estimate by the Oil and Gas Journal (OGJ), Morocco has proven oil reserves of and natural gas reserves of . Morocco may have additional hydrocarbon reserves, as many of the country&#x27;s sedimentary basins have not yet been explored. The Moroccan Office of Hydrocarbons and Mining (ONHYM) has become optimistic about finding additional reserves—particularly offshore—following discoveries in neighboring Mauritania.

Recent activity in Western Sahara, which is believed to contain viable hydrocarbon reserves, has been controversial. In 2001, Morocco granted exploration contracts to TotalEnergies and Kerr-McGee, angering Premier Oil and Sterling Energy, which previously had obtained licenses from the Polisario government. In 2005, the government-in-exile of the Western Sahara invited foreign companies to bid on 12 contracts for offshore exploration, with hopes of awarding production sharing contracts by the end of 2005.

== Environment ==

The shift to an environment-conscious approach in Morocco has brought about scores of investment opportunities, most being in the utility and renewable energy industries. In addition to the rise in sales of photovoltaic panels, the business of wind turbines is also surging despite soaring prices on international markets because of the growing demand. To work towards a programme of sustainable development, a number of technological updates need to be made, including improvements to automobiles, the quality of energy products and increasing the number of renewable energy-producing plants. The government also needs to promote water conservation and efficiency in order to prevent further scarcity. Despite these challenges, Morocco is working to conserve and protect its environment and its efforts were recognised when its Mohammed VI Foundation for Environment won the environmental prize National Energy Globe Award in Brussels in 2007.

While Morocco is already a model of water management in the MENA region, upgrades to its water system under the National Wastewater Management Programme should further improve wastewater treatment and maximise efficient water usage. Authorities are promoting better water rationalisation in agriculture, which uses 80% of water resources, by replacing existing irrigation systems with micro- irrigation and drip networks. A net energy importer, Morocco launched the National Renewable Energy and Efficiency Plan in February 2008 to develop alternative energy to meet 15% of its domestic needs and increase the use of energy-saving methods. It is expected to create more than 40,000 jobs and stimulate over €4.5 billion in investment by 2020. The National Plan for the Development of Solar Thermal Energy, formulated in 2001, aims to install 440,000 solar-powered water heaters by 2012, of which 235,000 are completed.

In May 2009, the World Bank approved a €121m loan to help finance the implementation of Morocco&#x27;s solid-waste management programme, which targets a 90% waste disposal rate for urban areas by 2021. The government is taking measures to mitigate the harmful effects of tourism on Morocco&#x27;s natural resources, while increasing incentives for a growing niche of ecotourism projects. As of January 2008, hotels with good environmental practices will receive a Green Key label as part of a programme by the Mohammed VI Foundation for the Protection of the Environment. Under a ten-year plan for the protection of natural resources, 40,000 to 50,000 ha of forests are replanted annually with indigenous palm trees.

==See also==
*Economy of Africa
*Bank Al-Maghrib—Central bank of Morocco
*Morocco and the European Union
*Investment in Morocco
*Economy of Tangier
*Economy of Casablanca
*Economy of Western Sahara
* United Nations Economic Commission for: Africa and Western Asia

==References==
==External links==
* Kingdom of Morocco—Country Strategy Paper 2003–2005—&quot;African Development Bank&quot;
* Description of the US-Moroccan FTA 
* Final Text of the US-Moroccan FTA
* Description of benefits of the US-Moroccan FTA
* Moroccan-American Trade and Investment Council
* Maroc Entrepreneurs: Association dedicated to the Promotion of Entrepreneurship in Morocco 
* Morocco Economic Outlook
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Morocco </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q615580" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Morocco" label="economy of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="48" end="55" title="liberal economy" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="73" end="97" title="Supply and demand" label="law of supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="152" end="159" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="185" end="198" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="237" end="243" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463027" start="274" end="301" title="List of African countries by GDP (PPP)" label="6th largest African economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="305" end="308" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="320" end="340" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="391" end="403" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153937" start="729" end="748" title="Politics of Morocco" label="Moroccan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="843" end="870" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="876" end="886" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="896" end="906" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q200192" start="965" end="980" title="Moroccan dirham" label="Moroccan dirham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1141" end="1156" title="Economy of Morocco#Services" label="services sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1192" end="1195" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533973" start="1352" end="1359" title="Tourism in Morocco" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593833" start="1537" end="1556" title="Demographics of Morocco" label="Moroccan population"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="1565" end="1582" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1845" end="1856" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092395" start="1858" end="1876" title="phosphate minerals" label="phosphate minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1882" end="1889" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="1909" end="1916" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="1940" end="1948" title="Industrial sector" label="Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2082" end="2095" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2100" end="2105" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="2245" end="2255" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="2291" end="2303" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2674" end="2683" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238438" start="2739" end="2762" title="structural unemployment" label="structural unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="2974" end="2997" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3012" end="3019" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="3031" end="3038" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="3116" end="3121" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="4141" end="4153" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="5204" end="5213" title="Hassan II" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="6200" end="6210" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q478207" start="6211" end="6218" title="Kénitra" label="Kénitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="6649" end="6656" title="Drought" label="Drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="6890" end="6903" title="external debt" label="external debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003668" start="6931" end="6942" title="Morocco and the European Union" label="freer trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6952" end="6954" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060857" start="6995" end="7013" title="Investment in Morocco" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="7101" end="7114" title="Macroeconomics" label="Macroeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="7154" end="7169" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="7368" end="7380" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7490" end="7502" title="Economy of Morocco#Labour" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="7606" end="7609" title="Oil exploration" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="7745" end="7758" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="7890" end="7897" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="7918" end="7931" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="7986" end="7995" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="8005" end="8023" title="developed country" label="industrial country"/>
<link wikidata="Q200192" start="8138" end="8144" title="Moroccan dirham" label="dirham"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="8218" end="8243" title="Foreign exchange reserves" label="Foreign exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="8573" end="8588" title="Economic growth" label="Economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="8758" end="8766" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="8804" end="8807" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593833" start="8842" end="8852" title="Demographics of Morocco" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="8897" end="8904" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="9196" end="9207" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="9467" end="9480" title="Maroc Telecom" label="Maroc Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="9581" end="9604" title="oil and gas exploration" label="oil and gas exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="9642" end="9657" title="public services" label="public services"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11418" end="11433" title="Economy of Morocco#Economic growth" label="Economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="11503" end="11513" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="11518" end="11525" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369817" start="11543" end="11561" title="Agriculture in Morocco" label="agriculture sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="11719" end="11722" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="11775" end="11781" title="Maghreb" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="11806" end="11822" title="King Mohammed VI" label="King Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q328198" start="11831" end="11843" title="Bank Al-Maghrib" label="Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="11925" end="11940" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="12192" end="12195" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="12278" end="12285" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="12358" end="12367" title="Inflation" label="Inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q473750" start="12468" end="12483" title="World economy" label="global economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q328198" start="12887" end="12902" title="Bank Al-Maghrib" label="Bank Al-Maghrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="13463" end="13470" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="15300" end="15316" title="King Mohammed VI" label="King Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369817" start="15452" end="15470" title="Agriculture in Morocco" label="agriculture sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369817" start="15933" end="15954" title="Agriculture in Morocco" label="agricultural campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137381" start="16902" end="16947" title="Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development" label="Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="18247" end="18255" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="18454" end="18461" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="18466" end="18478" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="18559" end="18566" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="18660" end="18671" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="18776" end="18782" title="olives" label="olives"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="18784" end="18797" title="citrus fruits" label="citrus fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357585" start="18803" end="18814" title="wine grapes" label="wine grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="18873" end="18882" title="Livestock" label="Livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="19015" end="19021" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="19023" end="19032" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="19034" end="19043" title="El Jadida" label="El Jadida"/>
<link wikidata="Q606775" start="19049" end="19056" title="Larache" label="Larache"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="19139" end="19145" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="19147" end="19152" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="19194" end="19204" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="19256" end="19261" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="19324" end="19334" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="19361" end="19366" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="19371" end="19378" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="19402" end="19408" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="19469" end="19475" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="19501" end="19506" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="19591" end="19597" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q516494" start="19660" end="19669" title="tangerine" label="tangerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="19760" end="19767" title="Orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="19829" end="19834" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="19860" end="19870" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="19896" end="19901" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="19927" end="19936" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881191" start="19961" end="19966" title="melon" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="19992" end="19998" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="20024" end="20029" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="20055" end="20061" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="20087" end="20100" title="chilli pepper" label="chilli pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="20126" end="20129" title="Common fig" label="fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="20431" end="20452" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q477968" start="21090" end="21101" title="Gharb Basin" label="Gharb plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="21750" end="21757" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="23179" end="23187" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="23315" end="23322" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="23373" end="23376" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q456349" start="23408" end="23428" title="cannabis cultivation" label="cannabis cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331499" start="23782" end="23805" title="1988 UN Drug Convention" label="1988 UN Drug Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q667217" start="24005" end="24042" title="International Narcotics Control Board" label="International Narcotics Control Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="24231" end="24234" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q477273" start="24576" end="24590" title="Istiqlal Party" label="Istiqlal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q784586" start="24599" end="24631" title="Authenticity and Modernity Party" label="Authenticity and Modernity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831585" start="24874" end="24893" title="Fishing industry by country" label="largest fish market"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="26309" end="26322" title="raw materials" label="raw materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="26420" end="26435" title="French Morocco" label="colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060857" start="26639" end="26649" title="Investment in Morocco" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="26709" end="26720" title="fertilizers" label="fertilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="26725" end="26740" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="26960" end="26968" title="textiles" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="27376" end="27394" title="petroleum refining" label="petroleum refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477864" start="29048" end="29055" title="Renault-Nissan" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="29060" end="29063" title="Peugeot" label="PSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608329" start="29086" end="29089" title="BYD Company" label="BYD"/>
<link wikidata="Q502344" start="30146" end="30162" title="Lear Corporation" label="Lear Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926640" start="30262" end="30268" title="Yazaki" label="Yazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q176508" start="30314" end="30319" title="Denso" label="Denso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305281" start="30391" end="30396" title="Valeo" label="Valeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884343" start="30444" end="30460" title="Magneti Marelli" label="Magnetti Marelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="31048" end="31056" title="Textiles" label="Textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="31095" end="31109" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="31181" end="31187" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="31670" end="31684" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="31686" end="31699" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="31704" end="31710" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="31797" end="31802" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="33644" end="33652" title="Service (economics)" label="Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q937312" start="33679" end="33699" title="military expenditure" label="military expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="33749" end="33752" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533973" start="33946" end="33953" title="Tourism in Morocco" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="34548" end="34554" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="34582" end="34589" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="34595" end="34608" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="34614" end="34623" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="34632" end="34637" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="34696" end="34703" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148708" start="34744" end="34759" title="economic output" label="economic output"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="34768" end="34791" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="35201" end="35210" title="Marrakech" label="Marrakech"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="35262" end="35265" title="Fes, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="35779" end="35785" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="35840" end="35850" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200877" start="35863" end="35872" title="Plan Azur" label="Plan Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="35923" end="35934" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="36075" end="36089" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="36105" end="36118" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="39519" end="39536" title="Offshoring" label="offshoring sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="39815" end="39838" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="39910" end="39916" title="European Union" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369817" start="40284" end="40303" title="Agriculture in Morocco" label="agricultural sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="41256" end="41271" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q765517" start="41635" end="41655" title="credit rating agency" label="credit rating agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="43391" end="43394" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="43424" end="43429" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="43448" end="43450" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="46193" end="46208" title="microwave radio" label="microwave radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="46226" end="46234" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="46285" end="46295" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="46300" end="46305" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="46357" end="46368" title="fiber-optic" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="46522" end="46530" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="46541" end="46555" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q624426" start="46565" end="46572" title="Arabsat" label="Arabsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="46610" end="46619" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="46621" end="46626" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="46635" end="46649" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="46651" end="46664" title="Coaxial cable" label="Coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="46702" end="46709" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46739" end="46749" title="Medarabtel" label="Medarabtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="46785" end="46791" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="46807" end="46814" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="47048" end="47050" title="Amplitude modulation" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="47066" end="47068" title="Frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="47084" end="47093" title="Shortwave radio" label="Shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="47185" end="47198" title="Maroc Telecom" label="Maroc Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47328" end="47334" title="Menara, Maroc Telecom" label="Menara"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="47436" end="47449" title="Privatization" label="Privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602796" start="47481" end="47506" title="Casablanca Stock Exchange" label="Casablanca Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="47661" end="47667" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="47778" end="47799" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="47876" end="47886" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="51747" end="51761" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="51845" end="51862" title="Barcelona Conference" label="Barcelona Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335686" start="51962" end="51977" title="free trade area" label="free trade area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933285" start="52442" end="52471" title="Caisse de Dépôt et de Gestion" label="Caisse de Dépôt et de Gestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="53267" end="53277" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575889" start="53361" end="53395" title="Euro-Mediterranean free trade area" label="Euro-Mediterranean free trade area"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="53415" end="53429" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="53468" end="53499" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53529" end="53545" title="Council of Arab Economic Unity#Agadir Agreement" label="Agadir Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53635" end="53663" title="Council of Arab Economic Unity#Greater Arab Free Trade Area" label="Greater Arab Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822804" start="53669" end="53700" title="US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement" label="US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="53706" end="53719" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="53808" end="53814" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54062" end="54079" title="Information technology in Morocco#Offshoring" label="offshoring sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q195006" start="55179" end="55199" title="Moroccan diaspora" label="Moroccan expatriates"/>
<link wikidata="Q195006" start="55406" end="55423" title="Moroccan diaspora" label="Moroccan migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="55486" end="55491" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="55507" end="55517" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="55587" end="55594" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="56202" end="56208" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="56248" end="56298" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="57147" end="57153" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="57196" end="57199" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="57235" end="57249" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="57255" end="57261" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="57297" end="57309" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="57387" end="57392" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="57572" end="57586" title="Arab States" label="Arab countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="57746" end="57758" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="57943" end="57950" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="57959" end="57966" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="57968" end="57973" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="57975" end="57985" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="57999" end="58006" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q195006" start="58363" end="58389" title="Moroccan diaspora" label="Moroccan expatriates&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="58403" end="58406" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333486" start="58753" end="58768" title="Economic history of Morocco" label="five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117513" start="59649" end="59669" title="Omnium Nord Africain" label="Omnium Nord Africain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="60164" end="60169" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="60210" end="60226" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="60324" end="60336" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="60338" end="60352" title="marine biology" label="marine biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q635139" start="60395" end="60411" title="fishing industry" label="fishing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="60623" end="60630" title="Fishing" label="Fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="60635" end="60644" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="60701" end="60715" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="60877" end="60887" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="60888" end="60893" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="61029" end="61043" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q845643" start="61307" end="61329" title="Regions of Morocco" label="Morocco&amp;#x27;s regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="61520" end="61525" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="61638" end="61649" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="61654" end="61670" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="61682" end="61701" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="61714" end="61723" title="Hassan II" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="61744" end="61755" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="61839" end="61846" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="62051" end="62061" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="62164" end="62171" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="62403" end="62414" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Mohammed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="62662" end="62672" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="62765" end="62783" title="free economic zone" label="free economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="62852" end="62859" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62967" end="62977" title="Tanger-med port" label="Tanger-Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="63009" end="63015" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="63027" end="63040" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384234" start="63068" end="63081" title="economic boom" label="economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908215" start="63134" end="63153" title="Tangier City Center" label="Tangier City Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="63254" end="63273" title="automobile industry" label="automobile industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63286" end="63309" title="Tangier Automotive city" label="Tangier Automotive city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="63344" end="63351" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="63418" end="63447" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="Global Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q518888" start="64948" end="64958" title="Tanger-Med" label="Tanger-Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="66575" end="66586" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832048" start="66706" end="66711" title="Trade in Morocco" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="66786" end="66802" title="informal economy" label="informal economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="67059" end="67070" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="67078" end="67090" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="67437" end="67449" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128426" start="68076" end="68100" title="Haut Commissariat au Plan" label="High Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060857" start="68699" end="68717" title="Investment in Morocco" label="private investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763895" start="69001" end="69011" title="List of countries by unemployment rate" label="lower rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="69021" end="69028" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="69040" end="69047" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="69083" end="69090" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="69564" end="69581" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593833" start="69670" end="69695" title="Demographics of Morocco" label="Morocco&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="69742" end="69745" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="70524" end="70551" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="71333" end="71348" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="71357" end="71370" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="Moroccan king"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="71669" end="71679" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="72784" end="72798" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q154037" start="72932" end="72945" title="TotalEnergies" label="TotalEnergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394305" start="72950" end="72960" title="Kerr-McGee" label="Kerr-McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="73052" end="73061" title="Polisario" label="Polisario"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="73680" end="73703" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="74302" end="74306" title="MENA" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q580864" start="75893" end="75910" title="Economy of Africa" label="Economy of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q328198" start="75912" end="75927" title="Bank Al-Maghrib" label="Bank Al-Maghrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003668" start="75953" end="75983" title="Morocco and the European Union" label="Morocco and the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060857" start="75985" end="76006" title="Investment in Morocco" label="Investment in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q56376967" start="76008" end="76026" title="Economy of Tangier" label="Economy of Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333648" start="76028" end="76049" title="Economy of Casablanca" label="Economy of Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333811" start="76051" end="76076" title="Economy of Western Sahara" label="Economy of Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="76119" end="76125" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355485" start="76130" end="76142" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="76238" end="76262" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19297" wikidata="Q16000347" url="?curid=19297" title="Telecommunications in Morocco">
<text>The following is an outline of [[Information and communications technology|communications technology]] in [[Morocco]].

==Telecoms industry==
While the Moroccan telecoms market remains under-saturated, its three mobile operators –– both at home and abroad –– have experienced robust growth in recent years. Meditel, which received a mobile licence in 2000, is the kingdom&#x27;s first private operator, holding 36.69% of the market. While the company performed strongly last year, registering a 17% growth in client base (to 7.4m) over the first three quarters of 2008, it began to falter as consumer spending slowed, resulting in a 1% annual increase in turnover for Q2 2009. Meditel&#x27;s focus on lower-income markets impacted their average revenue per user, which fell by 16%, but the resulting expansion of the customer base helped drive up the country&#x27;s mobile penetration rate from 65.7% in 2007 to 74% in 2008. Meditel&#x27;s biggest competitor is Maroc Telecom, holding 60.71% of the market. A former state monopoly now controlled by French entertainment giant Vivendi, Maroc Telecom is one of the region&#x27;s fastest-growing multinational telecoms operators, actively pursuing expansion across northwest Africa, including Gabon, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. MT has announced plans to create a fibre-optic network connecting the Moroccan cities Laâyoune and Dakhla to Nouadhibou, which would ultimately be extended to other North African countries.

Meditel and MT operated a duopoly until 2008, when the state regulator Agence Nationale de Réglementation des Télécommunications waved in Wana, owned by Morocco&#x27;s Omnium Nord Africain. Though holding a tiny share (2.6%) of the voice market, this new player has captured a majority of the 3G market (69.11%). Total subscribers for this new technology increased 527% in 2008. Earlier this year, Wana sold a 31% stake for €228m to the partnership of two Kuwaiti companies, mobile operator Zain and Al Ajial Investment Fund Holding, to help finance the roll out of its 15-year 2G GSM network at the end of 2009. In August 2019, the government signed a MAD 10 billion investment deal with Maroc Telecom to improve telecom infrastructure in the country.

==Telephone system==
*main lines in use: 3.28 million (2007) : estimation
*mobile cellular: 47.25 million [135% of the total population] (2015) : estimation
source:

===Domestic telephone system===
Morocco has a constantly failing system composed of open-wire lines, cables, and microwave radio relay links. The internet is available but slow, and overpriced in comparison to Europe and the United States. The principal switching centers are Casablanca and Rabat. An improved rural service employs microwave radio relay.

===International telephone system===
The system has seven submarine cables, three satellite earth stations, two Intelsat (over the Atlantic Ocean) and one Arabsat. There is a microwave radio relay to Gibraltar, Spain and the Western Sahara. Coaxial cables and microwave radio relays exist to Algeria. Morocco is a participant in Medarabtel and a fiber-optic cable links from Agadir to Algeria and Tunisia.

==Radio broadcast==
First radio service began in 1928 in Morocco.

*AM stations 25,
*FM stations 31,
*shortwave 11 (2007)
*Radio sets: 7.78 million (2007)

==Television==
*Television broadcast stations: 36 (plus 35 repeaters) (2007)
*Televisions receivers: 5.6 million (2007)

==Internet==

*Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 8 (2017)
*ccTLD (country code top-level domain): .ma
The country had more than 16.3M of internet users in 2012.
Operated by Maroc Telecom (IAM). The service started as a test in November 2002 before it was launched in October 2003 and it is one of the most technologically advanced Internet services in the African continent but the service is monopolised by IAM. The service is offered by the subsidiary Menara.The company is the best in the Moroccan market in the ADSL, optic fiber and they offers the following options:

Personal ADSL (All of those offers are available with a 12 months or above engagement) :

*Menara ADSL 4 Mbit/s 200MAD (Around 17$)
*Menara ADSL 8 Mbit/s
*Menara ADSL 2+ 12 Mbit/s
*Menara ADSL 2+ 20 Mbit/s
*IAM optic fiber 100 Mbit/s 500MAD (Around 44$) 
*IAM optic fiber 200 Mbit/a 1000MAD (Around 90$)

The installation is free, but the ADSL modem or router is not always free.

IAM is the only ISP who operate underwater cables and national cables, the things that cause a huge monopoly in the Moroccan market, the other ISPs can always rent a part of the leader&#x27;s infrastructure.

Orange Morocco offers ADSL, optic fiber and 4G+ but their connexions is considered as the weakest in the country according to Ookla .

INWI offers ADSL, optic fiber and 4G+ the internet provided by INWI is lower than IAM refers to Ookla but they have the largest coverage and the highest bandwidth when it comes to 4G+ referred to Network Performance which makes the IPS great for those who uses mobile data.

Mobile data prices (Without engagement) :

The plans are 0,5 GB (500 MB), 1 GB, 2 GB, 2,5 GB, 3 GB, 5 GB, 10 GB and 20 GB
To calculate the price of each plan, multiple the number of GBs by 10 and you should get the price in MAD.

==See also==
* Ministry of Communications of Morocco

==References==
==External links==
* Morocco Telecom market
* Maroc Telecom IPO
* MTDS Licensed Moroccan ISP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16000347" start="31" end="117" title="Telecommunications in Morocco" label="[[Information and communications technology|communications technology]] in [[Morocco]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="161" end="169" title="Telecommunications" label="telecoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300422" start="307" end="314" title="Meditel" label="Meditel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="592" end="609" title="consumer spending" label="consumer spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="962" end="975" title="Maroc Telecom" label="Maroc Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634516" start="1016" end="1030" title="state monopoly" label="state monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="1076" end="1083" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="1143" end="1156" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="1240" end="1245" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="1247" end="1257" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="1262" end="1274" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q47837" start="1362" end="1370" title="Laâyoune" label="Laâyoune"/>
<link wikidata="Q345204" start="1375" end="1381" title="Dakhla, Western Sahara" label="Dakhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q184184" start="1385" end="1395" title="Nouadhibou" label="Nouadhibou"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="1441" end="1453" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388949" start="1605" end="1609" title="Wana (Telecommunications)" label="Wana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117513" start="1635" end="1655" title="Omnium Nord Africain" label="Omnium Nord Africain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="1760" end="1762" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="1923" end="1929" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q144364" start="1958" end="1962" title="Zain Group" label="Zain"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="2045" end="2047" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="2500" end="2515" title="microwave radio" label="microwave radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2533" end="2541" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="2663" end="2673" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="2678" end="2683" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="2855" end="2863" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2874" end="2888" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q624426" start="2898" end="2905" title="Arabsat" label="Arabsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="2943" end="2952" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2954" end="2959" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="2968" end="2982" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="2984" end="2997" title="Coaxial cable" label="Coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3035" end="3042" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="3118" end="3124" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="3140" end="3147" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="3218" end="3220" title="amplitude modulation" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="3235" end="3237" title="frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="3252" end="3261" title="shortwave radio" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="3442" end="3468" title="Internet Service Providers" label="Internet Service Providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="3487" end="3492" title="Country code top-level domain" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q41439" start="3526" end="3529" title=".ma" label=".ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="3601" end="3614" title="Maroc Telecom" label="Maroc Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3882" end="3888" title="Menara, Maroc Telecom" label="Menara"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4099" end="4103" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4141" end="4145" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4163" end="4167" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4189" end="4193" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="4208" end="4211" title="Maroc Telecom" label="IAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4212" end="4223" title="optic fiber" label="optic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="4257" end="4260" title="Maroc Telecom" label="IAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4261" end="4272" title="optic fiber" label="optic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4340" end="4344" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="4345" end="4350" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="4354" end="4360" title="router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="4382" end="4385" title="Maroc Telecom" label="IAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300422" start="4591" end="4605" title="Orange Morocco" label="Orange Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4613" end="4617" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4619" end="4630" title="optic fiber" label="optic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345402" start="4635" end="4638" title="4G+" label="4G+"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575658" start="4717" end="4722" title="Ookla" label="Ookla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388949" start="4726" end="4730" title="INWI (telecommunications)" label="INWI"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4738" end="4742" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4744" end="4755" title="optic fiber" label="optic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345402" start="4760" end="4763" title="4G+" label="4G+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388949" start="4789" end="4793" title="INWI" label="INWI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575658" start="4822" end="4827" title="Ookla" label="Ookla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001161" start="4922" end="4941" title="Network Performance" label="Network Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866677" start="5246" end="5283" title="Ministry of Communications of Morocco" label="Ministry of Communications of Morocco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19298" wikidata="Q2525891" url="?curid=19298" title="Transport in Morocco">
<text>There are around of roads (national, regional and provincial) in Morocco. In addition to of highways (August 2016).

The Tangier–Casablanca high-speed rail link marks the first stage of the ONCF&#x27;s high-speed rail master plan, pursuant to which over of new railway lines will be built by 2035. The high speed train - TGV - will have a capacity of 500 passengers and will carry 8 million passengers per year. The work on the High Speed Rail project was started in September 2011. Construction of infrastructure and delivery of railway equipment will end in 2014 and the HSR will be operational by .
== Government policy ==
With billions of dollars committed to improving the country&#x27;s infrastructure, Morocco aims to become a world player in terms of marine transport. The 2008–2012 investment plan aims to invest $16.3 billion and will contribute to major projects such as the combined port and industrial complex of the Tanger-Med and the construction of a high-speed train between Tangier and Casablanca. The plan will also improve and expand the existing highway system and expand the Casablanca Mohammed V International Airport. Morocco&#x27;s transport sector is one of the kingdom&#x27;s most dynamic, and will remain so for years to come. The improvements in infrastructure will boost other sectors and will also help the country in its goal of attracting 10 million tourists by 2010.

== Railways ==

1907 km standard gauge, 1003 km electrified with 3 kV DC.

=== High speed lines ===
There are plans for several high-speed lines. Work by ONCF began in September 2011 on a first section from Tangier to Kenitra. There are plans to construct two core lines, one from Tangier in the north via Marrakesh to Agadir in the south, and a second from Casablanca on the Atlantic to Oujda on the Algerian border. If all of these plans will be approved, the 1,500 kilometres of track may take until 2035 to complete at a cost of around 100 billion dirhams ($10 billion).

Potential speed gains are large, with travel time from Casablanca to Marrakesh down from 3 hours to 1:20, and from the capital Rabat to Tangier from 4:30 to 1:30.

The second High-Speed Rail (HSR) which is planned to be built after Tangier-Kenitra is the HSR Marrakech-Essaouira (180 km) followed by a new HSR Rabat-Meknes (130 km). The last high-speed lines will connect these two old empire cities to the Atlantique coast in less than one hour instead of two hours now.

The current high-speed line Tangier-Kenitra under construction was impacted by delays resulting from issues about land acquisitions because this operation was performed by different provincial governors, in order to avoid such delays on the next high-speed rail Marrakech-Essaouira, the national railway company ONCF was given the green light to start the land acquisition and expropriation procedure.

In December 2024, Morocco secured $14 billion in investments to expand Morocco&#x27;s high speed rail. The goal of the project is to increase the high speed rail coverage of 320km to over 1280km by 2040, this would significantly enhance the country&#x27;s connectivity, reduce travel times, and contribute to a greener, more sustainable transport system. 

high-speed rail linking Kenitra to Marrakech via Casablanca Airport is being currently constructed. Journeys to Marrakech will only take 2 hours 45 minutes by 2029, down from 7 hours. Another line connecting Marrakech to Agadir could be ready as soon as mid-2025.
=== Other routes ===
A railway connecting Nador to the existing network at Taourirt was finished in 2010, after it had been under construction since 2007.

== Tramways ==
* Rabat-Salé tramway (2011)
* Casablanca Tramway (2012)

== Roads ==
As of 2006 there were around 57625 kilometres of roads (national, regional and provincial) in Morocco, and an additional 1808 kilometers of highways (August 2016).

Principal national roads:
*National Route 1 (Morocco)
*National Route 2 (Morocco)
*National Route 3 (Morocco)
*National Route 4 (Morocco)
*National Route 5 (Morocco)
*National Route 6 (Morocco)
*National Route 7 (Morocco)
*National Route 8 (Morocco)
*National Route 9 (Morocco)
*National Route 10 (Morocco)
*National Route 11 (Morocco)
*National Route 12 (Morocco)
*National Route 13 (Morocco)
*National Route 14 (Morocco)
*National Route 15 (Morocco)
*National Route 16 (Morocco)

=== Highways ===

*Rabat Ring Road (42 km)
*A1 Casablanca-Rabat (86 km)
*A1 Casablanca–Safi (255 km)
*A2 Rabat-Fes (190 km)
*A2 Fes-Oujda (306 km)
*A3 Casablanca-Marrakesh (220 km)
*A3 extension to Agadir (233 km)
*A4 Berrechid-Benni Mellal (172 km)
*A5 Rabat-Tangier Med (308 km)
*A7 Tetouan-Fnideq (28 km)

== Major airports ==

*Agadir -- Agadir Al Massira Airport: (AGA) Flights to most major European cities.
*Al Hoceima -- Cherif Al Idrissi Airport: (AHU) Flights to Brussels, Amsterdam and Rotterdam
*Casablanca -- Mohammed V International Airport: (CMN) Royal Air Maroc hub. Arrivals and departures to worldwide destinations.
*Essaouira -- Essaouira Mogador Airport: (ESU) Flights to Brussels, Bordeaux, London, Paris, Madrid and Marseille.
*Fez -- Fes Saïss Airport: (FEZ) Flights to Europe and Casablanca
*Laayoune -- Hassan I Airport: (EUN) Flights to Agadir, Casablanca, Dakhla and Las Palmas.
*Marrakesh -- Marrakesh Menara Airport: (RAK) Flights all major international airports in Western Europe
*Nador -- Nador International Airport: (NDR) Flights to Amsterdam, Brussels, Casablanca, Cologne, Düsseldorf and Paris.
*Oujda -- Angads Airport: (OUD) Flights to Amsterdam, Casablanca, Marseille and Paris.
*Ouarzazate -- Ouarzazate Airport: (OZZ) Flights to Casablanca and Paris.
*Rabat -- Rabat–Salé Airport: (RBA) Flights to Paris, Brussels, Barcelona, London, Madrid, Rome, Düsseldorf, Toulouse, Marseille and Seville.
*Tangier -- Tangier Ibn Battouta Airport: (TNG) Flights all major international airports in Western Europe
*Tetouan -- Tetouan Saniat Rmel Airport: (TTU) Flights to Brussels, Malaga, Seville, Madrid, Al Hoceima and Casablanca.
*
*

== National airlines ==
* Air Arabia Maroc
* Royal Air Maroc
* Royal Air Maroc Express

== Merchant marine ==
Total: 35 ships ( or over) by type:
*cargo ship 3,
*chemical tanker 6,
*container ship 8,
*passenger/cargo ship 12,
*petroleum tanker 1,
*refrigerated cargo ship 1,
*roll-on/roll-off 4

Foreign-owned: 14 (France 13, Germany 1) (2007)
*Registered in other countries: 4 (Gibraltar)

== Maritime companies ==

* Acciona Trasmediterránea
* Baleària
* Comanav
* Comarit
* FerriMaroc
* FRS Iberia
* Grandi Navi Veloci
* Grimaldi Lines
* International Maritime Transport Corporation
* Naviera Armas

== Intercity bus companies ==
Bus service in Morocco offers access almost to every corner of the country. There&#x27;s a big choice of carriers at bus stations, among them:

* CTM
* Supratours

== Sports car ==
* Laraki

== References ==
== External links ==
* UN Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="65" end="72" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="92" end="99" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60539878" start="121" end="155" title="Al Boraq" label="Tangier–Casablanca high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815809" start="190" end="194" title="ONCF" label="ONCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="1426" end="1440" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="1450" end="1461" title="Railway electrification system" label="electrified"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1467" end="1474" title="List of railway electrification systems#3 kV DC" label="3 kV DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815809" start="1556" end="1560" title="ONCF" label="ONCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="1609" end="1616" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q478207" start="1620" end="1627" title="Kenitra" label="Kenitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="1683" end="1690" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="1721" end="1727" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="1760" end="1770" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="1790" end="1795" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="2105" end="2110" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="3517" end="3522" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329701" start="3550" end="3558" title="Taourirt, Morocco" label="Taourirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q948685" start="3648" end="3666" title="Rabat-Salé tramway" label="Rabat-Salé tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522904" start="3676" end="3694" title="Casablanca Tramway" label="Casablanca Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="3855" end="3862" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q735201" start="3907" end="3933" title="National Route 1 (Morocco)" label="National Route 1 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397334" start="3935" end="3961" title="National Route 2 (Morocco)" label="National Route 2 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3963" end="3989" title="National Route 3 (Morocco)" label="National Route 3 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3991" end="4017" title="National Route 4 (Morocco)" label="National Route 4 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4019" end="4045" title="National Route 5 (Morocco)" label="National Route 5 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445264" start="4047" end="4073" title="National Route 6 (Morocco)" label="National Route 6 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4075" end="4101" title="National Route 7 (Morocco)" label="National Route 7 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445356" start="4103" end="4129" title="National Route 8 (Morocco)" label="National Route 8 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4131" end="4157" title="National Route 9 (Morocco)" label="National Route 9 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q734498" start="4159" end="4186" title="National Route 10 (Morocco)" label="National Route 10 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444742" start="4188" end="4215" title="National Route 11 (Morocco)" label="National Route 11 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444749" start="4217" end="4244" title="National Route 12 (Morocco)" label="National Route 12 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444761" start="4246" end="4273" title="National Route 13 (Morocco)" label="National Route 13 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4275" end="4302" title="National Route 14 (Morocco)" label="National Route 14 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4304" end="4331" title="National Route 15 (Morocco)" label="National Route 15 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398180" start="4333" end="4360" title="National Route 16 (Morocco)" label="National Route 16 (Morocco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178354" start="4381" end="4396" title="Rabat Ring Road" label="Rabat Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126421" start="4406" end="4425" title="Casablanca-Rabat expressway" label="A1 Casablanca-Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474215" start="4435" end="4453" title="Casablanca–Safi expressway" label="A1 Casablanca–Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705725" start="4464" end="4476" title="Rabat-Fes expressway" label="A2 Rabat-Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120228" start="4487" end="4499" title="Fes-Oujda expressway" label="A2 Fes-Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206960" start="4510" end="4533" title="Casablanca–Marrakesh expressway" label="A3 Casablanca-Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703593" start="4544" end="4566" title="Marrakech–Agadir expressway" label="A3 extension to Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681052" start="4577" end="4602" title="Berrechid–Beni Mellal expressway" label="A4 Berrechid-Benni Mellal"/>
<link wikidata="Q629822" start="4613" end="4633" title="Rabat-Tangier expressway" label="A5 Rabat-Tangier Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q528726" start="4644" end="4661" title="Tetouan–Fnideq expressway" label="A7 Tetouan-Fnideq"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="4694" end="4700" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416280" start="4704" end="4729" title="Agadir–Al Massira Airport" label="Agadir Al Massira Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q310350" start="4777" end="4787" title="Al Hoceima" label="Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370928" start="4791" end="4816" title="Cherif Al Idrissi Airport" label="Cherif Al Idrissi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="4835" end="4843" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="4845" end="4854" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="4859" end="4868" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="4870" end="4880" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q955433" start="4884" end="4916" title="Mohammed V International Airport" label="Mohammed V International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q866103" start="4924" end="4939" title="Royal Air Maroc" label="Royal Air Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="4997" end="5006" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432053" start="5010" end="5035" title="Essaouira-Mogador Airport" label="Essaouira Mogador Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431012" start="5054" end="5062" title="Brussels South Charleroi Airport" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q612731" start="5064" end="5072" title="Bordeaux–Mérignac Airport" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="5074" end="5080" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="5082" end="5087" title="Orly Airport" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="5089" end="5095" title="Madrid–Barajas Airport" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q651190" start="5100" end="5109" title="Marseille Provence Airport" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="5112" end="5115" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431302" start="5119" end="5136" title="Fes–Saïss Airport" label="Fes Saïss Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q47837" start="5178" end="5186" title="Laayoune" label="Laayoune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431242" start="5190" end="5206" title="Hassan I Airport" label="Hassan I Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431176" start="5245" end="5251" title="Dakhla Airport" label="Dakhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="5269" end="5278" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q429304" start="5282" end="5306" title="Marrakesh Menara Airport" label="Marrakesh Menara Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q824594" start="5374" end="5379" title="Nador" label="Nador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432126" start="5383" end="5410" title="Nador International Airport" label="Nador International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="5429" end="5438" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="5440" end="5448" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q955433" start="5450" end="5460" title="Mohammed V International Airport" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q157741" start="5462" end="5469" title="Cologne Bonn Airport" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q58226" start="5471" end="5481" title="Düsseldorf Airport" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="5486" end="5491" title="Orly Airport" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="5494" end="5499" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382309" start="5503" end="5517" title="Angads Airport" label="Angads Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q505208" start="5581" end="5591" title="Ouarzazate" label="Ouarzazate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432275" start="5595" end="5613" title="Ouarzazate Airport" label="Ouarzazate Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="5655" end="5660" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432573" start="5664" end="5682" title="Rabat–Salé Airport" label="Rabat–Salé Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="5701" end="5706" title="Orly Airport" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="5708" end="5716" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q56973" start="5718" end="5727" title="Josep Tarradellas Barcelona–El Prat Airport" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="5729" end="5735" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="5737" end="5743" title="Madrid–Barajas Airport" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132616" start="5745" end="5749" title="Ciampino–G. B. Pastine International Airport" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q632410" start="5751" end="5761" title="Weeze Airport" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q372615" start="5763" end="5771" title="Toulouse–Blagnac Airport" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q651190" start="5773" end="5782" title="Marseille Provence Airport" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344758" start="5787" end="5795" title="Seville Airport" label="Seville."/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="5797" end="5804" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433022" start="5808" end="5836" title="Tangier Ibn Battouta Airport" label="Tangier Ibn Battouta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q185157" start="5904" end="5911" title="Tétouan" label="Tetouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433058" start="5915" end="5942" title="Sania Ramel Airport" label="Tetouan Saniat Rmel Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431012" start="5961" end="5969" title="Brussels South Charleroi Airport" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q690894" start="5971" end="5977" title="Málaga Airport" label="Malaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344758" start="5979" end="5986" title="Seville Airport" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="5988" end="5994" title="Madrid–Barajas Airport" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370928" start="5996" end="6006" title="Cherif Al Idrissi Airport" label="Al Hoceima"/>
<link wikidata="Q955433" start="6011" end="6021" title="Mohammed V International Airport" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q406803" start="6054" end="6070" title="Air Arabia Maroc" label="Air Arabia Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q866103" start="6073" end="6088" title="Royal Air Maroc" label="Royal Air Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445865" start="6091" end="6114" title="Royal Air Maroc Express" label="Royal Air Maroc Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="6175" end="6185" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="6190" end="6205" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="6210" end="6224" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="6239" end="6249" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="6255" end="6271" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504307" start="6276" end="6299" title="Reefer ship" label="refrigerated cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="6304" end="6320" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="6407" end="6416" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562098" start="6447" end="6471" title="Acciona Trasmediterránea" label="Acciona Trasmediterránea"/>
<link wikidata="Q804887" start="6474" end="6482" title="Baleària" label="Baleària"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990217" start="6485" end="6492" title="Compagnie Marocaine de Navigation" label="Comanav"/>
<link wikidata="Q374773" start="6495" end="6502" title="Comarit" label="Comarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432965" start="6505" end="6515" title="FerriMaroc" label="FerriMaroc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6518" end="6528" title="FRS Iberia" label="FRS Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543002" start="6531" end="6549" title="Grandi Navi Veloci" label="Grandi Navi Veloci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057367" start="6552" end="6566" title="Grimaldi Lines" label="Grimaldi Lines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6569" end="6613" title="International Maritime Transport Corporation" label="International Maritime Transport Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813577" start="6616" end="6629" title="Naviera Armas" label="Naviera Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989899" start="6807" end="6810" title="Compagnie de Transports au Maroc" label="CTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126499" start="6844" end="6850" title="Laraki" label="Laraki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19299" wikidata="Q34511" url="?curid=19299" title="Royal Moroccan Armed Forces">
<text>The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces () are the military forces of the Kingdom of Morocco. They consist of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Royal Gendarmerie, and the Royal Guard.

The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces have experience in counter-insurgency, desert warfare and combined air-land operations. Further experience has come from participating in peace-keeping operations.

==History==

The oldest &quot;Moroccan&quot; military forces are those of the Mauri Berber Kingdoms from around 225 BCE. The Moroccan army has existed continuously since 1088 during the rising of Almoravid Empire in the 11th-century. During the protectorates period (1912–1955), large numbers of Moroccans were recruited for service in the Spahi and Tirailleur regiments of the French Army of Africa (French: &quot;Armée d&#x27;Afrique&quot;). Many served during World War I. During World War II more than 300,000 Moroccan troops (including goumier auxiliaries) served with the Free French forces in North Africa, Italy, France and Austria. The two world conflicts saw Moroccan units earning the nickname of &quot;Todesschwalben&quot; (death swallows) by German soldiers as they showed particular toughness on the battlefield. After the end of World War II, Moroccan troops formed part of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps engaged in the First Indochina War from 1946 to 1954.

The Spanish Army also made extensive use of Moroccan troops recruited in the Spanish Protectorate, during both the Rif War of 1921–26 and the Spanish Civil War of 1936–39. Moroccan &quot;Regulares&quot;, together with the Spanish Legion, made up Spain&#x27;s elite Spanish Army of Africa. A para-military gendarmerie, known as the &quot;Mehal-la Jalifianas&quot; and modelled on the French goumieres, was employed within the Spanish Zone.

The Royal Armed Forces were created on 14 May 1956, after the French Protectorate was dissolved in 1955. 14,000 Moroccan personnel from the French Army and 10,000 from the Spanish Armed Forces transferred into the newly formed armed forces, this number was augmented by approximately 5,000 former guerrillas from the &quot;Army of Liberation&quot;, About 2,000 French officers and NCOs remained in Morocco on short term contracts until the training programs at the military academies of St-Cyr, Toledo and Dar al Bayda produced sufficient numbers of Moroccan commissioned officers. Four years later, the Royal Moroccan Navy was established in 1960.

The Moroccan military&#x27;s first engagement as an independent country in the 20th century was the Ifni War, followed by the Rif revolt, and then the border war of 1963 with Algeria, In the early 1960s, Moroccan troops were sent to the Congo as part of the first multifunctional UN peacekeeping operation ONUC, The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces fought on the Golan front during the Yom Kippur War of 1973 (mostly in the battle for Quneitra) and intervened decisively in the 1977 conflict known as Shaba I to save Zaire&#x27;s regime. After Shaba II, Morocco was part of the Inter-African Force deployed on the Zaire border, contributing about 1,500 troops. The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces also took a symbolic part in the Gulf War among other Arab armies.

Between 1975 and 1991, the Moroccan Armed Forces fought a 16-year war against the POLISARIO, an Algerian backed rebel national liberation movement seeking the independence of Western Sahara from Morocco. From the mid-1980s on, Morocco largely managed to keep POLISARIO troops at bay by building a huge sand wall, staffed by an army roughly the same size as the entire Sahrawi population, enclosing the Southern Provinces within it. The enclosure contained most of the economically useful parts of Western Sahara, including Bou Craa, El-Aaiun, and Smara. The Moroccan army destroyed all the posts created by the Polisario and won decisively the majority of battles, but artillery strikes and sniping attacks by the guerrillas continued, and Morocco was economically and politically strained by the war.

In the 1990s, Moroccan troops went to Angola with the three UN Angola Verifications Missions, UNAVEM I, UNAVEM II, and UNAVEM III. They were also in Somalia, with UNOSOM I, the U.S.-led Unified Task Force (UNITAF), known by its U.S. codename of &#x27;Restore Hope&#x27; and the follow-on UNOSOM II, They saw fighting during the Battle of Mogadishu to rescue a U.S. anti-militia assault force. Other peace support involvement during the 1990s included United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) in Cambodia, and the missions in the former Yugoslavia: IFOR, SFOR, and KFOR.

On 14 July 1999, the Moroccan Armed Forces took part in the Bastille Day parade on the Champs-Élysées, which was exceptional for a non-French armed forces, at the invitation of then French President Jacques Chirac.

==Branches==

The modern Moroccan military is composed of the following branches:

===The Royal Army===

The Royal Moroccan Army is the branch of the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces responsible for land-based military operations. The army is about 175,000 troops strong, In case of war or a state of siege, an additional force of 150,000 Reservists and paramilitary forces, including 20,000 regulars of the Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie and 30,000 Auxiliary Forces come under the Ministry of Defense command. The Moroccan Army helped with the annexation of Western Sahara which is disputed. 

====Royal Guard====

The Moroccan Royal Guard is officially part of the Royal Moroccan Army, However, it is under the direct operational control of the Royal Military Household of His Majesty the King, The sole duty of the guard is to provide for the security and safety of the King and royal family of Morocco with 1,500 personnel.

===The Royal Air Force===

The Royal Moroccan Air Force is the air force branch of the Moroccan Armed Forces, It employs 13,000 personnel and is equipped with more than 300 aircraft. In the 21st century, the Royal Moroccan Air Force started a progressive modernization program of its aging fleet and its technical and operational capacities.

===The Royal Navy===

The Royal Navy is the branch of the Moroccan Armed Forces responsible of conducting naval operations, 7,800 personnel strong Its mission includes the protection of Moroccan territory and sovereignty, as well as the control of Morocco&#x27;s Exclusive Economic Zone. Given Morocco&#x27;s significant coastline (2,952 km) and strategic position overseeing the strait of Gibraltar, it (with Spain and the United Kingdom) is deeply involved in the security of this important international waterway.

===Royal Gendarmerie===

The Moroccan Royal Gendarmerie is the Gendarmerie body of Morocco. The legislation which founded the Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie describes it as a public force designed to guarantee public security and public order and the implementation of laws. This legislation text attaches the Gendarmerie to the Royal Moroccan Army, then constituting a military force in its structure, administration and command forms. It consists of officers and NCOs.

==History of participation in peacekeeping operations==
===Congo 1960–1961===
Congo United Nations Operation in the Congo

By 20 July 1960 Morocco had deployed 1,250 troops in Congo.

===Somalia 1992–1994===
Somalia UNOSOM I, UNITAF, UNOSOM II

===Bosnia and Herzegovina 1996–2007===
Bosnia and Herzegovina IFOR, SFOR, EUFOR Althea

===Kosovo 1998-1999===
Kosovo Kosovo War

Morocco has deployed one company of soldiers to contribute in the NATO-led international peacekeeping force which was responsible for establishing a secure environment in Kosovo.

===Haiti 2004–2006===

Haiti MINUSTAH

In 2004, Morocco provided an infantry company as part of a joint Spanish-Moroccan battalion, which was deployed in Fort Liberté, in the north-eastern part of Haiti. Disagreements between the United Nations and the Spanish government led to Spain´s withdrawal from the mission, leaving the Moroccans in charge of a much larger area than what was initially designed. The last Moroccan troops left Haiti in 2006, and the area was covered by a battalion from Uruguay, which already had another unit in the South of the country. About six Moroccan Army officers served in the mission HQ during this period.

===Democratic Republic of the Congo since 1999===

Morocco has deployed 6 observers, one mechanised infantry battalion and one field hospital to participate in the United Nations Security Council efforts to monitor the peace process of the Second Congo War.

===Ivory Coast since 2004===
Ivory Coast UNOCI
Morocco has deployed one infantry battalion to participate in the UNOCI peacekeeping mission whose objective is &quot;to facilitate the implementation by the Ivorian parties of the peace agreement signed by them in January 2003&quot; (which aimed to end the Ivorian Civil War). The two main Ivorian parties here are the Ivorian Government forces who control the south of the country, and the New Forces (former rebels), who control the north. The UNOCI mission aims to control a &quot;zone of confidence&quot; across the centre of the country separating the two parties.

===Central African Republic since 2013===
Central African Republic BINUCA, MINUSCA

The Moroccan Royal Armed Forces has sent a contingent of 777 Moroccan soldiers on December 25, 2013 for the Central African Republic to be deployed in the UN Integrated Peace building Office (BINUCA). Moroccan authorities also said they stand ready to support the Central African Republic in its path toward peace and stability.
==Motto==
The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces motto, which graces every military base, banner, and ship, is: God, The Homeland, and The King.
* God: The Creator of all destiny, by His Mercy we draw from, He ordains our choice to the right path.
* The Homeland: The Land that begets our bounty, from which we sustain ourselves we protect its integrity and defend it from all enemies.
* King: Our commander and guide, he guides our renaissance and development, protector of our people&#x27;s rights.

==Gallery==
==References==
==Bibliography==

==See also==
* Auxiliary Forces a paramilitary force composed of army veterans which, following the command of the Ministry of the Interior, supplements the military, Gendarmerie and police when needed.
* Battle of Smara (1979)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34511" start="4" end="31" title="Royal Moroccan Armed Forces" label="Royal Moroccan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="43" end="58" title="military forces" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="66" end="84" title="Morocco" label="Kingdom of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616232" start="106" end="110" title="Royal Moroccan Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721678" start="116" end="120" title="Royal Moroccan Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062751" start="126" end="135" title="Royal Moroccan Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238830" start="141" end="158" title="Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie" label="Royal Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095418" start="168" end="179" title="Moroccan Royal Guard" label="Royal Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="233" end="251" title="counter-insurgency" label="counter-insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182852" start="253" end="267" title="desert warfare" label="desert warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="352" end="365" title="peace-keeping" label="peace-keeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="575" end="591" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996618" start="719" end="724" title="Spahi" label="Spahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084700" start="729" end="739" title="Tirailleur" label="Tirailleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q867365" start="764" end="778" title="Army of Africa (France)" label="Army of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="780" end="786" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="842" end="853" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602100" start="920" end="927" title="goumier" label="goumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="957" end="975" title="Free French forces" label="Free French forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1223" end="1235" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997796" start="1272" end="1307" title="French Far East Expeditionary Corps" label="French Far East Expeditionary Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q748780" start="1323" end="1342" title="First Indochina War" label="First Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="1367" end="1379" title="Spanish Army" label="Spanish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="1440" end="1460" title="Spanish Morocco" label="Spanish Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q766437" start="1478" end="1485" title="Rif War (1920)" label="Rif War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="1505" end="1522" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812763" start="1550" end="1559" title="Regulares" label="Regulares"/>
<link wikidata="Q591925" start="1585" end="1599" title="Spanish Legion" label="Spanish Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862878" start="1628" end="1650" title="Spanish Army of Africa" label="Spanish Army of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="1668" end="1679" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16525154" start="2309" end="2321" title="Meknes Royal Military Academy" label="Dar al Bayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721678" start="2407" end="2426" title="Royal Moroccan Navy" label="Royal Moroccan Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640107" start="2553" end="2561" title="Ifni War" label="Ifni War"/>
<link wikidata="Q103896058" start="2579" end="2589" title="Rif revolt" label="Rif revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891008" start="2600" end="2635" title="Sand War" label="the border war of 1963 with Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q699009" start="2759" end="2763" title="ONUC" label="ONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="2834" end="2848" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q576368" start="2883" end="2891" title="Quneitra" label="Quneitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290619" start="2949" end="2956" title="Shaba I" label="Shaba I"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="3174" end="3182" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093550" start="3267" end="3278" title="Western Sahara War" label="16-year war"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="3291" end="3300" title="POLISARIO" label="POLISARIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3305" end="3312" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q209225" start="3336" end="3355" title="liberation movement" label="liberation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="3384" end="3398" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q510052" start="3511" end="3520" title="Moroccan Wall" label="sand wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418613" start="3611" end="3629" title="Southern Provinces" label="Southern Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q894941" start="3732" end="3740" title="Bou Craa" label="Bou Craa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47837" start="3742" end="3750" title="El-Aaiun" label="El-Aaiun"/>
<link wikidata="Q842810" start="3756" end="3761" title="Smara" label="Smara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556735" start="4106" end="4114" title="United Nations Angola Verification Mission I" label="UNAVEM I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760414" start="4116" end="4125" title="United Nations Angola Verification Mission II" label="UNAVEM II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971799" start="4131" end="4141" title="United Nations Angola Verification Mission III" label="UNAVEM III"/>
<link wikidata="Q592397" start="4175" end="4183" title="United Nations Operation in Somalia I" label="UNOSOM I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460844" start="4198" end="4216" title="Unified Task Force" label="Unified Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778229" start="4300" end="4309" title="United Nations Operation in Somalia II" label="UNOSOM II"/>
<link wikidata="Q52226" start="4340" end="4359" title="Battle of Mogadishu (1993)" label="Battle of Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="4463" end="4512" title="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia" label="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="4577" end="4581" title="IFOR" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="4583" end="4587" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="4593" end="4597" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="4687" end="4701" title="Avenue des Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="4799" end="4813" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q637615" start="5257" end="5273" title="Auxiliary Forces" label="Auxiliary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q699009" start="7149" end="7186" title="United Nations Operation in the Congo" label="United Nations Operation in the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q592397" start="7281" end="7289" title="United Nations Operation in Somalia I" label="UNOSOM I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460844" start="7291" end="7297" title="Unified Task Force" label="UNITAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778229" start="7299" end="7308" title="United Nations Operation in Somalia II" label="UNOSOM II"/>
<link wikidata="Q313577" start="7372" end="7376" title="Implementation Force" label="IFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="7378" end="7382" title="SFOR" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q691042" start="7384" end="7396" title="EUFOR Althea" label="EUFOR Althea"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="7428" end="7438" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q740123" start="7649" end="7657" title="United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti" label="MINUSTAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855454" start="8562" end="8567" title="United Nations Operation in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="UNOCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898874" start="9207" end="9213" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2031" label="BINUCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664777" start="9215" end="9222" title="MINUSCA" label="MINUSCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q637615" start="10108" end="10124" title="Auxiliary Forces" label="Auxiliary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889996" start="10298" end="10320" title="Battle of Smara (1979)" label="Battle of Smara (1979)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19300" wikidata="Q3699056" url="?curid=19300" title="Foreign relations of Morocco">
<text>Morocco is a member of the United Nations and belongs to the African Union, Arab League, Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN-SAD). Morocco&#x27;s relationships vary greatly between African, Arab, United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Western states. Morocco has had strong ties with the West in order to gain economic and political benefits. France and Spain remain the primary trade partners, as well as the primary creditors and foreign investors in Morocco. From the total foreign investments in Morocco, the European Union invests approximately 73.5%, whereas the Arab world invests only 19.3%. As of 2009, many countries from the Persian Gulf and Maghreb regions are also becoming more involved in large-scale development projects in Morocco.

Foreign relations have had a significant impact on economic and social development in Morocco. Certain evidence of foreign influence is through the many development projects, loans, investments, and free trade agreements that Morocco has with other countries. Some free trade agreements include the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area agreement with the European Union; the Greater Arab Free Trade Area with Egypt, Jordan, and Tunisia; as well as the US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement with the United States. An example of recent foreign influence is through loan agreements. Morocco signed three loan agreements with the French Development Agency (AFD) in 2009, totalling up to 155 million euros. These were for the purpose of reforming the education system, rural roads and rehabilitation, as well as infrastructure projects.

==Factors influencing foreign relations==
===Role of political organization===
Policies associated with foreign relations are determined by King Mohamed VI, as well as his advisors, despite the fact that Morocco has a constitutional monarchy. Morocco has had a history of monarchical rule. For example, the previous king, Hassan II of Morocco, suspended parliament in 1965 and ruled directly for two years. This was in response to the discovery of a plot on the king&#x27;s life, of which a political party, UNFP, was accused of orchestrating. Foreign relations with Western countries became strained as a result of this. Portraying Morocco as a democratic state became important if Morocco wished to receive loans and investments from foreign powers.

===Role of colonialism===
Morocco&#x27;s current relations with some countries are related to its colonial history. Morocco was secretly partitioned by Spain and France and in 1912 the Moroccan territory was made into French and Spanish protectorates. After achieving independence in 1956, Morocco still has a strong relationship with its former colonizers. Spain and France are currently the largest exporting and importing partners to Morocco. French is still popularly spoken and remains the second language in Morocco whilst Spanish is also widespread, particularly in the northern regions. France now is home to more than a million Moroccans legally residing in the country. This is the largest Moroccan population in a foreign country, followed next by Spain. These former colonizers remain influential in economic matters, such as development projects, investments, trade, and loans.

===Role of free market===
Relations with foreign powers, especially with the West, have also been strengthened as Morocco has liberalized its economy and implemented major economic reforms. In 1993 there was major privatization and markets were opened up to foreign powers. Morocco now is focusing more on promoting foreign direct investments. In 2007, Morocco adopted the Hassan II Fund for Development, which are measures that simplify procedures to make the process easier and more financially beneficial for foreign investors. This was done with financial incentives, as well as tax exemptions. These policies make it beneficial for other countries to have relations with Morocco so that they can take advantage of their goods. Morocco&#x27;s exports are mainly agriculture, and it is one of the largest exporters of phosphate in the world. In addition, Morocco has rich fishing waters, a tourist industry, and a small manufacturing sector.

===Role of foreign policy support===
Morocco also gains financial support from countries that it assists. For example, Morocco has had a long history of supporting the United States and it has received financial support as a result. Moroccan troops were involved in Bosnia as well as in Somalia, during the operation Desert Storm. Morocco also was among the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the September 11 attacks and declare solidarity with the American people in the war against terror. It has contributed to UN peacekeeping efforts on the continent. In 1998, the U.S. Secretary of Defense, William Cohen, said that Morocco and the U.S. have &quot;mutual concerns over transnational terrorism&quot; as well as interests in &quot;the effort to control the spread of weapons of mass destruction&quot;. In recognition of its support for the War on Terror, in June 2004 U.S. President George W. Bush designated Morocco as a major non-NATO ally. 
Another case of mutual foreign policy interests is with Saudi Arabia. Ties between these countries were strengthened when Morocco sent troops to help Saudi Arabia during the 1992 Gulf War. This was perceived as a &quot;gesture to support Western and Arab allies&quot;. Morocco&#x27;s relationship to countries in the Middle East and its contribution to the Palestinian cause have created stronger relations between these countries.

===Role of immigration===
Another factor determining relations is how much immigration the country receives from Morocco. The beginning of major migration to Europe began during the colonial era (1912 to 1956). During World War I and II, France had an urgent need for manpower, which led to the recruitment of tens of thousands of Moroccan men to work in factories, mines, and in the army. Another increase in immigration from Morocco to France was during the Algerian war of independence. France stopped recruiting workers from Algeria and instead accepted more Moroccan factory and mine labourers. Immigration increased even further from 1962 to 1972 when economic growth in Europe occurred, which led to a greater demand for low-skilled labour. At this time, Morocco signed major labour recruitment agreements with European countries, such as France, West Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands. This led to a more diverse spread of emigration, which until this time was focused primarily on the country of France.

Morocco&#x27;s perceived identity plays a role in its relations with other countries. Numerous countries have strong relations with Morocco because of its history of being a Western ally. For example, Morocco has the longest friendship treaties with the United States. This is important for US interests because Morocco is a stable, democratizing, and liberalizing MENA &amp; Muslim nation. Geopolitical benefits are evident because ties to Morocco means that an ally is established in Africa, in the Maghreb region. Morocco&#x27;s identity as a Muslim state has also strengthened ties with the Persian Gulf countries as a result of 9/11 and the &quot;War on Terror&quot;. This has resulted in Arab countries, including members of the GCC (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates), choosing to invest more in Morocco. Many countries in the Maghreb region also invest in Morocco because of perceived similarities in identity.

==Maghreb and Africa==
Morocco is very active in Maghreb and African affairs. The Arab Maghreb Union is made up of Morocco, Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, and Tunisia. Although it was long not a member of the African Union (formerly the Organisation of African Unity) since November 12, 1984—following the admission of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic as the government of Western Sahara—Morocco remained involved in developing the regional economy, as the city of Casablanca contains North Africa&#x27;s busiest port and serves as the country&#x27;s economic center. Morocco rejoined the African Union on 30 January 2017, following a change in AU leadership. There are significant ties with West African and Sahel countries and Morocco maintains good relationships with Senegal, Gabon and Burkina Faso.

===Positions on Western Sahara conflict===
The following lists contain the following states and entities:

* 45 states, the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the African Union and the European Union support &quot;the right of self-determination of the people of Western Sahara&quot; (e.g. the conduction of a referendum for status determination),
* 65 states support Morocco&#x27;s claim of Western Sahara, and 23 states have consulates and/or consulates-general in the Moroccan-administered Sahara.

Some states are listed in both lists, for example when a state is supportive of the &quot;right of self-determination&quot; including the option of autonomy under Morocco sovereignty. Some states change their opinion frequently, or give separate announcements of support for both Morocco and the Polisario Front/SADR.

Some of the states announcing support of the &quot;right of self-determination&quot; in addition already recognize the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. Not all of the states that have canceled relations with or withdrawn recognition of SADR have announced support for the Moroccan claim.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Morocco maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
Morocco&#x27;s stance is supporting the search for peace in the Middle East, encouraging Israeli–Palestinian negotiations and urging moderation on both sides.

Morocco maintains close relations with Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf states, which have provided Morocco with substantial amounts of financial assistance. Morocco was the first Arab state to condemn Iraq&#x27;s invasion of Kuwait and sent troops to help defend Saudi Arabia. Morocco also was among the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the September 11 attacks in the United States and declare solidarity with the American people in the war against terrorism. It has contributed to United Nations peacekeeping efforts on the continent. In recognition of its support for the War on Terrorism, in June 2004 U.S. President George W. Bush designated Morocco as a major non-NATO ally.

===Europe===
===Oceania===
==See also==

* List of diplomatic missions in Morocco
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs, African Cooperation and Moroccan Expatriates

== Citations ==
== General and cited references==
* 

==External links==
* The EU&#x27;s Relations with Morocco
* U.S. Dept. of State&#x27;s Background Note on Morocco, Oct. 2004 
* US Consulate a turning point for disputed Western Sahara (by MOSA&#x27;AB ELSHAMY, Associated Press, January 10, 2021) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="27" end="41" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="61" end="74" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="76" end="87" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="89" end="107" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="115" end="150" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="162" end="182" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q605883" start="191" end="224" title="Community of Sahel-Saharan States" label="Community of Sahel-Saharan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="625" end="639" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="748" end="760" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="765" end="772" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="862" end="879" title="Foreign relations" label="Foreign relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1215" end="1229" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12239049" start="1235" end="1263" title="Greater Arab Free Trade Area" label="Greater Arab Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822804" start="1312" end="1343" title="US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement" label="US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826643" start="1481" end="1506" title="French Development Agency" label="French Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q57553" start="1828" end="1843" title="Mohammed VI of Morocco" label="King Mohamed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1906" end="1929" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="2010" end="2030" title="Hassan II of Morocco" label="Hassan II of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q692325" start="2196" end="2200" title="National Union of Popular Forces" label="UNFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="2678" end="2690" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3410" end="3414" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="3547" end="3560" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="3649" end="3675" title="foreign direct investments" label="foreign direct investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="4596" end="4608" title="Desert Storm" label="Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4683" end="4703" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="4759" end="4777" title="War on Terror" label="war against terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q710721" start="4883" end="4896" title="William Cohen" label="William Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="5057" end="5084" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="5173" end="5187" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="5849" end="5861" title="French protectorate in Morocco" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="7420" end="7423" title="Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="7681" end="7688" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="7838" end="7851" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="7866" end="7895" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="7952" end="7984" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="8098" end="8108" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="8404" end="8411" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="8413" end="8418" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="8423" end="8435" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497657" start="8547" end="8549" title="International recognition of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="45"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8562" end="8576" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="8582" end="8602" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="8608" end="8621" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8630" end="8644" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="8663" end="8690" title="right of self-determination" label="right of self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q695186" start="8755" end="8790" title="United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara" label="referendum for status determination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8857" end="8859" title="Political status of Western Sahara#States supporting Morocco&amp;#x27;s autonomy proposal" label="23"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="9046" end="9064" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="9777" end="9788" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141816" start="9802" end="9834" title="Israeli–Palestinian peace process" label="Israeli–Palestinian negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="9912" end="9924" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="9933" end="9945" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="10225" end="10245" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="10367" end="10394" title="United Nations peacekeeping" label="United Nations peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="10459" end="10475" title="War on Terrorism" label="War on Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="10490" end="10504" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10505" end="10519" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="10544" end="10563" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616472" start="10609" end="10647" title="List of diplomatic missions in Morocco" label="List of diplomatic missions in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315358" start="10650" end="10723" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs, African Cooperation and Moroccan Expatriates" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs, African Cooperation and Moroccan Expatriates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19301" wikidata="Q1029" url="?curid=19301" title="Mozambique">
<text>Mozambique, officially the Republic of Mozambique, is a country located in Southeast Africa bordered by the Indian Ocean to the east, Tanzania to the north, Malawi and Zambia to the northwest, Zimbabwe to the west, and Eswatini and South Africa to the south and southwest. The sovereign state is separated from the Comoros, Mayotte, and Madagascar by the Mozambique Channel to the east. The capital and largest city is Maputo.

Between the 7th and 11th centuries, a series of Swahili port towns developed on that area, which contributed to the development of a distinct Swahili culture and dialect. In the late medieval period, these towns were frequented by traders from Somalia, Ethiopia, Egypt, Arabia, Persia, and India. The voyage of Vasco da Gama in 1498 marked the arrival of the Portuguese, who began a gradual process of colonisation and settlement in 1505. After over four centuries of Portuguese rule, Mozambique gained independence in 1975, becoming the People&#x27;s Republic of Mozambique shortly thereafter. After only two years of independence, the country descended into an intense and protracted civil war lasting from 1977 to 1992. In 1994, Mozambique held its first multiparty elections and has since remained a relatively stable presidential republic, although it still faces a low-intensity insurgency distinctively in the farthermost regions from the southern capital and where Islam is dominant.

Mozambique is endowed with rich and extensive natural resources, notwithstanding the country&#x27;s economy is based chiefly on fishery—substantially molluscs, crustaceans and echinoderms—and agriculture with a growing industry of food and beverages, chemical manufacturing, aluminium and oil. The tourism sector is expanding. Since 2001, Mozambique&#x27;s GDP growth has been thriving, but since 2014/15, both a significant decrease in household real consumption and a sharp rise in economic inequality have been observed. The nation remains one of the poorest and most underdeveloped countries in the world, ranking low in GDP per capita, human development, measures of inequality and average life expectancy.

The country&#x27;s population of around 34,777,605, as of 2024 estimates, which is a 2.96% population increase from 2023, is composed overwhelmingly of Bantu peoples. However, the only official language in Mozambique is Portuguese, which is spoken in urban areas as a first or second language by most, and generally as a lingua franca between younger Mozambicans with access to formal education. The most important local languages include Tsonga, Makhuwa, Sena, Chichewa, and Swahili. Glottolog lists 46 languages spoken in the country, of which one is a signed language (Mozambican Sign Language/&quot;Língua de sinais de Moçambique&quot;). The largest religion in Mozambique is Christianity, with significant minorities following Islam and African traditional religions.

==Etymology==
The country was named Moçambique by the Portuguese after the Island of Mozambique, derived from either Mussa Bin Bique, &quot;Musa Al Big,&quot; &quot;Mossa Al Bique&quot;, &quot;Mussa Ben Mbiki&quot; or &quot;Mussa Ibn Malik&quot;, an Arab trader who first visited the island and later lived there and was still alive when Vasco da Gama called at the island in 1498. The island-town was the capital of the Portuguese colony until 1898, when it was moved south to Lourenço Marques (now Maputo).

==History==

===Bantu migrations===
Bantu-speaking peoples migrated into Mozambique as early as the 4th century BC. It is believed between the 1st and 5th centuries AD, waves of migration from the west and north went through the Zambezi River valley and then gradually into the plateau and coastal areas of Southern Africa. They established agricultural communities or societies based on herding cattle. They brought with them the technology for smelting and smithing iron.

===Swahili Coast===

From the late first millennium AD, vast Indian Ocean trade networks extended as far south into Mozambique as evidenced by the ancient port town of Chibuene. Beginning in the 9th century, a growing involvement in Indian Ocean trade led to the development of numerous port towns along the entire East African coast, including modern day Mozambique. Largely autonomous, these towns broadly participated in the incipient Swahili culture. Islam was often adopted by urban elites, facilitating trade. In Mozambique, Sofala, Angoche, and Mozambique Island were regional powers by the 15th century.

The towns traded with merchants from both the African interior and the broader Indian Ocean world. Particularly important were the gold and ivory caravan routes. Inland states like the Kingdom of Zimbabwe and Kingdom of Mutapa provided the coveted gold and ivory, which were then exchanged up the coast to larger port cities like Kilwa and Mombasa.

=== Portuguese Mozambique (1498–1975) ===


The Island of Mozambique after which the country is named, is a small coral island at the mouth of Mossuril Bay on the Nacala coast of northern Mozambique, first explored by Europeans in the late 15th century.

When Portuguese explorers reached Mozambique in 1498, Arab-trading settlements had existed along the coast and outlying islands for several centuries. From about 1500, Portuguese trading posts and forts displaced the Arabic commercial and military hegemony, becoming regular ports of call on the new European sea route to the east, the first steps in what was to become a process of colonisation.

The voyage of Vasco da Gama around the Cape of Good Hope in 1498 marked the Portuguese entry into trade, politics, and society of the region. The Portuguese gained control of the Island of Mozambique and the port city of Sofala in the early 16th century, and by the 1530s, small groups of Portuguese traders and prospectors seeking gold penetrated the interior regions. Here they set up garrisons and trading posts at Sena and Tete on the Zambezi and tried to gain exclusive control over the gold trade.

In the central part of the Mozambique territory, the Portuguese attempted to legitimise and consolidate their trade and settlement positions through the creation of &quot;prazos&quot;. These land grants tied emigrants to their settlements, and inland Mozambique was largely left to be administered by &quot;prazeiros&quot;, the grant holders, while central authorities in Portugal concentrated their direct exercise of power on, in their view, the more important Portuguese possessions in Asia and the Americas. Slavery in Mozambique pre-dated European-contact. African rulers and chiefs dealt in enslaved people, first with Arab Muslim traders, who sent the enslaved to Middle East Asia cities and plantations, and later with Portuguese and other European traders. In a continuation of the trade, slaves were supplied by warring local African rulers, who raided enemy tribes and sold their captives to the &quot;prazeiros&quot;. The authority of the &quot;prazeiros&quot; was exercised and upheld amongst the local population by armies of these enslaved men, whose members became known as &quot;Chikunda&quot;. Continuing emigration from Portugal occurred at comparatively low levels until late in the nineteenth century, promoting &quot;Africanisation&quot;. While &quot;prazos&quot; were originally intended to be held solely by Portuguese colonists, through intermarriage and the relative isolation of &quot;prazeiros&quot; from ongoing Portuguese influences, the &quot;prazos&quot; became African-Portuguese or African-Indian.

Although Portuguese influence gradually expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy. The Portuguese were able to wrest much of the coastal trade from Arab Muslims between 1500 and 1700, but, with the Arab Muslim seizure of Portugal&#x27;s key foothold at Fort Jesus on Mombasa Island (now in Kenya) in 1698, the pendulum began to swing in the other direction. As a result, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the more lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonisation of Brazil.

The Mazrui and Omani Arabs reclaimed much of the Indian Ocean trade, forcing the Portuguese to retreat south. Many &quot;prazos&quot; had declined by the mid-19th century, but several of them survived. During the 19th century other European powers, particularly the British (British South Africa Company) and the French (Madagascar), became increasingly involved in the trade and politics of the region around the Portuguese East African territories.

By the early 20th century the Portuguese had shifted the administration of much of Mozambique to large private companies, like the Mozambique Company, the Zambezia Company and the Niassa Company, controlled and financed mostly by British financiers such as Solomon Joel, which established railroad lines to their neighbouring colonies (South Africa and Rhodesia). Although slavery had been legally abolished in Mozambique, at the end of the 19th century the chartered companies enacted a forced labour policy and supplied cheap—often forced—African labour to the mines and plantations of the nearby British colonies and South Africa. The Zambezia Company, the most profitable chartered company, took over several smaller &quot;prazeiro&quot; holdings and established military outposts to protect its property. The chartered companies built roads and ports to bring their goods to market including a railroad linking present-day Zimbabwe with the Mozambican port of Beira.

Due to their unsatisfactory performance and the shift, under the corporatist Estado Novo regime of Oliveira Salazar, toward a stronger Portuguese control of Portuguese Empire&#x27;s economy, the companies&#x27; concessions were not renewed when they ran out. This was what happened in 1942 with the Mozambique Company, which, however, continued to operate in the agricultural and commercial sectors as a corporation, and had already happened in 1929 with the termination of the Niassa Company&#x27;s concession. In 1951, the Portuguese overseas colonies in Africa were rebranded as Overseas Provinces of Portugal.

The Mueda massacre of 16 June 1960, resulted in the death of Makonde protestors, which provoked the struggle of independence from Portuguese rule of Mozambique.

===Mozambican War of Independence (1964–1975)===

As communist and anti-colonial ideologies spread out across Africa, many clandestine political movements were established in support of Mozambican independence. These movements claimed that since policies and development plans were primarily designed by the ruling authorities for the benefit of Mozambique&#x27;s Portuguese population, little attention was paid to Mozambique&#x27;s tribal integration and the development of its native communities. According to the official guerrilla statements, this affected a majority of the indigenous population who suffered both state-sponsored discrimination and enormous social pressure. As a response to the guerrilla movement, the Portuguese government from the 1960s and principally the early 1970s initiated gradual changes with new socioeconomic developments and egalitarian policies.

The Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) initiated a guerrilla campaign against Portuguese rule in September 1964. This conflict—along with the two others already initiated in the other Portuguese colonies of Angola and Portuguese Guinea—became part of the so-called Portuguese Colonial War (1961–1974). From a military standpoint, the Portuguese regular army maintained control of the population centres while the guerrilla forces sought to undermine their influence in rural and tribal areas in the north and west. As part of their response to FRELIMO, the Portuguese government began to pay more attention to creating favourable conditions for social development and economic growth.

=== Independence (1975) ===
FRELIMO took control of the territory after ten years of sporadic warfare, as well as Portugal&#x27;s own return to democracy after the fall of the authoritarian Estado Novo regime in the Carnation Revolution of April 1974 and the failed coup of 25 November 1975. Within a year, most of the 250,000 Portuguese in Mozambique had left—some expelled by the government of the nearly independent territory, some left the country to avoid possible reprisals from the unstable government—and Mozambique became independent from Portugal on 25 June 1975. A law had been passed on the initiative of the relatively unknown Armando Guebuza of the FRELIMO party, ordering the Portuguese to leave the country in 24 hours with only of luggage. Unable to salvage any of their assets, most of them returned to Portugal penniless.

===Mozambican Civil War (1977–1992)===
The new government under President Samora Machel established a one-party state based on Marxist principles. It received diplomatic and some military support from Cuba and the Soviet Union and proceeded to crack down on opposition. Starting shortly after independence, the country was plagued from 1977 to 1992 by a long and violent civil war between the opposition forces of anti-communist Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO) rebel militias and the FRELIMO regime. This conflict characterised the first decades of Mozambican independence, combined with sabotage from the neighbouring states of Rhodesia and South Africa, ineffective policies, failed central planning, and the resulting economic collapse. This period was also marked by the exodus of Portuguese nationals and Mozambicans of Portuguese heritage, a collapsed infrastructure, lack of investment in productive assets, and government nationalisation of privately owned industries, as well as widespread famine.

During most of the civil war, the FRELIMO-formed central government was unable to exercise effective control outside urban areas, many of which were cut off from the capital. RENAMO-controlled areas included up to 50% of the rural areas in several provinces, and it is reported that health services of any kind were isolated from assistance for years in those areas. The problem worsened when the government cut back spending on health care. The war was marked by mass human rights violations from both sides of the conflict, with both RENAMO and FRELIMO contributing to the chaos through the use of terror and indiscriminate targeting of civilians. The central government executed tens of thousands of people while trying to extend its control throughout the country and sent many people to &quot;re-education camps&quot; where thousands died.
During the war, RENAMO proposed a peace agreement based on the secession of RENAMO-controlled northern and western territories as the independent &quot;Republic of Rombesia&quot;, but FRELIMO refused, insisting on the undivided sovereignty of the entire country. An estimated one million Mozambicans perished during the civil war, 1.7 million took refuge in neighbouring states, and several million more were internally displaced. The FRELIMO regime also gave shelter and support to South African (African National Congress) and Zimbabwean (Zimbabwe African National Union) rebel movements, while the governments of Rhodesia and later Apartheid South Africa backed RENAMO in the civil war. Between 300,000 and 600,000 people died of famine during the war.

On 19 October 1986, Machel was on his way back from an international meeting in Zambia when his plane crashed in the Lebombo Mountains near Mbuzini in South Africa. President Machel and thirty-three others died, including ministers and officials of the Mozambique government. The United Nations&#x27; Soviet delegation issued a minority report contending that their expertise and experience had been undermined by the South Africans. Representatives of the Soviet Union advanced the theory that the plane had been intentionally diverted by a false navigational beacon signal, using a technology provided by military intelligence operatives of the South African government.

Machel&#x27;s successor Joaquim Chissano implemented sweeping changes in the country, starting reforms such as changing from Marxism to capitalism and began peace talks with RENAMO. The new constitution enacted in 1990 provided for a multi-party political system, a market-based economy, and free elections. That same year, Mozambique abolished the people&#x27;s republic as the country&#x27;s official name. The civil war ended in October 1992 with the Rome General Peace Accords, first brokered by the Christian Council of Mozambique (Council of Protestant Churches) and then taken over by Community of Sant&#x27;Egidio. Peace returned to Mozambique, under the supervision of the peacekeeping force of the United Nations.

===Democratic era (1993–present)===

Mozambique held elections in 1994, which were accepted by most political parties as free and fair although still contested by many nationals and observers alike. FRELIMO won, under Joaquim Chissano, while RENAMO, led by Afonso Dhlakama, ran as the official opposition. In 1995, Mozambique joined the Commonwealth of Nations, becoming, at the time, the only member nation that had never been part of the British Empire.

By mid-1995, over 1.7 million refugees who had sought asylum in neighbouring countries had returned to Mozambique, part of the largest repatriation witnessed in sub-Saharan Africa. An additional four million internally displaced persons had returned to their homes. In December 1999, Mozambique held elections for a second time since the civil war, which were again won by FRELIMO. RENAMO accused FRELIMO of fraud and threatened to return to civil war but backed down after taking the matter to the Supreme Court and losing.

In early 2000, a cyclone caused widespread flooding, killing hundreds and devastating the already precarious infrastructure. There were widespread suspicions that foreign aid resources had been diverted by powerful leaders of FRELIMO. Carlos Cardoso, a journalist investigating these allegations, was murdered, and his death was never satisfactorily explained.

Indicating in 2001 that he would not run for a third term, Chissano criticised leaders who stayed on longer than he had, which was generally seen as a reference to Zambian President Frederick Chiluba and Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe. Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on 1–2 December 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote, and Dhlakama received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament, with a coalition of RENAMO and several small parties winning the 90 remaining seats. Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on 2 February 2005 and served two five-year terms. His successor, Filipe Nyusi, became the fourth President of Mozambique on 15 January 2015.

From 2013 to 2019, a low-intensity insurgency by RENAMO occurred, mainly in the country&#x27;s central and northern regions. On 5 September 2014, Guebuza and Dhlakama signed the Accord on Cessation of Hostilities, which brought the military hostilities to a halt and allowed both parties to concentrate on the general elections to be held in October 2014. However, after the general elections, a new political crisis emerged. RENAMO did not recognise the validity of the election results and demanded the control of six provinces – Nampula, Niassa, Tete, Zambezia, Sofala, and Manica – where they claimed to have won a majority. About 12,000 refugees fled to Malawi. The UNHCR, Doctors Without Borders, and Human Rights Watch reported that government forces had torched villages and carried out summary executions and sexual abuses.

In October 2019, President Filipe Nyusi was re-elected after a landslide victory in general election. FRELIMO won 184 seats, RENAMO got 60 seats and the MDM party received the remaining 6 seats in the National Assembly. Opposition did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud and irregularities. FRELIMO secured two-thirds majority in parliament which allowed FRELIMO to re-adjust the constitution without needing the agreement of the opposition.

Since 2017, the country has faced an ongoing insurgency by Islamist groups. In September 2020, ISIL insurgents captured and briefly occupied Vamizi Island in the Indian Ocean. In March 2021, dozens of civilians were killed and 35,000 others were displaced after Islamist rebels seized the city of Palma. In December 2021, nearly 4,000 Mozambicans fled their villages after an intensification of jihadist attacks in Niassa.

==Geography==
At , Mozambique is the world&#x27;s 35th-largest country. Mozambique is located on the southeast coast of Africa and is bound by Eswatini to the south, South Africa to the southwest, Zimbabwe to the west, Zambia and Malawi to the northwest, Tanzania to the north and the Indian Ocean to the east. Mozambique lies between latitudes 10° and 27°S, and longitudes 30° and 41°E.

The country is divided into two topographical regions by the Zambezi River. To the north of the Zambezi, the narrow coastal strip gives way to inland hills and low plateaus. Rugged highlands are further west; they include the Niassa highlands, Namuli or Shire highlands, Angonia highlands, Tete highlands and the Makonde plateau, covered with miombo woodlands. To the south of the Zambezi, the lowlands are broader with the Mashonaland plateau and Lebombo Mountains located in the deep south.

The country is drained by five principal rivers and several smaller ones with the largest and most important the Zambezi. The country has four notable lakes: Lake Niassa (or Malawi), Lake Chiuta, Cahora Bassa and Lake Shirwa, all in the north. The major cities are Maputo, Beira, Nampula, Tete, Quelimane, Chimoio, Pemba, Inhambane, Xai-Xai and Lichinga.

===Climate===
Mozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons: a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September. Climatic conditions, however, vary depending on altitude. Rainfall is heavy along the coast and decreases in the north and south. Annual precipitation varies from depending on the region, with an average of . Cyclones are common during the wet season. Average temperature ranges in Maputo are from in July and from in February.

In 2019 Mozambique suffered floods and destruction from the devastating cyclones Idai and Kenneth, the first time two cyclones had struck the nation in a single season.

Thousands of crops were destroyed during the flooding, which causes transboundary animal diseases, and over 10 million people were affected throughout the region, according to the FAO&#x27;s urgent campaign for southern Africa, which includes Malawi, Madagascar, and Mozambique. These countries have been experiencing climate disasters between January and March 2023 that have seriously affected various sectors, including farming, fisheries, and thousands of crops. 

===Wildlife===
There are known to be 740 bird species in Mozambique, including 20 globally threatened species and two introduced species, and over 200 mammal species endemic to Mozambique, including the critically endangered Selous&#x27; zebra, Vincent&#x27;s bush squirrel and 13 other endangered or vulnerable species.

Protected areas include thirteen forest reserves, seven national parks, six nature reserves, three frontier conservation areas and three wildlife or game reserves.

== Government and politics ==


The Constitution of Mozambique stipulates that the President of the Republic functions as the head of state, head of government, commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and as a symbol of national unity. They are directly elected for a five-year term via run-off voting. The prime minister is appointed by the president. Their functions include convening and chairing the council of ministers (cabinet), advising the president, assisting the president in governing the country, and coordinating the functions of the other ministers.

The Assembly of the Republic has 250 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation. The judiciary comprises a Supreme Court and provincial, district, and municipal courts.

Mozambique operates a small, functioning military that handles all aspects of domestic national defence, the Mozambique Defence Armed Forces.

=== Administrative divisions ===
Mozambique is divided into ten provinces (&quot;provincias&quot;) and one capital city (&quot;cidade capital&quot;) with provincial status. The provinces are subdivided into 129 districts (&quot;distritos&quot;). The districts are further divided into 405 &quot;&quot;postos administrativos&quot; (administrative posts, headed by &quot;secretários&quot;) and then into &quot;localidades&quot; (localities), the lowest geographical level of the central state administration. There are 53 &quot;municípios&quot;&quot; (municipalities).

=== Foreign relations ===

While allegiances dating back to the liberation struggle remain relevant, Mozambique&#x27;s foreign policy has become increasingly pragmatic. The twin pillars of Mozambique&#x27;s foreign policy are maintenance of good relations with its neighbours and maintenance and expansion of ties to development partners.

During the 1970s and the early 1980s, Mozambique&#x27;s foreign policy was inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in Rhodesia and South Africa as well as superpower competition and the Cold War. Mozambique&#x27;s decision to enforce UN sanctions against Rhodesia and deny that country access to the sea led Ian Smith&#x27;s government to undertake overt and covert actions to oppose the country. Although the change of government in Zimbabwe in 1980 removed this threat, the government of South Africa continued to destabilise Mozambique. Mozambique also belonged to the Frontline States. The 1984 Nkomati Accord, while failing in its goal of ending South African support to RENAMO, opened initial diplomatic contacts between the Mozambican and South African governments. This process gained momentum with South Africa&#x27;s elimination of apartheid, which culminated in the establishment of full diplomatic relations in October 1993. While relations with neighbouring Zimbabwe, Malawi, Zambia and Tanzania show occasional strains, Mozambique&#x27;s ties to these countries remain strong.

In the years immediately following its independence, Mozambique benefited from considerable assistance from some Western countries, notably the Scandinavians. The Soviet Union and its allies became Mozambique&#x27;s primary economic, military and political supporters, and its foreign policy reflected this linkage. This began to change in 1983; in 1984 Mozambique joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. Western aid by the Scandinavian countries of Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Iceland quickly replaced Soviet support. Finland and the Netherlands are becoming increasingly important sources of development assistance. Italy also maintains a profile in Mozambique as a result of its key role during the peace process. Relations with Portugal, the former colonial power, continue to be important because Portuguese investors play a visible role in Mozambique&#x27;s economy.

Mozambique is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and ranks among the moderate members of the African bloc in the United Nations and other international organisations. Mozambique also belongs to the African Union and the Southern African Development Community. In 1994, the government became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, in part to broaden its base of international support but also to please the country&#x27;s sizeable Muslim population. Similarly, in 1995 Mozambique joined its Anglophone neighbours in the Commonwealth of Nations. At the time it was the only nation to have joined the Commonwealth that was never part of the British Empire. In the same year, Mozambique became a founding member and the first president of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries and maintains close ties with other Portuguese-speaking countries.

=== Human rights ===

Same-sex sexual activity has been legal since 2015. However, discrimination against LGBT people in Mozambique is widespread.

==Economy==

Mozambique is one of the poorest and most underdeveloped countries in the world, even though between 1994 and 2006 its average annual GDP growth was approximately 8%. Since 2014/15 household real consumption has decreased significantly and a sharp rise in economic inequality has been observed. The IMF classifies Mozambique as a heavily indebted poor country. In a 2006 survey, three-quarters of Mozambicans said that in the past five years their economic position had remained the same or become worse.

Mozambique&#x27;s official currency is the metical (as of October 2023, US$1 is roughly equivalent to 64 meticals) The U.S. dollar, South African rand, and the euro are widely accepted and used in business transactions. The minimum legal salary is around US$60 per month. Mozambique is a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC). The SADC free trade protocol is aimed at making the Southern African region more competitive by eliminating tariffs and other trade barriers. The World Bank in 2007 talked of Mozambique&#x27;s &#x27;blistering pace of economic growth&#x27;. A joint donor-government study in early 2007 said &#x27;Mozambique is generally considered an aid success story.&#x27;

===Rebounding growth===

The resettlement of civil war refugees and successful economic reform have led to a high growth rate: the country enjoyed a remarkable recovery, achieving an average annual rate of economic growth of 8% between 1996 and 2006 and between 6–7% from 2006 to 2011. Rapid expansion in the future hinges on several major foreign investment projects, continued economic reform, and the revival of the agriculture, transportation, and tourism sectors. In 2013 about 80% of the population was employed in agriculture, the majority of whom were engaged in small-scale subsistence farming which still suffered from inadequate infrastructure, commercial networks, and investment. However, in 2012, more than 90% of Mozambique&#x27;s arable land was still uncultivated.

In 2013, a BBC article reported that starting in 2009, the Portuguese had been returning to Mozambique because of the growing economy in Mozambique and the poor economic situation in Portugal.

===Economic reforms===

More than 1,200 mostly small state-owned enterprises have been privatised. Preparations for privatisation and/or sector liberalisation were made for the remaining parastatal enterprises, including telecommunications, energy, ports, and railways. The government frequently selected a strategic foreign investor when privatising a parastatal. Additionally, customs duties have been reduced, and customs management has been streamlined and reformed. The government introduced a value-added tax in 1999 as part of its efforts to increase domestic revenues.

===Corruption===

Mozambique&#x27;s economy has been shaken by numerous corruption scandals. In July 2011, the government proposed new anti-corruption laws to criminalise embezzlement, influence peddling and graft, following numerous instances of the theft of public money. This has been endorsed by the country&#x27;s Council of Ministers. Mozambique convicted two former ministers for graft. Mozambique was ranked 116 of 178 countries in anti-graft watchdog Transparency International&#x27;s index of global corruption. According to a USAID report written in 2005, &quot;the scale and scope of corruption in Mozambique are cause for alarm.&quot;

In 2012, the government of Inhambane province uncovered the misappropriation of public funds by the director of the Provincial Anti-Drugs Office, Calisto Alberto Tomo. He was found to have colluded with the accountant in the Anti-Drugs Office, Recalda Guambe, to steal over 260,000 meticais between 2008 and 2010. The government of Mozambique has taken steps to address the problem of corruption, and some positive developments can be observed, such as the passages of several anti-corruption bills in 2012.

===Natural resources===

In 2010–2011, Anadarko Petroleum and Eni discovered the Mamba South gas field, recoverable reserves of 4,200 billion cubic metres (150 trillion cubic feet) of natural gas in the Rovuma Basin, off the coast of northern Cabo Delgado Province. Once developed, this could make Mozambique one of the largest producers of liquefied natural gas in the world. In January 2017, 3 firms were selected by the government for the natural gas development projects in the Rovuma gas basin. GL Africa Energy (UK) was awarded one of the tenders. It plans to build and operate a 250 MW gas-powered plant. Production was scheduled to start in 2018. Mozambique is now scheduled to begin exporting LNG globally in 2024. In 2019, developments in the Rovuma Basin, referred to as The Mozambique LNG Project, raised $19 billion from a consortium of investors to finally bring this LNG to market. The majority of the project and its associated operations have been awarded to the company, TotalEnergies.

===Tourism===
The country&#x27;s natural environment, wildlife, and historic heritage provide opportunities for beach, cultural, and eco-tourism. Mozambique has a great potential for growth in its gross domestic product (GDP).

The north beaches with clean water are suitable for tourism, especially those that are very far from urban centres, such the Quirimbas Islands and the archipelago of Bazaruto. The Inhambane Province attracts international divers because of the marine biodiversity and the presence of whale sharks and manta rays. There are several national parks, including Gorongosa National Park.

===Transport===


There are over of roads, but much of the network is unpaved. Like its Commonwealth neighbours, traffic circulates on the left, in spite of having not been colonised by the British. There is an international airport at Maputo, 21 other paved airports, and over 100 airstrips with unpaved runways. There are 3,750 km of navigable inland waterways. There are rail links serving principal cities and connecting the country with Malawi, Zimbabwe and South Africa. 

The Mozambican railway system developed over more than a century from three different ports on the coast that served as terminals for separate lines to the hinterland. The railroads were major targets during the Mozambican Civil War, were sabotaged by RENAMO, and are being rehabilitated. A parastatal authority, &quot;Portos e Caminhos de Ferro de Moçambique&quot; (Mozambique Ports and Railways), oversees the railway system and its connected ports, but management has been largely outsourced. Each line has its own development corridor.

 there were 3,123 km of railway track, consisting of 2,983 km of gauge, compatible with neighbouring rail systems, and a 140 km line of gauge, the Gaza Railway. The central Beira–Bulawayo railway and Sena railway route links the port of Beira to the landlocked countries of Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. To the north of this the port of Nacala is also linked by Nacala rail to Malawi, and to the south the port of Maputo is connected by the Limpopo rail, the Goba rail and the Ressano Garcia rail to Zimbabwe, Eswatini and South Africa. These networks interconnect only via neighbouring countries. A new route for coal haulage between Tete and Beira was planned to come into service by 2010, and in August 2010, Mozambique and Botswana signed a memorandum of understanding to develop a 1,100 km railway through Zimbabwe, to carry coal from Serule in Botswana to a deepwater port at Techobanine Point. Newer rolling stock has been supplied by the Indian Golden Rock workshop using Centre Buffer Couplers and air brakes.

=== Water supply and sanitation ===

Water supply and sanitation in Mozambique is characterised by low levels of access to an improved water source (estimated to be 51% in 2011), low levels of access to adequate sanitation (estimated to be 25% in 2011) and mostly poor service quality. In 2007 the government defined a strategy for water supply and sanitation in rural areas, where 62% of the population lives. In urban areas, water is supplied by informal small-scale providers and by formal providers.

Beginning in 1998, Mozambique reformed the formal part of the urban water supply sector through the creation of an independent regulatory agency called CRA, an asset-holding company called FIPAG and a public-private partnership (PPP) with a company called Aguas de Moçambique. The PPP covered those areas of the capital and of four other cities that had access to formal water supply systems. However, the PPP ended when the management contracts for four cities expired in 2008 and when the foreign partner of the company that serves the capital under a lease contract withdrew in 2010, claiming heavy losses. While urban water supply has received considerable policy attention, the government has no strategy for urban sanitation yet. External donors finance about 87.4% of all public investments in the sector.

==Demographics==
The north-central provinces of Zambezia and Nampula are the most populous, with about 45% of the population. The estimated four million Makua are the dominant group in the northern part of the country; the Sena and Shona (mostly Ndau and Manyika) are prominent in the Zambezi valley, and the Tsonga people dominate southern Mozambique. Other groups include Makonde, Yao, Swahili, Tonga, Chopi, and Nguni (including Zulu). Bantu people comprise 97.8% of the population, with the rest made up of Portuguese ancestry, Euro-Africans (&quot;mestiço&quot; people of mixed Bantu and Portuguese ancestry), and Indians. Roughly 45,000 people of Indian descent reside in Mozambique.

During Portuguese colonial rule, a large minority of people of Portuguese descent lived permanently in almost all areas of the country, and Mozambicans with Portuguese heritage at the time of independence numbered about 360,000. Many of these left the country after independence from Portugal in 1975. There are various estimates for the size of Mozambique&#x27;s Chinese community, ranging from 7,000 to 12,000 .

According to a 2011 survey, the total fertility rate was 5.9 children per woman, with 6.6 in rural areas and 4.5 in urban areas.

===Largest cities===
===Languages===

Portuguese is the official and most widely spoken language of the nation, spoken by 50.3% of the population.
Additionally, around 50% of Maputo speaks Portuguese as a native language. 

The Bantu-group languages that are indigenous to the country vary greatly in their groupings and in some cases are rather poorly appreciated and documented. Apart from its lingua franca uses in the north of the country, Swahili is spoken in a small area of the coast next to the Tanzanian border; south of this, towards Moçambique Island, Kimwani, regarded as a dialect of Swahili, is used. Immediately inland of the Swahili area, Makonde is used, separated farther inland by a small strip of Makhuwa-speaking territory from an area where Yao or ChiYao is used. Makonde and Yao belong to a different group, Yao being very close to the Mwera language of the Rondo Plateau area in Tanzania. Prepositions appear in these languages as locative prefixes prefixed to the noun and declined according to their own noun-class. Some Nyanja is used at the coast of Lake Malawi, as well as on the other side of the Lake.

Somewhat different from all of these are the languages of the eMakhuwa group, with a loss of initial k-, which means that many nouns begin with a vowel: for example, &quot;epula&quot; = &quot;rain&quot;. There is eMakhuwa proper, with the related eLomwe and eChuwabo, with a small eKoti-speaking area at the coast. In an area straddling the lower Zambezi, Sena, which belongs to the same group as Nyanja, is spoken, with areas speaking the related CiNyungwe and CiSenga further upriver.

A large Shona-speaking area extends between the Zimbabwe border and the sea: this was formerly known as the Ndau variety but now uses the orthography of the Standard Shona of Zimbabwe. Apparently similar to Shona, but lacking the tone patterns of the Shona language, and regarded by its speakers as quite separate, is CiBalke, also called Rue or Barwe, used in a small area near the Zimbabwe border. South of this area are languages of the Tsonga group. XiTswa or Tswa occurs at the coast and inland, XiTsonga or Tsonga straddles the area around the Limpopo River, including such local dialects as XiHlanganu, XiN&#x27;walungu, XiBila, XiHlengwe, and XiDzonga. This language area extends into neighbouring South Africa. Still related to these, but distinct, are GiTonga, BiTonga, and CiCopi or Chopi, spoken north of the mouth of the Limpopo, and XiRonga or Ronga, spoken in the immediate region around Maputo. The languages in this group are, judging by the short vocabularies, very vaguely similar to Zulu, but obviously not in the same immediate group. There are small Swazi- and Zulu-speaking areas in Mozambique immediately next to the Swaziland and KwaZulu-Natal borders.

===Religion===

The 2007 census found that Christians made up 59.2% of Mozambique&#x27;s population, Muslims comprised 18.9% of the population, 7.3% of the people held other beliefs, mainly animism, and 13.9% had no religious beliefs. A more recent government survey conducted by the Demographic and Health Surveys program in 2015 indicated that Catholicism had increased to 30.5% of the population, Muslims constituted 19.3%, and various Protestant groups a total of 44%. According to 2018 estimates from the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, 28% of the population is Catholic, 18% are Muslim (mostly Sunni), 15% are Zionist Christians, 12% are Protestants, 7% are members of other religious groups, and 18% have no religion.

The Catholic Church has established twelve dioceses (Beira, Chimoio, Gurué, Inhambane, Lichinga, Maputo, Nacala, Nampula, Pemba, Quelimane, Tete, and Xai-Xai; archdioceses are Beira, Maputo and Nampula). Statistics for the dioceses range from a low 5.8% Catholics in the population in the Diocese of Chimoio, to 32.50% in Quelimane diocese (Anuario catolico de Mocambique). Among the main Protestant denominations are Igreja União Baptista de Moçambique, the Assembleias de Deus, the Seventh-day Adventists, the Anglican Church of Southern Africa, the Igreja do Evangelho Completo de Deus, the Igreja Metodista Unida, the Igreja Presbiteriana de Moçambique, the Igrejas de Cristo and the Assembleia Evangélica de Deus. The work of Methodism in Mozambique started in 1890. Erwin Richards began a Methodist mission at Chicuque in Inhambane Province. The Igreja Metodista Unida em Moçambique (United Methodist Church in Mozambique) observed the 100th anniversary of Methodist presence in Mozambique in 1990. President Chissano praised the work and role of the UMC to more than 10,000 people who attended the ceremony. The United Methodist Church has tripled in size in Mozambique since 1998. There are more than 150,000 members in more than 180 congregations of the 24 districts. New pastors are ordained each year. New churches are chartered each year in each Annual Conference (north and south).

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has established a growing presence. It first began sending missionaries to Mozambique in 1999, and, as of April 2015, has more than 7,943 members. The Baháʼí Faith has been present in Mozambique since the early 1950s but did not openly identify itself in those years because of the strong influence of the Catholic Church which did not recognise it officially as a world religion. The independence in 1975 saw the entrance of new pioneers. In total, there are about 3,000 declared Baháʼís . Muslims are particularly present in the north of the country. They are organised in several &quot;tariqa&quot; or brotherhoods. Two national organisations also exist—the &quot;Conselho Islâmico de Moçambique&quot; and the &quot;Congresso Islâmico de Moçambique&quot;. There are also important Pakistani, Indian associations as well as some Shia communities. There is a very small but thriving Jewish community in Maputo.

===Health===


The fertility rate is at about 5.5 births per woman. Public expenditure on health was at 2.7% of the GDP in 2004, whereas private expenditure on health was at 1.3% in the same year. Health expenditure per capita was 42 US$ (PPP) in 2004. In the early 21st century there were 3 physicians per 100,000 people in the country. Infant mortality was at 100 per 1,000 births in 2005. The 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Mozambique is 550. This is compared with 598.8 in 2008 and 385 in 1990. The under 5 mortality rate, per 1,000 births is 147 and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5s mortality is 29. In Mozambique the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 3 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women 1 in 37.

The official HIV prevalence in 2011 was 11.5% of the population aged between 15 and 49 years. In the southern parts of Mozambique—Maputo and Gaza provinces as well as the city of Maputo—the official figures are more than twice as high as the national average. In 2011 the health authorities estimated about 1.7 million Mozambicans were HIV-positive, of whom 600,000 were in need of anti-retroviral treatment. As of December 2011, 240,000 were receiving such treatment, increasing to 416,000 in March 2014 according to the health authorities.

Mozambique has been experiencing high levels of acute food insecurity for years.

===Education===
Portuguese is the primary language of instruction in all Mozambican schools. All Mozambicans are required by law to attend school through the primary level; however, a lot of children do not go to primary school because they have to work for their families&#x27; subsistence farms for a living. In 2007, one million children still did not go to school, most of them from poor rural families, and almost half of all teachers were unqualified. Girls enrollment increased from 3 million in 2002 to 4.1 million in 2006 while the completion rate increased from 31,000 to 90,000, which testified a very poor completion rate.

After grade 7, pupils must take standardised national exams to enter secondary school, which runs from eighth to 10th grade. Space in Mozambican universities is extremely limited; thus most pupils who complete pre-university school do not immediately proceed on to university studies. Many go to work as teachers or are unemployed. There are also institutes that give more vocational training, specialising in agricultural, technical or pedagogical studies, which students may attend after grade 10 in lieu of a pre-university school. After independence from Portugal in 1975, a number of Mozambican pupils continued to be admitted every year at Portuguese high schools, polytechnical institutes and universities, through bilateral agreements between the Portuguese government and the Mozambican government.

According to 2010 estimates, the literacy rate was 56.1% (70.8% male and 42.8% female). By 2015, this had increased to 58.8% (73.3% male and 45.4% female).

==Culture==
Mozambique was ruled by Portugal, and they share a main language (Portuguese) and main religion (Roman Catholicism). But since most of the people of Mozambique are Bantus, most of the culture is native; for Bantus living in urban areas, there is some Portuguese influence. Mozambican culture also influences the Portuguese culture.

===Arts===
The Makonde are known for their wood carving and elaborate masks, which are commonly used in traditional dances. There are two different kinds of wood carvings: shetani, (evil spirits), which are mostly carved in heavy ebony, tall, and elegantly curved with symbols and nonrepresentational faces; and ujamaa, which are totem-type carvings which illustrate lifelike faces of people and various figures. These sculptures are usually referred to as &quot;family trees&quot; because they tell stories of many generations.

During the last years of the colonial period, Mozambican art reflected the oppression by the colonial power and became a symbol of resistance. After independence in 1975, modern art came into a new phase. The two best known and most influential contemporary Mozambican artists are the painter Malangatana Ngwenya and the sculptor Alberto Chissano. A lot of the post-independence art during the 1980s and 1990s reflect the political struggle, civil war, suffering, starvation, and struggle.

Dances are usually intricate, highly developed traditions throughout Mozambique. There are many different kinds of dances from tribe to tribe which are usually ritualistic in nature. The Chopi, for instance, act out battles dressed in animal skins. The men of Makua dress in colourful outfits and masks while dancing on stilts around the village for hours. Groups of women in the northern part of the country perform a traditional dance called &quot;tufo&quot;, to celebrate Islamic holidays.

=== Music ===
The music of Mozambique serves many purposes, ranging from religious expression to traditional ceremonies. Musical instruments are usually handmade. Some of the instruments used in Mozambican musical expression include drums made of wood and animal skin; the &quot;lupembe&quot;, a woodwind instrument made from animal horns or wood; and the marimba, which is a kind of xylophone native to Mozambique and other parts of Africa. The marimba is a popular instrument with the Chopi of the south-central coast, who are famous for their musical skill and dance.

===Media===

Mozambican media is heavily influenced by the government. Newspapers have relatively low circulation rates because of high newspaper prices and low literacy rates. Among the most highly circulated newspapers are state-controlled dailies, such as &quot;Noticias&quot; and &quot;Diário de Moçambique&quot;, and the weekly &quot;Domingo&quot;. Their circulation is mostly confined to Maputo. Most funding and advertising revenue is given to pro-government newspapers.

Radio programmes are the most influential form of media in the country because of ease of access. State-owned radio stations are more popular than privately owned media. This is exemplified by the government radio station, Rádio Moçambique, the most popular station in the country. It was established shortly after Mozambique&#x27;s independence. The television stations watched by Mozambicans are STV, TIM, and TVM. Through cable and satellite, viewers can access tens of other African, Asian, Brazilian, and European channels.

===Cuisine===

With a nearly 500-year presence in the country, the Portuguese have greatly influenced Mozambique&#x27;s cuisine. Staples and crops such as cassava (a starchy root of Brazilian origin) and cashew nuts (also of Brazilian origin, though Mozambique was once the largest producer of these nuts), and &quot;pãozinho&quot; (pronounced , Portuguese-style buns), were brought in by the Portuguese. The use of spices and seasonings such as bay leaves, chili peppers, fresh coriander, garlic, onions, paprika, red sweet peppers, and wine were introduced by the Portuguese, as were maize, potatoes, rice, and sugarcane. &quot;espetada&quot;, the popular &quot;inteiro com piripiri&quot; (whole chicken in piri-piri sauce), &quot;prego&quot; (steak roll), &quot;pudim&quot; (pudding), and &quot;rissóis&quot; (battered shrimp) are all Portuguese dishes commonly eaten in present-day Mozambique.

===National holidays===


===Sport===
Football () is the most popular sport in Mozambique. The national team is the Mozambique national football team. Track and field and basketball are also avidly followed in the country. Roller hockey is popular, and the best result for the national team was when they came in fourth at the 2011 FIRS Roller Hockey World Cup. The women&#x27;s beach volleyball team finished 2nd at the 2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup. The Mozambique national cricket team represents the nation in international cricket.

==See also==

*Index of Mozambique-related articles
*Outline of Mozambique

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==

*Abrahamsson, Hans, &quot;Mozambique: The Troubled Transition, from Socialist Construction to Free Market Capitalism&quot; London: Zed Books, 1995
*Bowen, Merle L., &quot;The State against the Peasantry: Rural struggles in colonial and postcolonial Mozambique&quot;, Charlottesville &amp; London, University Press of Virginia, 2000
*Cahen, Michel, &quot;Les bandits: un historien au Mozambique&quot;, Paris: Gulbenkian, 1994
*Fialho Feliciano, José, &quot;Antropologia económca dos Thonga do sul de Moçambique&quot;, Maputo, Arquivo Histórico de Moçamique, 1998
*Gengenbach, Heidi, &quot;Binding Memories: Women as Makers and Tellers of History in Magude, Mozambique&quot;. Columbia University Press, 2004. Entire Text Online 
*Mwakikagile, Godfrey, &quot;Africa and America in The Sixties: A Decade That Changed The Nation and The Destiny of A Continent&quot;, First Edition, New Africa Press, 2006, 
*Mwakikagile, Godfrey, &quot;Nyerere and Africa: End of an Era&quot;, Third Edition, New Africa Press, 2006, &quot;Chapter Seven: &quot;The Struggle for Mozambique: The Founding of FRELIMO in Tanzania,&quot; pp. 206–225, 
* Morier-Genoud, Eric, Cahen, Michel and do Rosário, Domingos M. (eds), &quot;The War Within New Perspectives on the Civil War in Mozambique, 1976–1992&quot; (Oxford: James Currey, 2018)
* Morier-Genoud, Eric, &quot;Mozambique since 1989: Shaping democracy after Socialism&quot; in A.R.Mustapha &amp; L.Whitfield (eds), &quot;Turning Points in African Democracy&quot;, Oxford: James Currey, 2008, pp. 153–166.
*Newitt, Malyn, &quot;A History of Mozambique&quot; Indiana University Press. 
*Pitcher, Anne, &quot;Transforming Mozambique: The politics of privatisation, 1975–2000&quot; Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2002
*Varia, &quot;Religion in Mozambique&quot;, &quot;LFM: Social sciences &amp; Missions&quot; No. 17, December 2005
==External links==

Government:
* Republic of Mozambique Official Government Portal

General information:
* Social Atlas from World Bank
* Country Profile from BBC News
* Mozambique. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Mozambique from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* Key Development Forecasts for Mozambique from International Futures
* Mozambique Population Worldometer

Tourism:
* —Niassa National Reserve official website

Health:
* The State of the World&#x27;s Midwifery – Mozambique Country Profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="0" end="10" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="27" end="49" title="Mozambique" label="Republic of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569281" start="75" end="91" title="Southeast Africa" label="Southeast Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="134" end="142" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="157" end="163" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="168" end="174" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="193" end="201" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="219" end="227" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="232" end="244" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="277" end="292" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="315" end="322" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="324" end="331" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="337" end="347" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="355" end="373" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="419" end="425" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="570" end="585" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="691" end="696" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="718" end="723" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="739" end="752" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="787" end="797" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="896" end="911" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Portuguese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002270" start="924" end="943" title="Mozambican War of Independence" label="gained independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q617078" start="966" end="1002" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Mozambique" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="1114" end="1149" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="civil war lasting from 1977 to 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="1250" end="1271" title="Presidential system" label="presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499139" start="1299" end="1323" title="Insurgency in Cabo Delgado" label="low-intensity insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="1571" end="1578" title="Mollusca" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="1581" end="1591" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="1597" end="1607" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="1905" end="1924" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="1987" end="2016" title="Least developed countries" label="most underdeveloped countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="2046" end="2060" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="2062" end="2079" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809938" start="2093" end="2103" title="List of countries by inequality-adjusted Human Development Index" label="inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="2116" end="2131" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="2286" end="2299" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2354" end="2364" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="2455" end="2468" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="2573" end="2579" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33882" start="2581" end="2588" title="Makhuwa language" label="Makhuwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="2590" end="2594" title="Sena language" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="2596" end="2604" title="Chewa language" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="2610" end="2617" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165062" start="2619" end="2628" title="Glottolog" label="Glottolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913701" start="2788" end="2810" title="religion in Mozambique" label="religion in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="2876" end="2905" title="Traditional African religions" label="African traditional religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q331099" start="2983" end="3003" title="Island of Mozambique" label="Island of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q17045329" start="3025" end="3040" title="Mussa Bin Bique" label="Mussa Bin Bique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="3246" end="3259" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="3408" end="3414" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="3454" end="3459" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="3647" end="3654" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021159" start="3954" end="3972" title="Indian Ocean trade" label="Indian Ocean trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071760" start="4061" end="4069" title="Chibuene" label="Chibuene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="4331" end="4346" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361151" start="4424" end="4430" title="Sofala" label="Sofala"/>
<link wikidata="Q541656" start="4432" end="4439" title="Angoche" label="Angoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q596092" start="4691" end="4710" title="Kingdom of Zimbabwe" label="Kingdom of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q854468" start="4715" end="4732" title="Kingdom of Mutapa" label="Kingdom of Mutapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741475" start="4836" end="4841" title="Kilwa Kisiwani" label="Kilwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="4846" end="4853" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q331099" start="4904" end="4924" title="Island of Mozambique" label="Island of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q990080" start="5019" end="5025" title="Nacala" label="Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="5523" end="5536" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="5548" end="5565" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q225675" start="5927" end="5931" title="Sena, Mozambique" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q388242" start="5936" end="5940" title="Tete, Mozambique" label="Tete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239108" start="6185" end="6190" title="prazo" label="prazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808942" start="7110" end="7118" title="Chikunda" label="Chikunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q379080" start="7882" end="7892" title="Fort Jesus" label="Fort Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570435" start="7896" end="7910" title="Mombasa Island" label="Mombasa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="8024" end="8030" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820403" start="8142" end="8148" title="Mazrui" label="Mazrui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505216" start="8153" end="8164" title="History of Oman" label="Omani Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="8413" end="8441" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121236" start="8721" end="8739" title="Mozambique Company" label="Mozambique Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q622803" start="8745" end="8761" title="Zambezia Province" label="Zambezia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q429312" start="8770" end="8784" title="Niassa Company" label="Niassa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558682" start="8847" end="8859" title="Solomon Joel" label="Solomon Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="8943" end="8951" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="9163" end="9173" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="9555" end="9560" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="9628" end="9639" title="corporatist" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="9640" end="9651" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="9662" end="9678" title="Oliveira Salazar" label="Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="9720" end="9737" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807961" start="10182" end="10196" title="Mueda massacre" label="Mueda massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48885" start="10239" end="10246" title="Makonde people" label="Makonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="10393" end="10402" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="10407" end="10420" title="Decolonization" label="anti-colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="11268" end="11275" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="11445" end="11451" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002279" start="11456" end="11473" title="Portuguese Guinea" label="Portuguese Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q609836" start="11503" end="11526" title="Portuguese Colonial War" label="Portuguese Colonial War"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="12114" end="12125" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="12140" end="12160" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177976" start="12190" end="12214" title="coup of 25 November 1975" label="coup of 25 November 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q57392" start="12564" end="12579" title="Armando Guebuza" label="Armando Guebuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q617078" start="12809" end="12823" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Mozambique" label="new government"/>
<link wikidata="Q219918" start="12840" end="12853" title="Samora Machel" label="Samora Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="12868" end="12883" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="12893" end="12900" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="12967" end="12971" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12980" end="12992" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="13227" end="13233" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="13403" end="13411" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="15125" end="15150" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q203427" start="15168" end="15199" title="Zimbabwe African National Union" label="Zimbabwe African National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q950273" start="15480" end="15493" title="1986 Mozambican Tupolev Tu-134 crash" label="plane crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501766" start="15501" end="15518" title="Lebombo Mountains" label="Lebombo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799832" start="15524" end="15531" title="Mbuzini" label="Mbuzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q820036" start="15932" end="15951" title="VHF omnidirectional range" label="navigational beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208355" start="16082" end="16098" title="Joaquim Chissano" label="Joaquim Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="16292" end="16320" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="16324" end="16344" title="market economy" label="market-based economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568540" start="16512" end="16538" title="Rome General Peace Accords" label="Rome General Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q153554" start="16650" end="16679" title="Community of Sant&amp;#x27;Egidio" label="Community of Sant&amp;#x27;Egidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q488011" start="16740" end="16780" title="United Nations Operation in Mozambique" label="peacekeeping force of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q383419" start="17040" end="17055" title="Afonso Dhlakama" label="Afonso Dhlakama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="17120" end="17143" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="17223" end="17237" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="17448" end="17475" title="internally displaced person" label="internally displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q859770" start="17798" end="17817" title="2000 Mozambique flood" label="widespread flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q968260" start="18001" end="18015" title="Carlos Cardoso (journalist)" label="Carlos Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q297057" start="18310" end="18327" title="Frederick Chiluba" label="Frederick Chiluba"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="18353" end="18366" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57392" start="18464" end="18479" title="Armando Guebuza" label="Armando Guebuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448556" start="18804" end="18816" title="Filipe Nyusi" label="Filipe Nyusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17332331" start="18916" end="18936" title="RENAMO insurgency (2013–2021)" label="insurgency by RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="19540" end="19546" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="19552" end="19557" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q49330" start="19559" end="19582" title="Médecins Sans Frontières" label="Doctors Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="19588" end="19606" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="19676" end="19693" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408310" start="19699" end="19712" title="Wartime sexual violence" label="sexual abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566773" start="19799" end="19815" title="2019 Mozambican general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499139" start="20214" end="20251" title="Insurgency in Cabo Delgado" label="ongoing insurgency by Islamist groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="20272" end="20276" title="Islamic State" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q20201709" start="20318" end="20331" title="Vamizi Island" label="Vamizi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q106232250" start="20439" end="20461" title="Battle of Palma" label="Islamist rebels seized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315681" start="20474" end="20479" title="Palma, Mozambique" label="Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q622799" start="20592" end="20598" title="Niassa Province" label="Niassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="20721" end="20727" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="20744" end="20752" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="20767" end="20779" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="20798" end="20806" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="20820" end="20826" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="20831" end="20837" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="20856" end="20864" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390214" start="20946" end="20949" title="10th parallel south" label="10°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390386" start="20954" end="20958" title="27th parallel south" label="27°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277379" start="20975" end="20978" title="30th meridian east" label="30°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185904" start="20983" end="20987" title="41st meridian east" label="41°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516857" start="21234" end="21240" title="Mount Namuli" label="Namuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q537348" start="21333" end="21339" title="miombo" label="miombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501766" start="21438" end="21455" title="Lebombo Mountains" label="Lebombo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="21642" end="21653" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Niassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075037" start="21667" end="21678" title="Lake Chiuta" label="Lake Chiuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q755015" start="21680" end="21692" title="Cahora Bassa" label="Cahora Bassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477724" start="21697" end="21708" title="Lake Shirwa" label="Lake Shirwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="21749" end="21755" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="21757" end="21762" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q323801" start="21764" end="21771" title="Nampula" label="Nampula"/>
<link wikidata="Q388242" start="21773" end="21777" title="Tete, Mozambique" label="Tete"/>
<link wikidata="Q318306" start="21779" end="21788" title="Quelimane" label="Quelimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q638509" start="21790" end="21797" title="Chimoio" label="Chimoio"/>
<link wikidata="Q498048" start="21799" end="21804" title="Pemba, Mozambique" label="Pemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q456577" start="21806" end="21815" title="Inhambane" label="Inhambane"/>
<link wikidata="Q318299" start="21817" end="21824" title="Xai-Xai" label="Xai-Xai"/>
<link wikidata="Q667650" start="21829" end="21837" title="Lichinga" label="Lichinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="21908" end="21918" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="21947" end="21957" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q62023294" start="22393" end="22397" title="Cyclone Idai" label="Idai"/>
<link wikidata="Q63341205" start="22402" end="22409" title="Cyclone Kenneth" label="Kenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607742" start="22988" end="23004" title="List of birds of Mozambique" label="740 bird species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627019" start="23093" end="23116" title="List of mammals of Mozambique" label="over 200 mammal species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490348" start="23176" end="23194" title="Selous&amp;#x27; zebra" label="Selous&amp;#x27; zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767198" start="23196" end="23224" title="Vincent&amp;#x27;s bush squirrel" label="Vincent&amp;#x27;s bush squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969187" start="23273" end="23288" title="List of protected areas of Mozambique" label="Protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995189" start="23474" end="23500" title="Constitution of Mozambique" label="Constitution of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q384419" start="23521" end="23546" title="List of presidents of Mozambique" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="23683" end="23699" title="Direct election" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345072" start="23745" end="23759" title="List of prime ministers of Mozambique" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848595" start="24008" end="24032" title="Assembly of the Republic of Mozambique" label="Assembly of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="24082" end="24109" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q198527" start="24309" end="24340" title="Mozambique Defence Armed Forces" label="Mozambique Defence Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="25452" end="25460" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="25574" end="25583" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q359269" start="25838" end="25854" title="Frontline States" label="Frontline States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301424" start="25865" end="25879" title="Nkomati Accord" label="Nkomati Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="26108" end="26117" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="26734" end="26744" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="26749" end="26776" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="26831" end="26837" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="26839" end="26846" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="26851" end="26858" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="26892" end="26899" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="26908" end="26919" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="27277" end="27297" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="27447" end="27460" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="27469" end="27507" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="27561" end="27599" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of the Islamic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="27790" end="27813" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="27909" end="27923" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="28010" end="28052" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129158" start="28227" end="28238" title="LGBT rights in Mozambique" label="LGBT people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="28538" end="28557" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="28581" end="28584" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433120" start="28612" end="28641" title="Heavily indebted poor countries" label="heavily indebted poor country"/>
<link wikidata="Q200753" start="28831" end="28838" title="Mozambican metical" label="metical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="28907" end="28918" title="United States dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181907" start="28920" end="28938" title="South African rand" label="South African rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="28948" end="28952" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="29090" end="29128" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="29146" end="29156" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="29245" end="29251" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q377302" start="29263" end="29276" title="trade barrier" label="trade barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="29283" end="29293" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q878333" start="30266" end="30278" title="Tillage" label="uncultivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="30528" end="30551" title="Nationalization" label="state-owned enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="30562" end="30572" title="Privatization" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592497" start="31261" end="31266" title="Graft (politics)" label="graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="31513" end="31539" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q483637" start="32250" end="32268" title="Anadarko Petroleum" label="Anadarko Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="32273" end="32276" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279799" start="32292" end="32313" title="Mamba South gas field" label="Mamba South gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q746779" start="32414" end="32420" title="Ruvuma River" label="Rovuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="32552" end="32573" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="33349" end="33360" title="eco-tourism" label="eco-tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80378" start="33728" end="33739" title="whale shark" label="whale shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536199" start="33745" end="33754" title="manta ray" label="manta ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q113952" start="33801" end="33824" title="Gorongosa National Park" label="Gorongosa National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="33915" end="33927" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="33940" end="33970" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="traffic circulates on the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="34163" end="34172" title="Navigability" label="navigable"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="34597" end="34607" title="State-owned enterprise" label="parastatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528971" start="34994" end="35006" title="Gaza Railway" label="Gaza Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84498314" start="35020" end="35042" title="Beira–Bulawayo railway" label="Beira–Bulawayo railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84510548" start="35047" end="35059" title="Sena railway" label="Sena railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10351869" start="35076" end="35089" title="port of Beira" label="port of Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231208" start="35175" end="35189" title="port of Nacala" label="port of Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q48801157" start="35208" end="35219" title="Nacala railway" label="Nacala rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494243" start="35252" end="35266" title="port of Maputo" label="port of Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18468998" start="35287" end="35299" title="Limpopo railway" label="Limpopo rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q84321383" start="35305" end="35314" title="Goba railway" label="Goba rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17521473" start="35323" end="35342" title="Pretoria–Maputo railway" label="Ressano Garcia rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="35573" end="35581" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q171143" start="35686" end="35692" title="Serule" label="Serule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692674" start="35728" end="35739" title="Techobanine" label="Techobanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579743" start="35799" end="35810" title="Golden Rock Railway Workshop" label="Golden Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383761" start="35826" end="35848" title="Janney coupler" label="Centre Buffer Couplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196198" start="35853" end="35863" title="Railway air brake" label="air brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973812" start="35903" end="35944" title="Water supply and sanitation in Mozambique" label="Water supply and sanitation in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491872" start="35992" end="36013" title="improved water source" label="improved water source"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="36572" end="36598" title="public-private partnership" label="public-private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261884" start="37338" end="37343" title="Makua people" label="Makua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478487" start="37408" end="37412" title="Sena people" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q642613" start="37417" end="37422" title="Shona people" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q760787" start="37431" end="37435" title="Ndau people" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q760720" start="37440" end="37447" title="Manyika" label="Manyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q902325" start="37494" end="37500" title="Tsonga people" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48885" start="37559" end="37566" title="Makonde people" label="Makonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255780" start="37568" end="37571" title="Yao people (East Africa)" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="37573" end="37580" title="Swahili people" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431896" start="37582" end="37587" title="Tonga people (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964471" start="37589" end="37594" title="Chopi people" label="Chopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268405" start="37600" end="37605" title="Nguni people" label="Nguni"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="37617" end="37621" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="37624" end="37629" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232666" start="37696" end="37706" title="Portuguese Mozambicans" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37732" end="37751" title="Creole peoples#Africa" label="&amp;quot;mestiço&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516782" start="37838" end="37852" title="Indians in Mozambique" label="Indian descent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38033" end="38052" title="White Africans of European ancestry#Portuguese in Africa" label="Portuguese heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404162" start="38222" end="38257" title="ethnic Chinese in Mozambique" label="Mozambique&amp;#x27;s Chinese community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="38865" end="38872" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042206" start="38984" end="38991" title="Mwani language" label="Kimwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35172" start="39076" end="39083" title="Makonde language" label="Makonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q33882" start="39138" end="39145" title="Makhuwa language" label="Makhuwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36902" start="39184" end="39187" title="Yao language" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944725" start="39280" end="39294" title="Mwera language" label="Mwera language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798551" start="39302" end="39315" title="Rondo Plateau" label="Rondo Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="39468" end="39474" title="Chewa language" label="Nyanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35824" start="39802" end="39808" title="Lomwe language" label="eLomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118412" start="39813" end="39821" title="Chuwabu language" label="eChuwabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29930" start="39836" end="39841" title="Koti language" label="eKoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="39911" end="39915" title="Sena language" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="40051" end="40056" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="40483" end="40489" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085051" start="40507" end="40511" title="Tswa language" label="Tswa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437616" start="40837" end="40842" title="Chopi language" label="Chopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520717" start="40901" end="40906" title="Ronga language" label="Ronga"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="41412" end="41419" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81886" start="41506" end="41536" title="Demographic and Health Surveys" label="Demographic and Health Surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889635" start="41732" end="41791" title="United States Commission on International Religious Freedom" label="United States Commission on International Religious Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q849391" start="41867" end="41885" title="Zionist churches" label="Zionist Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="42153" end="42158" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="42160" end="42166" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q323801" start="42171" end="42178" title="Nampula" label="Nampula"/>
<link wikidata="Q680241" start="42266" end="42284" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Chimoio" label="Diocese of Chimoio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994042" start="42395" end="42430" title="United Baptist Church of Mozambique" label="Igreja União Baptista de Moçambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031397" start="42436" end="42455" title="Assembleias de Deus" label="Assembleias de Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="42461" end="42483" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q540785" start="42489" end="42523" title="Anglican Church of Southern Africa" label="Anglican Church of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994015" start="42571" end="42593" title="Igreja Metodista Unida" label="Igreja Metodista Unida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994032" start="42599" end="42633" title="Igreja Presbiteriana de Moçambique" label="Igreja Presbiteriana de Moçambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q39277617" start="42639" end="42656" title="Igrejas de Cristo" label="Igrejas de Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="43373" end="43420" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="43572" end="43584" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="44010" end="44016" title="tariqa" label="tariqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="44026" end="44038" title="Fraternity" label="brotherhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="44672" end="44688" title="Infant mortality" label="Infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145559" start="45115" end="45129" title="List of countries by HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate" label="HIV prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="47205" end="47218" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746216" start="47653" end="47671" title="culture of Portugal" label="Portuguese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495646" start="47846" end="47853" title="shetani" label="shetani"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="47904" end="47909" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166287" start="47986" end="47992" title="ujamaa" label="ujamaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q384560" start="48497" end="48516" title="Malangatana Ngwenya" label="Malangatana Ngwenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711977" start="48534" end="48550" title="Alberto Chissano" label="Alberto Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851509" start="49139" end="49155" title="Tufo (dance)" label="&amp;quot;tufo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294872" start="49207" end="49226" title="music of Mozambique" label="music of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q220971" start="49545" end="49552" title="marimba" label="marimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715863" start="49774" end="49790" title="Mass media in Mozambique" label="Mozambican media"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="49922" end="49935" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572565" start="50652" end="50655" title="Televisão de Moçambique" label="TVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="50925" end="50932" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="50974" end="50980" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370943" start="51216" end="51226" title="Bay leaf" label="bay leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="51228" end="51240" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="51249" end="51258" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="51276" end="51283" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="51383" end="51392" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097864" start="51400" end="51408" title="espetada" label="espetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q512580" start="51479" end="51488" title="Peri-peri" label="piri-piri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="51707" end="51715" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q254231" start="51785" end="51818" title="Mozambique national football team" label="Mozambique national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748406" start="51892" end="51905" title="Roller hockey (quad)" label="Roller hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954140" start="51996" end="52029" title="2011 FIRS Men&amp;#x27;s Roller Hockey World Cup" label="2011 FIRS Roller Hockey World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q85731006" start="52090" end="52137" title="2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup" label="2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103087" start="52143" end="52175" title="Mozambique national cricket team" label="Mozambique national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764250" start="52201" end="52222" title="international cricket" label="international cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482149" start="52240" end="52276" title="Index of Mozambique-related articles" label="Index of Mozambique-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056528" start="52278" end="52299" title="Outline of Mozambique" label="Outline of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="54342" end="54352" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="54376" end="54384" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="54405" end="54423" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="54431" end="54458" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="54548" end="54569" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19302" wikidata="Q1128112" url="?curid=19302" title="History of Mozambique">
<text>Mozambique was a Portuguese colony, overseas province and later a member state of Portugal. It gained independence from Portugal in 1975.

==Pre-colonial history==
===Prehistoric Mozambique===
In 2007 Julio Mercader, of the University of Calgary, recovered dozens of 100,000-year-old stone tools from a deep limestone cave (Ngalue) near Lake Niassa in Mozambique showing that wild sorghum, the ancestor of the chief cereal consumed today in sub-Saharan Africa for flours, bread, porridges, and alcoholic beverages, was being consumed by &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; along with African wine palm, the false banana, pigeon peas, wild oranges, and the African &quot;potato.&quot; This is the earliest direct evidence of humans using pre-domesticated cereals anywhere in the world.

The first inhabitants of what is now Mozambique were the San hunters and gatherers, ancestors of the Khoisani peoples. Between the 1st and 5th centuries AD, waves of Bantu-speaking peoples migrated from the north through the Zambezi River valley and then gradually into the plateau and coastal areas. The Bantu were farmers and iron workers.

===Intercultural contact===
When Vasco da Gama, exploring for Portugal, reached the coast of Mozambique in 1498, Arab trading settlements had existed along the coast and outlying islands for several centuries, and political control of the coast was in the hands of a string of local sultans. Muslims had actually lived in the region for quite some time; the famous Arab historian and geographer, Al-Masudi, reported Muslims amongst Africans in the land of Sofala in 947 (modern day Mozambique, itself a derivative of the name of the Sheikh who ruled the area at the time when the Portuguese arrived, Mussa Bin Bique). Most of the local people had embraced Islam. The region lay at the southernmost end of a traditional trading world that encompassed the Red Sea, the Hadhramaut coast of Arabia and the Indian coast, described in the 1st-century coasting guide that is called the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea.

== Portuguese Mozambique (1498–1975) ==

From about 1500, Portuguese trading posts and forts displaced the Arabic commercial and military hegemony, becoming regular ports of call on the new European sea route to the east.

The voyage of Vasco da Gama around the Cape of Good Hope in 1498 marked the Portuguese entry into trade, politics, and society of the region. The Portuguese gained control of the Island of Mozambique and the port city of Sofala in the early 16th century, and by the 1530s, small groups of Portuguese traders and prospectors seeking gold penetrated the interior regions, where they set up garrisons and trading posts at Sena and Tete on the River Zambezi and tried to gain exclusive control over the gold trade.

The Portuguese attempted to legitimise and consolidate their trade and settlement positions through the creation of &quot;prazos&quot; (land grants) tied to Portuguese settlement and administration. While &quot;prazos&quot; were originally developed to be held by Portuguese, through intermarriage they became African Portuguese or African Indian centres defended by large African slave armies known as &quot;Chikunda&quot;. Historically within Mozambique there was slavery. Human beings were bought and sold by African tribal chiefs, Arab Muslim traders and Portuguese and other European traders as well. Many Mozambican slaves were supplied by tribal chiefs who raided warring tribes and sold their captives to the &quot;prazeiros&quot;.

Although Portuguese influence gradually expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy. The Portuguese were able to wrest much of the coastal trade from Arab Muslims between 1500 and 1700, but, with the Arab Muslim seizure of Portugal&#x27;s key foothold at Fort Jesus on Mombasa Island (now in Kenya) in 1698, the pendulum began to swing in the other direction. As a result, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the more lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonisation of Brazil.

During these wars, the Mazrui and Omani Arabs reclaimed much of the Indian Ocean trade, forcing the Portuguese to retreat south. Many &quot;prazos&quot; had declined by the mid-19th century, but several of them survived. During the 19th century other European powers, particularly the British (British South Africa Company) and the French (Madagascar), became increasingly involved in the trade and politics of the region around the Portuguese East African territories.
By the early 20th century the Portuguese had shifted the administration of much of Mozambique to large private companies, like the Mozambique Company, the Zambezia Company and the Niassa Company, controlled and financed mostly by the British, which established railroad lines to their neighbouring colonies (South Africa and Rhodesia). Although slavery had been legally abolished in Mozambique, at the end of the 19th century the Chartered companies enacted a forced labor policy and supplied cheap—often forced—African labour to the mines and plantations of the nearby British colonies and South Africa. The Zambezia Company, the most profitable chartered company, took over a number of smaller &quot;prazeiro&quot; holdings, and established military outposts to protect its property. The chartered companies built roads and ports to bring their goods to market including a railroad linking present day Zimbabwe with the Mozambican port of Beira.

Due to their unsatisfactory performance and the shift, under the corporatist Estado Novo regime of Oliveira Salazar, towards a stronger Portuguese control of Portuguese Empire&#x27;s economy, the companies&#x27; concessions were not renewed when they ran out. This was what happened in 1942 with the Mozambique Company, which however continued to operate in the agricultural and commercial sectors as a corporation, and had already happened in 1929 with the termination of the Niassa Company&#x27;s concession. In 1951, the Portuguese overseas colonies in Africa were rebranded as Overseas Provinces of Portugal.

==Mozambican War of Independence (1964–1974)==

As communist and anti-colonial ideologies spread out across Africa, many clandestine political movements were established in support of Mozambican independence. These movements claimed that since policies and development plans were primarily designed by the ruling authorities for the benefit of Mozambique&#x27;s Portuguese population, little attention was paid to Mozambique&#x27;s tribal integration and the development of its native communities.

This affected a majority of the indigenous population who suffered both state-sponsored discrimination and enormous social pressure. 

The Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) initiated a guerrilla campaign against Portuguese rule in September 1964. This conflict—along with the two others already initiated in the other Portuguese colonies of Angola and Portuguese Guinea—became part of the so-called Portuguese Colonial War (1961–1974). From a military standpoint, the Portuguese regular army maintained control of the population centres while the guerrilla forces sought to undermine their influence in rural and tribal areas in the north and west. As part of their response to FRELIMO, the Portuguese government began to pay more attention to creating favourable conditions for social development and economic growth.

== Independence (1975) ==

After 10 years of sporadic warfare and Portugal&#x27;s return to democracy through a leftist military coup in Lisbon, which replaced Portugal&#x27;s Estado Novo regime with a military junta (the Carnation Revolution of April 1974), FRELIMO took control of the territory. Within a year, most of the 250,000 Portuguese in Mozambique had left—some expelled by the government of the nearly independent territory, some fleeing in fear—and Mozambique became independent from Portugal on 25 June 1975. A law had been passed on the initiative of the then relatively unknown Armando Guebuza of the FRELIMO party ordering the Portuguese to leave the country in 24 hours with only 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of luggage. Unable to salvage any of their assets, most of them returned to Portugal penniless.

==Civil War (1977–1992)==
Formed in 1975, Mozambican National Resistance, an anti-communist group sponsored by the Rhodesian Intelligence Service, and the apartheid government in South Africa, launched a series of attacks on transport routes, schools and health clinics, and the country descended into civil war. In the United States, the CIA and conservatives lobbied for support to RENAMO, which was strongly resisted by the State Department, which would &quot;not recognize or negotiate with RENAMO&quot;. 

In 1984, Mozambique negotiated the Nkomati Accord with P. W. Botha and the South African government, in which Mozambique was to expel the African National Congress in exchange for South Africa stopping support of Renamo. At first both sides complied but it soon became evident that infringements were taking place on both sides and the war continued. In 1986, Mozambican President Samora Machel died in an air crash in South African territory. Although unproven, many suspect the South African government of responsibility for his death. Machel was replaced by Joaquim Chissano as president. The war was marked by huge human rights violations by both RENAMO and FRELIMO.

With support for RENAMO from South Africa drying up, in 1990 the first direct talks between the FRELIMO government and Renamo were held. In November 1990 a new constitution was adopted. Mozambique was now a multiparty state, with periodic elections, and guaranteed democratic rights. On 4 October 1992, the Rome General Peace Accords, negotiated by the Community of Sant&#x27;Egidio with the support of the United Nations, were signed in Rome between President Chissano and RENAMO leader Afonso Dhlakama, which formally took effect on the October 15, 1992. A UN Peacekeeping Force (ONUMOZ) oversaw a two-year transition to democracy. The last ONUMOZ contingents departed in early 1995.

==Democratic era (1994–present)==
Mozambique held elections in 1994, which were accepted by most parties as free and fair while still contested by many nationals and observers alike. FRELIMO won, under Joaquim Chissano, while RENAMO, led by Afonso Dhlakama, ran as the official opposition. 

In 1995, Mozambique joined the Commonwealth of Nations, becoming, at the time, the only member nation that had never been part of the British Empire.

By mid-1995, over 1.7 million refugees who had sought asylum in neighboring countries had returned to Mozambique, part of the largest repatriation witnessed in sub-Saharan Africa. An additional four million internally displaced persons had returned to their homes.

In December 1999, Mozambique held elections for a second time since the civil war, which were again won by FRELIMO. RENAMO accused FRELIMO of fraud, and threatened to return to civil war, but backed down after taking the matter to the Supreme Court and losing.

In early 2000 a cyclone caused widespread flooding in the country, killing hundreds and devastating the already precarious infrastructure. There were widespread suspicions that foreign aid resources have been diverted by powerful leaders of FRELIMO. Carlos Cardoso, a journalist investigating these allegations, was murdered but his death was not satisfactorily explained.

Indicating in 2001 that he would not run for a third term, Chissano criticized leaders who stayed on longer than he had, which was generally seen as a reference to Zambian president Frederick Chiluba, who at the time was considering a third term, and Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe, then in his fourth term. Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on December 1–2, 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote. His opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament. A coalition of RENAMO and several small parties won the 90 remaining seats. Armando Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on February 2, 2005.

Much of the economic recovery which has followed the end of the Mozambican Civil War (1977–1992) is being led by investors and tourists from neighbour South Africa and from East Asia. A number of returning Portuguese nationals have also invested in the country as well as some Italian organizations. Coal and gas have grown to become large sectors. The income per capita tripled over twenty years since the civil war.

Mozambique was declared to be free of land mines in 2015, following a 22-year effort to remove explosive devices planted during the War of Independence and Civil War.

The candidate of the ruling Mozambican Liberation Front&#x27;s (Frelimo) Filipe Nyusi has been the President of Mozambique since January 2015 after winning the election in October 2014.

President Filipe Nyusi was re-elected after a landslide victory in the 2019 general elections. Frelimo won 184 seats, Renamo got 60 seats and the MDM party received the remaining six in the National Assembly. The opposition did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud and irregularities. Frelimo secured two-thirds majority in parliament which allowed Frelimo to re-adjust the constitution without needing the agreement of the opposition.

In October 2024 the ruling FRELIMO party, which has increasingly become marked with growing concerns of authoritarianism and impunity amid the controversies surrounding the 2023 local elections and the 2019 general election, was declared the winner of the general election, with its leader, Daniel Chapo, proclaimed as president-elect. This was disputed by Venâncio Mondlane, with his party PODEMOS claiming Mondlane had received 53% of the vote using data from their poll observers. The result was also questioned by the Episcopal Conference of Mozambique and the European Union, while deadly protests broke out over the election results, with at least 250 deaths, mostly demonstrators being killed by police and army forces.

==See also==
*History of Africa
*History of Southern Africa
*List of heads of state of Mozambique
*Politics of Mozambique 
* Cities in Mozambique:
** Beira history and timeline 
** Maputo history and timeline

==References==
==External links==

*Background Note: Mozambique
* – article with an early 20th Century Catholic viewpoint.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="0" end="10" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="17" end="34" title="Portuguese colony" label="Portuguese colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="36" end="53" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="overseas province"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056710" start="324" end="330" title="Ngalue" label="Ngalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="832" end="835" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="836" end="857" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunters and gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="876" end="883" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="941" end="955" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="1000" end="1007" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="1091" end="1097" title="farmer" label="farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="1151" end="1164" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="1401" end="1407" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363789" start="1483" end="1497" title="Historiography of early Islam" label="Arab historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="1514" end="1523" title="Al-Masudi" label="Al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17045329" start="1718" end="1733" title="Mussa Bin Bique" label="Mussa Bin Bique"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="1872" end="1879" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517159" start="1885" end="1895" title="Hadhramaut" label="Hadhramaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q664162" start="1997" end="2027" title="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea" label="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="2267" end="2280" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="2292" end="2309" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q331099" start="2432" end="2452" title="Island of Mozambique" label="Island of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361151" start="2474" end="2480" title="Sofala" label="Sofala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="2565" end="2576" title="prospecting" label="prospectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q225675" start="2672" end="2676" title="Sena, Mozambique" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q388242" start="2681" end="2685" title="Tete, Mozambique" label="Tete"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="2699" end="2706" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247147" start="3174" end="3182" title="Kunda people" label="Chikunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q379080" start="3841" end="3851" title="Fort Jesus" label="Fort Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570435" start="3855" end="3869" title="Mombasa Island" label="Mombasa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="3983" end="3989" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820403" start="4120" end="4126" title="Mazrui" label="Mazrui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505216" start="4131" end="4142" title="History of Oman" label="Omani Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="4391" end="4419" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="4530" end="4552" title="Portuguese East Africa" label="Portuguese East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121236" start="4698" end="4716" title="Mozambique Company" label="Mozambique Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q622803" start="4722" end="4738" title="Zambezia Province" label="Zambezia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q429312" start="4747" end="4761" title="Niassa Company" label="Niassa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="5101" end="5106" title="mining" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="5111" end="5121" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="5508" end="5513" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="5581" end="5592" title="corporatist" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="5593" end="5604" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="5615" end="5631" title="Oliveira Salazar" label="Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="5674" end="5691" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="6195" end="6208" title="anti-colonial" label="anti-colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="6808" end="6815" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="6985" end="6991" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002279" start="6996" end="7013" title="Portuguese Guinea" label="Portuguese Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q609836" start="7043" end="7066" title="Portuguese Colonial War" label="Portuguese Colonial War"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="7601" end="7607" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="7640" end="7651" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701778" start="7666" end="7680" title="National Salvation Junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="7686" end="7706" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q57392" start="8057" end="8072" title="Armando Guebuza" label="Armando Guebuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="8360" end="8374" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="8398" end="8406" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="8438" end="8447" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="8622" end="8625" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301424" start="8829" end="8843" title="Nkomati Accord" label="Nkomati Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q212286" start="8849" end="8860" title="Pieter Willem Botha" label="P. W. Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="8932" end="8957" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q219918" start="9175" end="9188" title="Samora Machel" label="Samora Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208355" start="9355" end="9371" title="Joaquim Chissano" label="Joaquim Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="9445" end="9451" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="9456" end="9463" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568540" start="9773" end="9799" title="Rome General Peace Accords" label="Rome General Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q153554" start="9819" end="9848" title="Community of Sant&amp;#x27;Egidio" label="Community of Sant&amp;#x27;Egidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9873" end="9887" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q383419" start="9954" end="9969" title="Afonso Dhlakama" label="Afonso Dhlakama"/>
<link wikidata="Q488011" start="10023" end="10046" title="United Nations Operation in Mozambique" label="A UN Peacekeeping Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="10476" end="10499" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="10579" end="10593" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="10803" end="10830" title="internally displaced person" label="internally displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="11140" end="11147" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q859770" start="11155" end="11174" title="2000 Mozambique flood" label="widespread flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q968260" start="11374" end="11388" title="Carlos Cardoso (journalist)" label="Carlos Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="11662" end="11668" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297057" start="11680" end="11697" title="Frederick Chiluba" label="Frederick Chiluba"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="11749" end="11757" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="11770" end="11783" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57392" start="11907" end="11922" title="Armando Guebuza" label="Armando Guebuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q383419" start="11971" end="11986" title="Afonso Dhlakama" label="Afonso Dhlakama"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="12294" end="12314" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="Mozambican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002270" start="12781" end="12800" title="Mozambican War of Independence" label="War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="12805" end="12814" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15197253" start="12977" end="12985" title="2014 Mozambican general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448556" start="13014" end="13026" title="Filipe Nyusi" label="Filipe Nyusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566773" start="13075" end="13097" title="2019 Mozambican general election" label="2019 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q125849007" start="13632" end="13652" title="2023 Mozambican local elections" label="2023 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566773" start="13661" end="13682" title="2019 Mozambican general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q116686989" start="13711" end="13731" title="2024 Mozambican general election" label="the general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q97058466" start="13750" end="13762" title="Daniel Chapo" label="Daniel Chapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q384419" start="13778" end="13793" title="President of Mozambique" label="president-elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q111841675" start="13816" end="13833" title="Venâncio Mondlane" label="Venâncio Mondlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q64657923" start="13850" end="13857" title="Optimist Party for the Development of Mozambique" label="PODEMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667969" start="13981" end="14015" title="Episcopal Conference of Mozambique" label="Episcopal Conference of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="14024" end="14038" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626155" start="14046" end="14097" title="2024–2025 Mozambican protests" label="deadly protests broke out over the election results"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="14201" end="14218" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158749" start="14220" end="14246" title="History of Southern Africa" label="History of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q384419" start="14248" end="14284" title="List of heads of state of Mozambique" label="List of heads of state of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154823" start="14286" end="14308" title="Politics of Mozambique" label="Politics of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14343" end="14350" title="Beira, Mozambique#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q48792182" start="14355" end="14363" title="Timeline of Beira, Mozambique" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14375" end="14382" title="Maputo#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072040" start="14387" end="14395" title="Timeline of Maputo" label="timeline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19303" wikidata="Q1987424" url="?curid=19303" title="Geography of Mozambique">
<text>The geography of [[Mozambique]] consists mostly of coastal lowlands with uplands in its center and high plateaus in the northwest. There are also mountains in the western portion. The country is located on the east coast of southern Africa, directly west of the island of Madagascar. Mozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons, a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September.

==Physical features==
===The coast===
The coastline extends from 26° 52′ S. to 10° 40′ S., and from south to north makes a double curve with a general trend outward to the east. It has a length of .

The southern coastline is characterized by sandy beaches backed by coastal dunes. The dunes can reach up to in height, and older dunes are vegetated. Behind the coastal dunes are lagoons, including river estuaries, closed saline lagoons, and salt lakes. Some north of the South African frontier is the deep indentation of Maputo Bay (formerly Delagoa Bay). The land then turns outward to Cape Correntes, a little north of which is Inhambane Bay. Bending westward again and passing the Bazaruto Archipelago of several small islands, of which the chief is Bazaruto.

Mozambique&#x27;s central coast, from Bazaruto Island north to Angoche Island, is known as the Bight of Sofala or Sofala Bay. It is also known as the Swamp Coast, and is characterized by extensive mangrove swamps and coastal wetlands. As in the south, the coastline is generally low, and harbours are few and poor. Beira is the principal seaport on the central coast, with rail and highway links to the interior.

The bay has an area of . The continental shelf is up to wide at Beira, and is Mozambique&#x27;s most important marine fishery. Several large rivers, including the Save, Pungwe, and Zambezi, create coastal estuaries and river deltas, of which the Zambezi delta is the largest. North of the Zambezi, the small coralline islands of the Primeiras and Segundas Archipelago lie parallel to the coast.

The northern coast is much indented, abounding in rocky headlands and rugged cliffs, with an almost continuous fringe of islands. On one of these islands is Mozambique, and immediately north of that port is Conducia Bay. Somewhat farther north are two large bays, Fernao Veloso Bay and Memba Bay. Nacala on Fernao Veloso Bay is the principal seaport on the northern coast, with a rail link to Malawi and the coalfields of northwestern Mozambique. North of Fernao Veloso and Memba bays is Pemba Bay, where there is commodious anchorage for heavy draught vessels. North of Pemba Bay the Quirimbas Islands lie offshore, and numerous bays and estuaries indent the coast. Cape Delgado, the northernmost point on Mozambique&#x27;s coast, is part of the delta of the Ruvuma River, which forms Mozambique&#x27;s border with Tanzania.

The northern coast is part of the East African coral coast, a marine ecoregion that extends along the coasts of northern Mozambique, Tanzania, and Kenya. Along the northern coast the Mozambique Current, which flows south between Madagascar and the continent is close to the coast and scours out all the softer material, while at the same time the corals are building in deep waters.

A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 2,029km² of tidal flats in Mozambique, making it the 16th ranked country in terms of how much tidal flat occurs there.

===Orography===
Orographically the backbone of the country is the mountain chain which forms the eastern escarpment of the continental plateau. It does not present a uniformly abrupt descent to the plains, but in places, as in the lower Zambezi district, slopes gradually to the coast. The Lebombo Mountains, behind Delagoa Bay, nowhere exceed in height. The Manica Plateau, farther north between the Save and Zambezi rivers, is higher, rising towards the Eastern Highlands along the border with Zimbabwe. Monte Binga (), on the border with Zimbabwe, is Mozambique&#x27;s highest peak. Mount Gorongosa () lies north-east of the Manica Plateau, and is, like it, of granitic formation. Gorongosa, rising isolated with precipitous outer slopes, has been likened in its aspect to a frowning citadel. East of Gorongosa a graben valley extends from the Zambezi to Pungwe Bay, the southern extension of the African Rift Valley. The Cheringoma Plateau lies east of the graben, sloping gently towards the coast.

The chief mountain range lies north of the Zambezi, and east of Lake Chilwa, namely, the Namuli Mountains, in which Namuli Peak rises to , and Molisani, Mruli and Mresi attain altitudes of These mountains are covered with magnificent forests. Farther north the river basins are divided by well-marked ranges with heights of and over. Near the south-east shore of Lake Malawi there is a high range () with an abrupt descent to the lake — some in . The country between Malawi and Ibo is remarkable for the number of fantastically-shaped granite peaks, or inselbergs, which rise from the plateau. 

The plateau lands west of the escarpment are of moderate elevation — perhaps averaging . It is, however, only along the Zambezi and north of that river that Mozambique&#x27;s territory reaches to the continental plateau. This northern plain has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Eastern miombo woodlands ecoregion.

===Rivers===

Besides the Zambezi, the most considerable river in Mozambique is the Limpopo which enters the Indian Ocean about north of Maputo Bay. The other Mozambican rivers with considerable drainage areas are the Komati, Save, Buzi, and Pungwe south of the Zambezi, and the Licungo (Likungo), Ligonha, Lúrio, Montepuez (Montepuesi or Mtepwesi), Messalo (or Msalu), and Ruvuma (or Rovuma) with its affluent the Lugenda (or Lujenda), north of the Zambezi.

The Save (or Sabi) rises in Zimbabwe at an elevation of over , and after flowing south for over turns east and pierces the mountains some from the coast, being joined near the Zimbabwe-Mozambique frontier by the Lundi. Cataracts entirely prevent navigation above this point.
Below the Lundi confluence the bed of the Save becomes considerably broader, varying from . In the rainy season the Save is a large stream and even in the &quot;dries&quot; it can be navigated from its mouth by shallow draught steamers for over . Its general direction through Mozambique is east by north. At its mouth it forms a delta in extent.

The Buzi () and Pungwe () are streams north of and similar in character to the Save. They both rise in the Manica Highlands and enter the ocean in a large estuary, their mouths apart. The lower reaches of both streams are navigable, the Buzi for , the Pungwe for about . The port of Beira is at the mouth of the Pungwe.

Of the north-Zambezi streams the Licungo, rising in the hills south-east of Lake Chilwa, flows south and enters the ocean not far north of Quelimane. The Lúrio, rising in the Namuli Mountains, flows north-east, having a course of some . The Montepurez and the Messalo drain the country between the Lúrio and Ruvuma basins. Their banks are in general well-defined and the wet season rise seems fairly constant.

===Somali Plate===
Geologists have divided the Phanerozoic era of Mozambique&#x27;s geology into the Karoo and post-Karoo era. This terminology is mostly used pertaining to studies of the structural and stratigraphic composition of rocks in the Zambezi valley. Mozambique entirely lies within the Somali Plate.

== Climate ==

Mozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons, a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September. Climatic conditions vary depending on altitude. Rainfall is heavy along the coast and decreases in the north and south. 

Annual precipitation varies from depending on the region with an average of . Cyclones are also common during the wet season. Average temperature ranges in Maputo are from in July to in February.





== Facts ==
; Area:
:*Total: 
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 35th
:* Land: 786,380 km²
:*Water: 13,000 km²

; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: approximately the size of New South Wales
:* Canada comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Newfoundland and Labrador
:* United States comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Colorado
:* EU comparative: slightly less than larger than Spain

Capital
*Maputo (Lourenço Marques)

Major Cities
*Matola
*Nampula
*Beira
*Chimoio
*Nacala
*Quelimane
*Tete
*Lichinga
*Pemba (Porto Amelia)

Other Cities
*Angoche (António Enes)

Land boundaries:
&quot;total:&quot; 4,571 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;border countries:&quot;
Malawi 1,569 km, South Africa 491 km, Eswatini 105 km, Tanzania 756 km, Zambia 419 km, Zimbabwe 1,231 km

Coastline:
2,470 km

Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;territorial sea:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;exclusive economic zone:&quot;
 and 

Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest point:&quot;
Indian Ocean 0 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest point:&quot;
Monte Binga 2 436 m

Natural resources:
coal, titanium, natural gas, hydropower, tantalum, graphite

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;arable land:&quot;
6.51% (2011), 5.43% (2005 est.), 3.98% (1998 est.)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent crops:&quot;
0.25% (2011), 0.29% (2005 est.), 0.29% (1998 est.)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot;
93.24% (2011), 94.28% (2005 est.), 95.73% (1998 est.)

Irrigated land:
 (2003)

Total renewable water resources:
217.1 km3 (2011)

Natural hazards:
severe droughts; devastating cyclones and floods occur in central and southern provinces

Environment — current issues:
a long civil war and recurrent drought in the hinterlands have resulted in increased migration of the population to urban and coastal areas with adverse environmental consequences; desertification; pollution of surface and coastal waters; elephant poaching for ivory is a problem

Environment — international agreements:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;party to:&quot;
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

Ecoregions
* Eastern miombo woodlands
* Eastern Zimbabwe montane forest–grassland mosaic
* Maputaland coastal forest mosaic
* Southern miombo woodlands
* Southern Rift montane forest–grassland mosaic
* Southern Zanzibar–Inhambane coastal forest mosaic
* Zambezian coastal flooded savanna
* Zambezian flooded grasslands
* Zambezian halophytics
* Zambezian and mopane woodlands
* East African mangroves

==Extreme points==

This is a list of the extreme points of Mozambique, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point — Mouth of the Rovuma River, Cabo Delgado Province
* Easternmost point — unnamed headland east of the village of Amade, Nampula Province
* Southernmost point — unnamed location on the border with South Africa east of the South African town of Mosi, Maputo Province
* Westernmost point — the point where the border with Zambia enters the Luangwa river, Tete Province

==See also==
*Mozambique
*Monte Muambe
*Mount Lico
*Mount Mabu
*Volcanoes of Mozambique

==References==


==External links==
* Mozambique . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Weather in Mozambique from Free Tourist Information
* Mozambique Geography from Southern Africa Places
* Mozambique - Geography and Environment from Oxfam&#x27;s &quot;Cool Planet&quot;
* Integrated geological interpretation of remotely sensed data to support geological mapping in Mozambique </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1987424" start="4" end="31" title="Geography of Mozambique" label="geography of [[Mozambique]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="272" end="282" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="886" end="898" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134899" start="936" end="946" title="Maputo Bay" label="Maputo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q582262" start="1002" end="1016" title="Cape Correntes" label="Cape Correntes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1045" end="1058" title="Inhambane Bay" label="Inhambane Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860206" start="1099" end="1119" title="Bazaruto Archipelago" label="Bazaruto Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q812659" start="1168" end="1176" title="Bazaruto Island" label="Bazaruto"/>
<link wikidata="Q541636" start="1242" end="1256" title="Angoche Island" label="Angoche Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q107554889" start="1274" end="1289" title="Bight of Sofala/Swamp Coast" label="Bight of Sofala"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="1494" end="1499" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q293988" start="1756" end="1760" title="Save River (Africa)" label="Save"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116568" start="1762" end="1768" title="Pungwe River" label="Pungwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="1774" end="1781" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="1812" end="1823" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243391" start="1926" end="1960" title="Primeiras and Segundas Archipelago" label="Primeiras and Segundas Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q331099" start="2146" end="2156" title="Island of Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2196" end="2208" title="Conducia Bay" label="Conducia Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404964" start="2253" end="2270" title="Fernao Veloso Bay" label="Fernao Veloso Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404962" start="2275" end="2284" title="Memba Bay" label="Memba Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="2382" end="2388" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387423" start="2477" end="2486" title="Pemba Bay" label="Pemba Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q941046" start="2574" end="2591" title="Quirimbas Islands" label="Quirimbas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728307" start="2656" end="2668" title="Cape Delgado" label="Cape Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q746779" start="2749" end="2761" title="Ruvuma River" label="Ruvuma River"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="2805" end="2813" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376877" start="2850" end="2874" title="East African coral coast" label="East African coral coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q58708" start="2999" end="3017" title="Mozambique Current" label="Mozambique Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="3045" end="3055" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="3163" end="3168" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501766" start="3676" end="3693" title="Lebombo Mountains" label="Lebombo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278183" start="3745" end="3759" title="Manica Plateau" label="Manica Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278183" start="3842" end="3859" title="Eastern Highlands" label="Eastern Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="3882" end="3890" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353678" start="3892" end="3903" title="Monte Binga" label="Monte Binga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55237011" start="3972" end="3987" title="Mount Gorongosa" label="Mount Gorongosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="4202" end="4208" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="4286" end="4305" title="African Rift Valley" label="African Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607223" start="4311" end="4329" title="Cheringoma Plateau" label="Cheringoma Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q746975" start="4454" end="4465" title="Lake Chilwa" label="Lake Chilwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516857" start="4479" end="4495" title="Namuli Mountains" label="Namuli Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="4753" end="4764" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139493" start="4943" end="4952" title="inselberg" label="inselberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="5255" end="5274" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330316" start="5290" end="5314" title="Eastern miombo woodlands" label="Eastern miombo woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="5315" end="5324" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="5411" end="5418" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="5436" end="5448" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635625" start="5545" end="5551" title="Komati River" label="Komati"/>
<link wikidata="Q293988" start="5553" end="5557" title="Save River (Africa)" label="Save"/>
<link wikidata="Q855412" start="5559" end="5563" title="Buzi River (Mozambique)" label="Buzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116568" start="5569" end="5575" title="Pungwe River" label="Pungwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786422" start="5606" end="5613" title="Licungo River" label="Licungo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5625" end="5632" title="Ligonha River" label="Ligonha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11047093" start="5634" end="5639" title="Lúrio River" label="Lúrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391082" start="5641" end="5650" title="Montepuez River" label="Montepuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786451" start="5677" end="5684" title="Messalo River" label="Messalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q746779" start="5701" end="5707" title="Ruvuma River" label="Ruvuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876036" start="5742" end="5749" title="Lugenda River" label="Lugenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q293988" start="5791" end="5795" title="Save River (Africa)" label="Save"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5815" end="5823" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q855412" start="6414" end="6418" title="Buzi River (Mozambique)" label="Buzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116568" start="6426" end="6432" title="Pungwe River" label="Pungwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278183" start="6517" end="6533" title="Eastern Highlands" label="Manica Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="6693" end="6698" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786422" start="6764" end="6771" title="Licungo River" label="Licungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q318306" start="6870" end="6879" title="Quelimane" label="Quelimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094865" start="7208" end="7233" title="Geology of Mozambique" label="Mozambique&amp;#x27;s geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415528" start="7439" end="7451" title="Somali Plate" label="Somali Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="8111" end="8126" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="8187" end="8212" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="8286" end="8294" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8298" end="8300" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8345" end="8350" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="8361" end="8367" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109949" start="8402" end="8408" title="Matola" label="Matola"/>
<link wikidata="Q323801" start="8410" end="8417" title="Nampula" label="Nampula"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="8419" end="8424" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q638509" start="8426" end="8433" title="Chimoio" label="Chimoio"/>
<link wikidata="Q990080" start="8435" end="8441" title="Nacala" label="Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q318306" start="8443" end="8452" title="Quelimane" label="Quelimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q388242" start="8454" end="8458" title="Tete, Mozambique" label="Tete"/>
<link wikidata="Q667650" start="8460" end="8468" title="Lichinga" label="Lichinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q498048" start="8470" end="8475" title="Pemba, Mozambique" label="Pemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q541656" start="8506" end="8513" title="Angoche" label="Angoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="8615" end="8621" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="8653" end="8661" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="8670" end="8678" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="8687" end="8693" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="8702" end="8710" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="8815" end="8838" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353678" start="8963" end="8974" title="Monte Binga" label="Monte Binga"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="9632" end="9641" title="human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="9728" end="9743" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="9745" end="9754" title="water pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="9786" end="9794" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="9795" end="9803" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="9808" end="9813" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330316" start="10095" end="10119" title="Eastern miombo woodlands" label="Eastern miombo woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278183" start="10122" end="10170" title="Eastern Zimbabwe montane forest–grassland mosaic" label="Eastern Zimbabwe montane forest–grassland mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754248" start="10173" end="10205" title="Maputaland coastal forest mosaic" label="Maputaland coastal forest mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116459" start="10208" end="10233" title="Southern miombo woodlands" label="Southern miombo woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024562" start="10236" end="10281" title="Southern Rift montane forest–grassland mosaic" label="Southern Rift montane forest–grassland mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847048" start="10284" end="10333" title="Southern Zanzibar–Inhambane coastal forest mosaic" label="Southern Zanzibar–Inhambane coastal forest mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116475" start="10336" end="10369" title="Zambezian coastal flooded savanna" label="Zambezian coastal flooded savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401284" start="10372" end="10400" title="Zambezian flooded grasslands" label="Zambezian flooded grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q533041" start="10403" end="10424" title="Zambezian halophytics" label="Zambezian halophytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116464" start="10427" end="10457" title="Zambezian and mopane woodlands" label="Zambezian and mopane woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q929975" start="10460" end="10482" title="East African mangroves" label="East African mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="10544" end="10554" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q746779" start="10673" end="10685" title="Rovuma River" label="Rovuma River"/>
<link wikidata="Q466538" start="10687" end="10708" title="Cabo Delgado Province" label="Cabo Delgado Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500552" start="10771" end="10776" title="Amade" label="Amade"/>
<link wikidata="Q622794" start="10778" end="10794" title="Nampula Province" label="Nampula Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="10854" end="10866" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379658" start="10907" end="10922" title="Maputo Province" label="Maputo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="10977" end="10983" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605787" start="11010" end="11023" title="Tete Province" label="Tete Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="11039" end="11049" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904839" start="11051" end="11063" title="Monte Muambe" label="Monte Muambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741540" start="11065" end="11075" title="Mount Lico" label="Mount Lico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613668" start="11077" end="11087" title="Mount Mabu" label="Mount Mabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255725" start="11089" end="11112" title="Volcanoes of Mozambique" label="Volcanoes of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="11171" end="11189" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="11197" end="11224" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19304" wikidata="Q1357948" url="?curid=19304" title="Demographics of Mozambique">
<text>The demographics of [[Mozambique]] describes the condition and overview of Mozambique&#x27;s peoples. Demographic topics include basic education, health, and population statistics as well as identified racial and religious affiliations.

== Population ==

According to the 2022 revision of the world factbook the total population was 31,693,239 in 2022. The proportion of children below the age of 14 in 2020 was 45.57%, 51.5% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.93% was 65 years or older. A population census took place in 2017, and the preliminary results indicate a population of 28 861 863 inhabitants.
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Data refer to national projections based on 2007 census.):
== Vital statistics ==

Registration of vital events is in Mozambique not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations.
Also, according to a 2011 survey, the total fertility rate was 5.9 children per woman, with 6.6 in rural areas and 4.5 in urban areas.

===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

Fertility data by province (DHS Program):


=== Life expectancy ===

== Ethnic groups ==
Mozambique&#x27;s major ethnic groups encompass numerous subgroups with diverse languages, dialects, cultures, and histories. Many are linked to similar ethnic groups living in inland countries.
The estimated 4 million Makua are the largest ethnic group of the country and are dominant in the northern part of the country — the Sena and Shona (mostly Ndau and Manyika) are prominent in the Zambezi valley, and the Shangaan (Tsonga) dominate in southern Mozambique. Other groups include Makonde, Yao, Swahili, Tonga, Chopi, and Nguni (including Zulu). The country is also home to a growing number of white residents, most with Portuguese ancestry. During colonial rule, European residents hailed from every Mozambican province, and at the time of independence the total population was estimated at around 360,000. Most vacated the region after independence in 1975, emigrating to Portugal as &quot;retornados&quot;. There is also a larger &quot;mestiço&quot; minority with mixed African and Portuguese heritage. The remaining non-Blacks in Mozambique are primarily Indian Asiatics, who have arrived from Pakistan, Portuguese India, and numerous Arab countries. There are various estimates for the size of Mozambique&#x27;s Chinese community, ranging from 1,500 to 12,000 .
== Languages ==
Portuguese is the official and most widely spoken language of the nation, but in 2017 only 47.4% of Mozambique&#x27;s population speak Portuguese as either their first or second language, and only 16.6% speak Portuguese as their first language. Arabs, Chinese, and Indians speak their own languages (Indians from Portuguese India speak any of the Portuguese Creoles of their origin) aside from Portuguese as their second language. Most educated Mozambicans speak English, which is used in schools and business as second or third language.

== Religion ==

== Culture ==

Despite the influence of Islamic coastal traders and European colonizers, the people of Mozambique have largely retained an indigenous culture based on smallscale agriculture. Mozambique&#x27;s most highly developed art forms have been wood sculpture, for which the Makonde in northern Mozambique are particularly renowned, and dance. The middle and upper classes continue to be heavily influenced by the Portuguese colonial and linguistic heritage.

== Education and health ==
Under Portugal, educational opportunities for poor Mozambicans were limited; 93% of the Bantu population was illiterate, and many could not speak Portuguese. In fact, most of today&#x27;s political leaders were educated in missionary schools. After independence, the government placed a high priority on expanding education, which reduced the illiteracy rate to about two-thirds as primary school enrollment increased. Unfortunately, in recent years school construction and teacher training enrollments have not kept up with population increases. With post-war enrollments reaching all-time highs, the quality of education has suffered. As a member of Commonwealth of Nations, most urban Mozambicans are required to learn English starting high-school.

== References ==
Attribution:</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1357948" start="4" end="34" title="Demographics of Mozambique" label="demographics of [[Mozambique]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="75" end="85" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="827" end="844" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="936" end="950" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="1318" end="1330" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261884" start="1513" end="1518" title="Makua people" label="Makua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478487" start="1622" end="1626" title="Sena people" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q642613" start="1631" end="1636" title="Shona people" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q760787" start="1645" end="1649" title="Ndau people" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q760720" start="1654" end="1661" title="Manyika tribe" label="Manyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q902325" start="1708" end="1725" title="Tsonga people" label="Shangaan (Tsonga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48885" start="1780" end="1787" title="Makonde people" label="Makonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255780" start="1789" end="1792" title="WaYao" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="1794" end="1801" title="Swahili people" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="1803" end="1808" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964471" start="1810" end="1815" title="Chopi people" label="Chopi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1821" end="1826" title="Gaza Nguni people" label="Nguni"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="1838" end="1842" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1920" end="1930" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2191" end="2201" title="History of Portugal (1974-1986)#The retornados" label="retornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="2238" end="2245" title="mestizo" label="mestiço"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516782" start="2358" end="2373" title="Indians in Mozambique" label="Indian Asiatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="2397" end="2405" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="2407" end="2423" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2438" end="2442" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404162" start="2498" end="2533" title="ethnic Chinese in Mozambique" label="Mozambique&amp;#x27;s Chinese community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2582" end="2592" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507109" start="2929" end="2946" title="Portuguese Creole" label="Portuguese Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3045" end="3052" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3178" end="3183" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3206" end="3212" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="4283" end="4306" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19305" wikidata="Q1154823" url="?curid=19305" title="Politics of Mozambique">
<text>Politics in Mozambique takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Mozambique is head of state and head of government in a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of the Republic.

==Political history before the introduction of democracy==
The last 25 years of Mozambique&#x27;s history have encapsulated the political developments of the entire 20th century. Portuguese colonialism collapsed in 1974 after a decade of armed struggle, initially led by American-educated Eduardo Mondlane, who was assassinated in 1969. When independence was proclaimed in 1975, the leaders of FRELIMO&#x27;s military campaign rapidly established a one-party state allied to the Soviet bloc, eliminating political pluralism, religious educational institutions, and the role of traditional authorities.

Mozambique&#x27;s Portuguese population were ordered to leave the country within 24 hours, an order which was given by Armando Guebuza. Panicked Portuguese left the country via plane, road and sea and had to leave behind all their assets, returning to Portugal where they became destitute and fell under the ridicule of the European Portuguese who saw their rehabilitation as a burden on the country&#x27;s meager resources. They became known as the &quot;retornados&quot; or refugees. Many Portuguese took their own lives.

The new government gave shelter and support to South African (ANC) and Zimbabwean (ZANU-PF) guerrilla movements while the governments of apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia fostered and financed an armed rebel movement in central Mozambique called the Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO). Civil war, sabotage from neighbouring states, and economic collapse characterised the first decade of Mozambican independence. Also marking this period were the mass exodus of Portuguese nationals, weak infrastructure, nationalisation, and economic mismanagement. During most of the civil war the government was unable to exercise effective control outside of urban areas, many of which were cut off from the capital. An estimated one million Mozambicans perished during the civil war, 1.7 million took refuge in neighbouring states, and several million more were internally displaced. In the third FRELIMO party congress in 1983, President Samora Machel conceded the failure of socialism and the need for major political and economic reforms. His death, along with several advisers, in a suspicious plane crash in 1986 interrupted progress.

His successor, Joaquim Chissano, continued the reforms and began peace talks with RENAMO. The new constitution enacted in 1990 provided for a multi-party political system, market-based economy, and free elections. The civil war ended in October 1992 with the Rome General Peace Accords.

By mid-1995 the over 1.7 million Mozambican refugees who had sought asylum in neighbouring Malawi, Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Zambia, Tanzania, and South Africa as a result of war and drought had returned, as part of the largest repatriation witnessed in Sub-Saharan Africa. Additionally, a further estimated 4 million internally displaced returned to their areas of origin.

Under supervision of the ONUMOZ peacekeeping force of the United Nations, peace returned to Mozambique. In 1994 the country held its first democratic elections. Joaquim Chissano was elected president with 53% of the vote, and a 250-member National Assembly was voted in with 129 FRELIMO deputies, 112 RENAMO deputies, and 9 representatives of three smaller parties that formed the Democratic Union (UD).

==Executive branch==

|President
|Daniel Chapo
|FRELIMO
|15 January 2025
|Prime Minister
|Maria Benvinda Levy
|FRELIMO
|15 January 2025

The Constitution of Mozambique stipulates that the President of the Republic functions as the head of state, head of government, commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and as a symbol of national unity. He is directly elected for a five-year term via run-off voting; if no candidate receives more than half of the votes cast in the first round of voting, a second round of voting will be held in which only the two candidates who received the highest number of votes in the first round will participate, and whichever of the candidates obtains a majority of votes in the second round will thus be elected president. The Prime Minister is appointed by the President. His functions include convening and chairing the Council of Ministers (cabinet), advising the President, assisting the President in governing the country, and coordinating the functions of the other Ministers.

==Legislative branch==
The Assembly of the Republic (&quot;Assembleia da República&quot;) has 250 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation.

==Political parties and elections==
In 1994 the country held its first democratic elections. Joaquim Chissano was elected President with 53% of the vote, and a 250-member National Assembly was voted in with 129 FRELIMO deputies, 112 RENAMO deputies, and 9 representatives of three smaller parties that formed the Democratic Union (UD). Since its formation in 1994, the National Assembly has made progress in becoming a body increasingly more independent of the executive. By 1999, more than one-half (53%) of the legislation passed originated in the Assembly.

After some delays, in 1998 the country held its first local elections to provide for local representation and some budgetary authority at the municipal level. The principal opposition party, RENAMO, boycotted the local elections, citing flaws in the registration process. Independent slates contested the elections and won seats in municipal assemblies. Turnout was very low.

In the aftermath of the 1998 local elections, the government resolved to make more accommodations to the opposition&#x27;s procedural concerns for the second round of multiparty national elections in 1999. Working through the National Assembly, the electoral law was rewritten and passed by consensus in December 1998. Financed largely by international donors, a very successful voter registration was conducted from July to September 1999, providing voter registration cards to 85% of the potential electorate (more than 7 million voters).

The second general elections were held 3–5 December 1999, with high voter turnout. International and domestic observers agreed that the voting process was well organised and went smoothly. Both the opposition and observers subsequently cited flaws in the tabulation process that, had they not occurred, might have changed the outcome. In the end, however, international and domestic observers concluded that the close result of the vote reflected the will of the people.

President Chissano won the presidency with a margin of 4% points over the RENAMO-Electoral Union coalition candidate, Afonso Dhlakama, and began his 5-year term in January 2000. FRELIMO increased its majority in the National Assembly with 133 out of 250 seats. RENAMO-UE coalition won 116 seats, one went independent, and no third parties are represented.

The opposition coalition did not accept the National Election Commission&#x27;s results of the presidential vote and filed a formal complaint to the Supreme Court. One month after the voting, the court dismissed the opposition&#x27;s challenge and validated the election results. The opposition did not file a complaint about the results of the legislative vote.

The second local elections, involving 33 municipalities with some 2.4 million registered voters, took place in November 2003. This was the first time that FRELIMO, RENAMO-UE, and independent parties competed without significant boycotts. The 24% turnout was well above the 15% turnout in the first municipal elections. FRELIMO won 28 mayoral positions and the majority in 29 municipal assemblies, while RENAMO won 5 mayoral positions and the majority in 4 municipal assemblies. The voting was conducted in an orderly fashion without violent incidents. However, the period immediately after the elections was marked by objections about voter and candidate registration and vote tabulation, as well as calls for greater transparency.
In May 2004, the government approved a new general elections law that contained innovations based on the experience of the 2003 municipal elections.

Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on 1–2 December 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote. His opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament. A coalition of RENAMO and several small parties won the 90 remaining seats. Armando Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on 2 February 2005.

The candidate of the ruling Mozambican Liberation Front&#x27;s (Frelimo) Filipe Nyusi has been the President of Mozambique since January 2015 after winning the election in October 2014. In October 2019, President Filipe Nyusi was re-elected after a landslide victory in general election. Frelimo won 184 seats, Renamo got 60 seats and the MDM party received the remaining six in the National Assembly. Opposition did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud and irregularities. Frelimo secured two-thirds majority in parliament which allowed Frelimo to re-adjust the constitution without needing the agreement of the opposition.

==Judicial branch==
The judiciary comprises a Supreme Court and provincial, district, and municipal courts.

==Administrative divisions==
Mozambique is divided in 10 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Cabo Delgado, Gaza, Inhambane, Manica, Maputo, Nampula, Niassa, Sofala, Tete, Zambezia

==International organisation participation==
Mozambique is a member of ACP, AfDB, the Commonwealth, CPLP, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt (signatory), ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, MONUC, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMISET, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO and WTrO.

==See also==
* List of Council of Ministers of Mozambique, 1984

==References==
==Further reading==
*Hanlon, Joseph, and Teresa Smart. Do bicycles equal development in Mozambique?. James Currey Publisher, 2008.
*Manning CL. The politics of peace in Mozambique: post-conflict democratisation, 1992-2000. Greenwood Publishing Group; 2002.
*Newitt MD. A history of Mozambique. Indiana University Press; 1995.

==External links==
* &quot;Considerable change&quot; Decentralisation and public participation in Mozambique.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154823" start="0" end="22" title="Politics of Mozambique" label="Politics in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="55" end="72" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="73" end="98" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="99" end="107" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q384419" start="121" end="144" title="List of presidents of Mozambique" label="President of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="148" end="161" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="166" end="184" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="190" end="208" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="210" end="225" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="258" end="275" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="298" end="308" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848595" start="317" end="341" title="Assembly of the Republic of Mozambique" label="Assembly of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="424" end="434" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="523" end="533" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="534" end="545" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="615" end="623" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q443434" start="633" end="649" title="Eduardo Mondlane" label="Eduardo Mondlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="738" end="745" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="823" end="834" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q57392" start="1066" end="1081" title="Armando Guebuza" label="Armando Guebuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1519" end="1531" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="1534" end="1537" title="African National Congress" label="ANC"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="1543" end="1551" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910161" start="1555" end="1562" title="ZANU-PF" label="ZANU-PF"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1619" end="1631" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="1636" end="1644" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="1756" end="1762" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="1765" end="1774" title="Civil war" label="Civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q219918" start="2406" end="2419" title="Samora Machel" label="Samora Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208355" start="2623" end="2639" title="Joaquim Chissano" label="Joaquim Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="2780" end="2800" title="market economy" label="market-based economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568540" start="2867" end="2893" title="Rome General Peace Accords" label="Rome General Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="2987" end="2993" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="3005" end="3014" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="3016" end="3022" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="3024" end="3032" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="3145" end="3155" title="Sub-Sahara" label="Sub-Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q488011" start="3291" end="3297" title="ONUMOZ" label="ONUMOZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3324" end="3338" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208355" start="3427" end="3443" title="Joaquim Chissano" label="Joaquim Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969555" start="3505" end="3522" title="National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3647" end="3663" title="Democratic Union (Mozambique)" label="Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q384419" start="3694" end="3703" title="Heads of State of Mozambique" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q97058466" start="3705" end="3717" title="Daniel Chapo" label="Daniel Chapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="3719" end="3726" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345072" start="3745" end="3759" title="Heads of Government of Mozambique" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761049" start="3761" end="3780" title="Maria Benvinda Levy" label="Maria Benvinda Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="3782" end="3789" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995189" start="3812" end="3838" title="Constitution of Mozambique" label="Constitution of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848595" start="4713" end="4737" title="Assembly of the Republic of Mozambique" label="Assembly of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="4825" end="4852" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539645" start="4926" end="4946" title="Elections in Mozambique" label="democratic elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="5066" end="5073" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="5088" end="5094" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5168" end="5184" title="Democratic Union (Mozambique)" label="Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="6403" end="6416" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448556" start="8901" end="8913" title="Filipe Nyusi" label="Filipe Nyusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15197253" start="8988" end="8996" title="2014 Mozambican general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566773" start="9106" end="9114" title="2019 Mozambican general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="9843" end="9846" title="ACP (Lomé Convention)" label="ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="9848" end="9852" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="9858" end="9870" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="9872" end="9876" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="CPLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="9878" end="9881" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="9883" end="9886" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="9888" end="9892" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="9894" end="9898" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="9900" end="9904" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="9906" end="9910" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="9924" end="9929" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="9931" end="9935" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="9937" end="9940" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41230" start="9942" end="9945" title="Islamic Development Bank" label="IDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="9947" end="9951" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="9953" end="9956" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="9958" end="9963" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="9965" end="9968" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="IHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="9970" end="9973" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="9975" end="9978" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="9980" end="9983" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="9985" end="9993" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="9995" end="9998" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="10000" end="10003" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="10016" end="10019" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="10037" end="10040" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="10042" end="10047" title="MONUC" label="MONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="10049" end="10052" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="10054" end="10057" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="OAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="10059" end="10062" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="10064" end="10068" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="10070" end="10074" title="Southern African Development Community" label="SADC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10076" end="10078" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="10080" end="10086" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="10088" end="10094" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="10096" end="10101" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="10103" end="10108" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141705" start="10110" end="10117" title="UNMISET" label="UNMISET"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="10119" end="10122" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="10124" end="10127" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="10129" end="10133" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="WFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="10135" end="10138" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="10140" end="10144" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="10146" end="10149" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="10151" end="10155" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="10160" end="10164" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567963" start="10182" end="10230" title="List of Council of Ministers of Mozambique, 1984" label="List of Council of Ministers of Mozambique, 1984"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19307" wikidata="Q7695989" url="?curid=19307" title="Telecommunications in Mozambique">
<text>Telecommunications in Mozambique include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==

* Radio stations: 
** state-run radio provides nearly 100% territorial coverage and broadcasts in multiple languages; a number of privately owned and community-operated stations; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2007);
** AM 13, FM 17, shortwave 11 (2001).
* Radios: 730,000 (1997).
* Television stations: 1 state-run TV station supplemented by private TV station; Portuguese state TV&#x27;s African service, RTP Africa, and Brazilian-owned TV Miramar are available (2007).
* Televisions: 90,000 (1997).

==Telephones==

* Main lines: 
** 88,100 lines in use, 148th in the world (2012);
** 78,300 lines in use (2008).
* Mobile cellular: 
** 8.1 million lines (2012);
** 4.4 million lines (2008).
* Telephone system:
** General assessment: a fair telecommunications system that is with a heavy state presence, lack of competition, and high operating costs and charges (2011);
** Domestic: stagnation in the fixed-line network contrasts with rapid growth in the mobile-cellular network; mobile-cellular coverage now includes all the main cities and key roads, including those from Maputo to the South African and Eswatini borders, the national highway through Gaza and Inhambane provinces, the Beira corridor, and from Nampula to Nacala; extremely low fixed-line teledensity; despite significant growth in mobile-cellular services, teledensity remains low at about 35 per 100 persons (2011);
** International: calling code +258; landing point for the EASSy and SEACOM fiber-optic submarine cable systems; Satellite earth stations - 5 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 3 Indian Ocean) (2011).

==Internet==

* Top-level domain: .mz
* Internet exchange: Mozambique Internet Exchange (Moz-Ix).
* Internet users:
** 1.1 million users, 114th in the world; 4.8% of the population, 188th in the world (2012).
** 613,600, 113th in the world (2009).
* Fixed broadband: 19,753 subscriptions, 129th in the world; 0.1% of the population, 168th in the world (2012).
* Wireless broadband: 431,988 subscriptions, 94th in the world; 1.8% of the population, 127th in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts:
** 89,737 hosts, 82nd in the world (2012); 
** 21,172 (2010).
* IPv4: 343,296 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 14.6 addresses per 1000 people (2012).

Mozambique has a comparatively low Internet penetration rate with only 4.8% of the population having access to the Internet compared to 16% for Africa as a whole.

Telecommunication de Mozambique (TDM), Mozambique&#x27;s national fixed-line operator, offers ADSL Internet access for home and business customers. In early 2014 packages ranged from 512 kbit/s with a 6 GByte cap for MTN750 (~US$21) to 4 Mbit/s with a 43 GByte cap for MTN4300 (~US$118).

The three mobile operators, Movitel, mCel and Vodacom, also offer 3G Internet access.

Mozambique was the first African country to offer broadband wireless services using WiMax.

With the introduction of the SEACOM submarine cable in July 2009 and the EASSY submarine cable in July 2010, Mozambique now has access to less expensive international connectivity and is no longer reliant on VSAT or neighbor South Africa for Internet transit services.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet, however, opposition party members report government intelligence agents monitor e-mail.

The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and the press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. Individuals can generally criticize the government publicly or privately without reprisal. Some individuals express a fear that the government monitors their private telephone and e-mail communications. Many journalists practice self-censorship.

==See also==

* Telephone numbers in Mozambique
* Televisão de Moçambique, the government owned national public broadcaster of Mozambique.

== References ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7695989" start="0" end="32" title="Telecommunications in Mozambique" label="Telecommunications in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="136" end="150" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="428" end="434" title="Receiver (radio)" label="Radios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="454" end="473" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="1248" end="1254" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1262" end="1274" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="1280" end="1288" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="1577" end="1589" title="calling code" label="calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q687030" start="1618" end="1623" title="EASSy" label="EASSy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063249" start="1628" end="1634" title="SEACOM (African cable system)" label="SEACOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="1635" end="1670" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="fiber-optic submarine cable systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="1672" end="1696" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1701" end="1709" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1713" end="1727" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1734" end="1746" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1773" end="1789" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43131" start="1791" end="1794" title=".mz" label=".mz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="1797" end="1814" title="Internet exchange" label="Internet exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574343" start="1816" end="1844" title="Mozambique Internet Exchange" label="Mozambique Internet Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="1857" end="1871" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2007" end="2022" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2119" end="2137" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="2234" end="2248" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211867" start="2314" end="2318" title="List of countries by IPv4 address allocation" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696106" start="2589" end="2620" title="Telecommunication de Mozambique" label="Telecommunication de Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="2683" end="2687" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856518" start="2924" end="2931" title="Vodacom" label="Vodacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="2944" end="2946" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="3049" end="3054" title="WiMax" label="WiMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063249" start="3086" end="3092" title="SEACOM (African cable system)" label="SEACOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="3093" end="3102" title="Submarine communications cable" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q687030" start="3130" end="3135" title="EASSY" label="EASSY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="3265" end="3269" title="VSAT" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055942" start="3282" end="3294" title="Internet in South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351533" start="3299" end="3315" title="Internet transit" label="Internet transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="3515" end="3521" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3561" end="3578" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="3587" end="3592" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="3887" end="3902" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696622" start="3921" end="3952" title="Telephone numbers in Mozambique" label="Telephone numbers in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572565" start="3955" end="3978" title="Televisão de Moçambique" label="Televisão de Moçambique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19308" wikidata="Q3997829" url="?curid=19308" title="Transport in Mozambique">
<text>Modes of transport in Mozambique include rail, road, water, and air. There are rail links serving principal cities and connecting the country with Malawi, Zimbabwe and South Africa. There are over 30,000 km of roads, but much of the network is unpaved. 

On the Indian Ocean coast are several large seaports, including Nacala, Beira and Maputo, with further ports being developed. There are 3,750 km of navigable inland waterways. There is an international airport at Maputo, 21 other paved airports, and over 100 with unpaved runways.

== Railways ==


The Mozambican railway system developed over more than a century from three different ports on the Indian Ocean that serve as terminals for separate lines to the hinterland. The railroads were major targets during the Mozambican Civil War, were sabotaged by RENAMO, and are being rehabilitated. A parastatal authority, &quot;Portos e Caminhos de Ferro de Moçambique&quot; (abbreviated CFM; in English Mozambique Ports and Railways), oversees the railway system of Mozambique and its connected ports, but management has been largely outsourced. Each line has its own development corridor.

 there are 3,123 km of railway track, consisting of 2,983 km of gauge, compatible with neighboring rail systems, and a 140 km line of gauge, the Gaza Railway. The central Beira-Bulawayo railway and Sena railway route links the port of Beira to the landlocked countries of Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. To the north of this the port of Nacala is also linked by Nacala rail to Malawi, and to the south the port of Maputo is connected by the Limpopo rail, the Goba rail and the Ressano Garcia rail to Zimbabwe, Eswatini and South Africa.. These networks interconnect only via neighbouring countries. A new route for coal haulage between Tete and Beira was planned to come into service by 2010, and in August 2010, Mozambique and Botswana signed a memorandum of understanding to develop a 1,100 km railway through Zimbabwe, to carry coal from Serule in Botswana to a deepwater port at Techobanine Point in Mozambique.

Newer rolling stock has been supplied by the Indian Golden Rock and BLW, Varanasi workshop using Centre Buffer Couplers (AAR couplers) and air brakes.

=== Towns served by railways ===
== Roads and highways ==
Mozambique&#x27;s inter-city roads are classified as a national or primary road (&quot;estrada nacional&quot; or &quot;estrada primária&quot;), or as regional – secondary or tertiary – roads (&quot;estradas secundárias&quot; and &quot;estradas terciáreas&quot;). National roads are given the prefix &quot;N&quot; or &quot;EN&quot; followed by a one- or two-digit number. The numbers generally increase from the south of the country to the north. Regional roads are given the prefix &quot;R&quot;, followed by a three-digit number.

In 2008 the total length of Mozambique&#x27;s road network was 32,500 km. The primary and secondary road networks were less than 5000 km each. The tertiary network was 12,700 km. Unclassified or local roads (&quot;estradas vicinais&quot;) were estimated at 6,700 km, and urban roads at 3,300 km.

The national highway network includes 14 routes:
* N1 (EN1). Maputo – Xai-Xai – N5 junction – Maxixe – Inchope (N6 junction) – Gorongosa – Caia – N10 junction – Mocuba (N11 junction) – Nampula (N13 junction) – Mocuba (N11 junction) – Namialo (N12 junction) – Pemba
* N2 (EN2). Maputo – Matola – N3 junction – Namaacha border post (to eSwatini)
* N3 (EN3). N2 junction – Goba border post (to eSwatini)
* N4 (EN4). Maputo – Komatipoort border post (to South Africa)
* N5 (EN5). N1 junction – Inhambane
* N6 (EN6). Beira – Inchope (N1 junction) – Chimoio – N7 junction – Manica – Machipanda border post (to Zimbabwe). The N6 Highway is part of the Beira–Lobito Highway, Highway 9 in the Trans-African Highway network.
* N7 (EN7). N6 junction – Catandica – Changara District (N8 junction) – Tete (N9 junction) – Zobue border post (to Malawi)
* N8 (EN8). Changara District (N7 junction) – Nyamapanda border post (to Zimbabwe)
* N9 (EN9). Tete (N6 junction) – Chimefusa border post (to Zambia)
* N10 (EN10). N1 junction – Quelimane
* N11 (EN11). Mocuba (N1 junction) – Milange border post (to Malawi)
* N12 (EN12). Namialo (N1 junction) – Monapo – Nacala
* N13 (EN13). Nampula (N1 junction) – Ribaue – Cuamba – Mandimba border post (to Malawi) – Lichinga (N14 junction)
* N14 (EN14). Metoro (N1 junction) – Montepuez – Cassembe – Lichinga (N13 junction)

== Waterways ==

There are 3,750 km of navigable waterways.

==Sea transport==

=== Ports and harbours ===
Seaports on the Indian Ocean coast include:
* Beira - railhead for Zimbabwe (via the Beira-Bulawayo railway) and Malawi (via the Sena railway)
* Inhambane
* Maputo - railhead for South Africa (via the Pretoria-Maputo railway), Eswatini (via the Goba railway) and Zimbabwe (via the Limpopo railway)
* Nacala - a deepwater port and a railhead for Malawi (via the Nacala railway).
* Pemba
* Quelimane
* Matutuine, a new coal port in the far south, approved October 2009.

=== Merchant marine ===
 the merchant marine fleet consisted of three cargo ships of 1,000 gt or over, totaling 4,125 gt/. Two of these were Belgian-owned ships registered in Mozambique as a flag of convenience.

== Airports ==
 there were 158 airports in total, 22 of them having paved runways. The main airport in the country is Maputo International Airport, which is also the hub of Mozambique&#x27;s flag carrier, LAM Mozambique Airlines.

==References==

==External links==
===Rail network maps===
* UN Map
* Map Port Nacala railhead
* Southern Africa
* Sena Railway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="9" end="18" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="22" end="32" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="41" end="45" title="rail transport" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q516739" start="47" end="51" title="road transport" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="53" end="58" title="water transport" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="64" end="67" title="air transport" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="147" end="153" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="155" end="163" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="168" end="180" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="262" end="274" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="299" end="306" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q990080" start="319" end="325" title="Nacala" label="Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="327" end="332" title="Beira (Mozambique)" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="337" end="343" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="403" end="412" title="Navigability" label="navigable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="457" end="464" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022397" start="468" end="474" title="Maputo International Airport" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="653" end="665" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="772" end="792" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="Mozambican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="812" end="818" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="851" end="861" title="parastatal" label="parastatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177262" start="955" end="984" title="Mozambique Ports and Railways" label="Mozambique Ports and Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="1018" end="1028" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528971" start="1288" end="1300" title="Gaza Railway" label="Gaza Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84498314" start="1314" end="1336" title="Beira-Bulawayo railway" label="Beira-Bulawayo railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84510548" start="1341" end="1353" title="Sena railway" label="Sena railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10351869" start="1370" end="1383" title="port of Beira" label="port of Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231208" start="1469" end="1483" title="port of Nacala" label="port of Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q48801157" start="1502" end="1513" title="Nacala railway" label="Nacala rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494243" start="1546" end="1560" title="port of Maputo" label="port of Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18468998" start="1581" end="1593" title="Limpopo railway" label="Limpopo rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q84321383" start="1599" end="1608" title="Goba railway" label="Goba rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17521473" start="1617" end="1636" title="Ressano Garcia railway" label="Ressano Garcia rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q388242" start="1776" end="1780" title="Tete, Mozambique" label="Tete"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="1785" end="1790" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="1868" end="1876" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q171143" start="1981" end="1987" title="Serule" label="Serule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692674" start="2023" end="2034" title="Techobanine" label="Techobanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579743" start="2109" end="2120" title="Golden Rock Railway Workshop" label="Golden Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322605" start="2125" end="2138" title="Banaras Locomotive Works" label="BLW, Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383761" start="2178" end="2189" title="AAR coupler" label="AAR coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196198" start="2196" end="2206" title="Railway air brake" label="air brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="3157" end="3163" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q318299" start="3166" end="3173" title="Xai-Xai" label="Xai-Xai"/>
<link wikidata="Q525118" start="3190" end="3196" title="Maxixe, Mozambique" label="Maxixe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3199" end="3206" title="Inchope" label="Inchope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14216746" start="3223" end="3232" title="Gorongosa" label="Gorongosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017508" start="3235" end="3239" title="Caia, Mozambique" label="Caia"/>
<link wikidata="Q520687" start="3257" end="3263" title="Mocuba" label="Mocuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q323801" start="3281" end="3288" title="Nampula" label="Nampula"/>
<link wikidata="Q520687" start="3306" end="3312" title="Mocuba" label="Mocuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135625" start="3330" end="3337" title="Namialo" label="Namialo"/>
<link wikidata="Q498048" start="3355" end="3360" title="Pemba, Mozambique" label="Pemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="3373" end="3379" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109949" start="3382" end="3388" title="Matola" label="Matola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233176" start="3405" end="3413" title="Namaacha" label="Namaacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="3430" end="3438" title="eSwatini" label="eSwatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575394" start="3466" end="3470" title="Goba, Mozambique" label="Goba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="3487" end="3495" title="eSwatini" label="eSwatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="3509" end="3515" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779827" start="3518" end="3529" title="Komatipoort" label="Komatipoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3546" end="3558" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q456577" start="3586" end="3595" title="Inhambane" label="Inhambane"/>
<link wikidata="Q211563" start="3608" end="3613" title="Beira, Mozambique" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q638509" start="3640" end="3647" title="Chimoio" label="Chimoio"/>
<link wikidata="Q383170" start="3664" end="3670" title="Manica, Mozambique" label="Manica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723773" start="3673" end="3683" title="Machipanda" label="Machipanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="3700" end="3708" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q814827" start="3741" end="3761" title="Beira–Lobito Highway" label="Beira–Lobito Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583618" start="3780" end="3809" title="Trans-African Highway network" label="Trans-African Highway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050352" start="3837" end="3846" title="Catandica" label="Catandica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071724" start="3849" end="3866" title="Changara District" label="Changara District"/>
<link wikidata="Q388242" start="3883" end="3887" title="Tete, Mozambique" label="Tete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3904" end="3909" title="Zobue" label="Zobue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="3926" end="3932" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362149" start="3980" end="3990" title="Nyamapanda" label="Nyamapanda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4050" end="4059" title="Chimefusa" label="Chimefusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q318306" start="4112" end="4121" title="Quelimane" label="Quelimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q520687" start="4136" end="4142" title="Mocuba" label="Mocuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q27901726" start="4159" end="4166" title="Milange" label="Milange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135625" start="4205" end="4212" title="Namialo" label="Namialo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464447" start="4229" end="4235" title="Monapo" label="Monapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q990080" start="4238" end="4244" title="Nacala" label="Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q323801" start="4259" end="4266" title="Nampula" label="Nampula"/>
<link wikidata="Q726737" start="4283" end="4289" title="Ribaue" label="Ribaue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142811" start="4292" end="4298" title="Cuamba" label="Cuamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748076" start="4301" end="4309" title="Mandimba" label="Mandimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q667650" start="4336" end="4344" title="Lichinga" label="Lichinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824281" start="4374" end="4380" title="Metoro" label="Metoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027174" start="4397" end="4406" title="Montepuez" label="Montepuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049308" start="4409" end="4417" title="Cassembe, Mozambique" label="Cassembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q667650" start="4420" end="4428" title="Lichinga" label="Lichinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="4568" end="4580" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10351869" start="4598" end="4603" title="Port of Beira" label="Beira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4606" end="4614" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="4619" end="4627" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q84498314" start="4637" end="4659" title="Beira-Bulawayo railway" label="Beira-Bulawayo railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="4665" end="4671" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q84510548" start="4681" end="4693" title="Sena railway" label="Sena railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q456577" start="4697" end="4706" title="Inhambane" label="Inhambane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494243" start="4709" end="4715" title="Port of Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4718" end="4726" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17521473" start="4753" end="4776" title="Pretoria-Maputo railway" label="Pretoria-Maputo railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="4779" end="4787" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q84321383" start="4797" end="4809" title="Goba railway" label="Goba railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18468998" start="4833" end="4848" title="Limpopo railway" label="Limpopo railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231208" start="4852" end="4858" title="Port of Nacala" label="Nacala"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="4863" end="4877" title="deepwater port" label="deepwater port"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4884" end="4892" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q48801157" start="4913" end="4927" title="Nacala railway" label="Nacala railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q498048" start="4932" end="4937" title="Pemba, Mozambique" label="Pemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q318306" start="4940" end="4949" title="Quelimane" label="Quelimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852354" start="4952" end="4961" title="Matutuine" label="Matutuine"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="5050" end="5065" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q604097" start="5212" end="5231" title="flag of convenience" label="flag of convenience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022397" start="5352" end="5380" title="Maputo International Airport" label="Maputo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156479" start="5439" end="5462" title="LAM Mozambique Airlines" label="LAM Mozambique Airlines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19309" wikidata="Q198527" url="?curid=19309" title="Mozambique Defence Armed Forces">
<text>The Mozambique Defence Armed Forces () or FADM are the national armed forces of Mozambique. They include the General Staff of the Armed Forces and three branches of service: Army, Air Force and Navy.

The FADM were formed in mid August 1994, by the integration of the Forças Armadas de Moçambique/FPLM with the military wing of RENAMO, following the end of the civil war.

==History==
Coelho et al write:
&quot;Independence in June 1975 was preceded by a nine-month transition period in which Frelimo took control of a transitional cabinet where ..it held six of the nine ministries.&quot; The previous Forças Populares de Libertação de Moçambique (FPLM), the armed wing of FRELIMO, became the Forças Armadas de Moçambique but retained the FPLM title, becoming &quot;FAM/FPLM&quot;. From 1975 to the successful conclusions of the Rome negotiations in 1992, former liberation war leader Alberto Joaquim Chipande served as Minister of National Defence.

Under the previous FAM, in 1982, ten provincial semi-autonomous military commands were created; the provincial commanders also acted as second in commands of the provincial government. Coelho et al write:
&quot;the 1st Brigade and the 6th Tank Brigade were located in Maputo; the 2nd Brigade was in Mapai and, together with 8th Brigade based in Chokwe, assured protection of the south; the 3rd Brigade was in Chimoio and the 5th in Beira; the 4th Brigade was placed in Tete, and the 7th in Cuamba, assuring a military presence in Niassa, Cabo Delgado, Zambezia and Nampula, and particularly in the Nacala corridor..&quot;

Throughout the 1980s the FRELIMO government and its armed forces, the Forças Armadas de Moçambique/FPLM, fought the rebel Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO), which received support by South Africa. The Mozambican Civil War only ended in 1992.

The Mozambique Defence Armed Forces were formed in mid-August 1994 after peace negotiations in Rome had produced the General Peace Agreement (GPA, AGP in Portuguese). The new armed forces were formed by integrating those soldiers of the former government Forças Armadas de Moçambique/FPLM and those among the RENAMO rebels who wished to stay in uniform. They were formed through a commission, the &quot;Comissão Conjunta para a Formação das Forças Armadas de Defesa e Segurança de Moçambique&quot; (CCFADM), chaired by the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).

Two generals were appointed to lead the new forces, one from FRELIMO, Lieutenant General Lagos Lidimo, who was named Chief of the Defence Force and Major General Mateus Ngonhamo from RENAMO as Vice-Chief of the Defence Force. The former Chief of the Army of the &quot;Forças Armadas de Moçambique,&quot; Lieutenant General Antonio Hama Thai, was retired.

The first three infantry battalions were stationed at Chokwe, Cuamba, and Quelimane.

On 20 March 2008, Reuters reported that President Guebuza had dismissed the Chief and Vice Chief of the Defence Force, Lieutenant General Lagos Lidimo (FRELIMO) and Lieutenant General Mateus Ngonhamo (RENAMO), replacing them with Brigadier General Paulino Macaringue as Chief of Defence Force and Major General Olímpio Cambora as Vice-Chief of Defence Force.

Filipe Nyussi took office as Minister of Defense on 27 March 2008, succeeding Tobias Joaquim Dai. Nyussi&#x27;s appointment came almost exactly one year after a fire and resulting explosions of munitions at the Malhazine armoury in Maputo killed more than 100 people and destroyed 14,000 homes. A government-appointed investigative commission concluded that negligence played a role in the disaster, and Dai &quot;was blamed by many for failing to act on time to prevent the loss of life&quot;. Although no official reason was given for Dai&#x27;s removal, it may have been a &quot;delayed reaction&quot; to the Malhazine disaster.

In April 2010 it was announced that &quot;the People&#x27;s Republic of China donated to the FADM material for agriculture worth 4 million euros, including trucks, tractors, agricultural implements, mowers and motorbikes in the framework of bilateral cooperation in the military. Under a protocol of cooperation in the military field, the Government of China will also provide support to the Ministry of Defence of Mozambique with about 1 million euros for the areas of training and logistics. The protocol for granting aid to the Armed Forces for the Defence of Mozambique (FADM) was signed by Defense Minister of Mozambique, Filipe Nyusi, and the charge d&#x27;affaires of the Chinese embassy in Maputo, Lee Tongli.&quot;

Mozambique has also been involved in many peacekeeping operations in Burundi (232 personnel), Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, East Timor and Sudan. They have also actively participated in joint military operations such Blue Hungwe in Zimbabwe in 1997 and Blue Crane in South Africa in 1999.

== Land Forces ==
The Mozambican Army was formed in 1976 from three conventional battalions, two of which were trained in Tanzania and a third of which was trained in Zambia. Army officer candidates were initially trained in Maputo by Chinese military instructors. In March 1977, following Mozambique&#x27;s Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union, officer candidates became eligible for training in various Warsaw Pact member states. The Soviet military mission in Mozambique assisted in raising a new army composed of five infantry brigades and an armored brigade. At the height of the civil war, this was gradually increased to eight infantry brigades, an armored brigade, and a counter-insurgency brigade modeled after the Zimbabwean 5th Brigade.

The preexisting FAM was abolished after the end of the civil war under the auspices of the Joint Commission for the Formation of the Mozambican Defence Force (CCFADM), which included advisers from Portugal, France, and the United Kingdom. The CCFADM recommended that former army personnel and an equal number of demobilised RENAMO insurgents be integrated into a single force numbering about 30,000. Due to logistics problems and budgetary constraints, however, the army only numbered about 12,195 in 1995. Force levels rarely fluctuated between 1995 and the mid-2000s due to the army&#x27;s limited resources and low budget priority.

In 2016, the Mozambican Army consisted of 10,000 troops organised into three special forces battalions, seven light infantry battalions, two engineer battalions, two artillery battalions, and a single logistics battalion.

As of 2017, the serving chief of the army was Major General Eugènio Dias Da Silva.

===Equipment===
Between 1977 and 1989, the Mozambican Army was lavishly supplied with Soviet weapons, as well as a Soviet-supervised technical programme to oversee their logistics needs and maintenance. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, along with the resulting departure of Soviet technical staff, much of this equipment was rendered inoperable. The bulk of the army&#x27;s hardware remained vested in this ageing and increasingly obsolescent Soviet equipment throughout the 2000s, and serviceability rates have remained low. In 2016, less than 10% of the army&#x27;s artillery and armoured vehicles were operational.

==== Small arms ====
====Anti-tank weapons====
====Mortars====
====Tanks====
====Scout cars====
====Infantry fighting vehicles====
====Armored personnel carriers====
====Artillery====
====Air defence systems====
== Air Force ==
==Navy==
There are about 200 personnel in the navy. In September 2004 it was reported that the South African Navy was to donate two of its Namacurra class harbour patrol boat to the Mozambique Navy. The boats were refitted by the naval dockyard at Simon&#x27;s Town and equipped with outboard motors and navigation equipment donated by the French Navy. The French Navy &quot;Durance&quot; class command and replenishment oiler &quot;Marne&quot; (A360) was to deliver the boats to Maputo en route to its ALINDIEN operational area in the Indian Ocean after a refit in Cape Town.

In 2013, the French shipyard CMN Group confirmed a major order by Mozambique, including 6 patrol vessels &amp; interceptors (HSI32).

On 29 July 2019 in the first ever visit by an Defence Minister of India Rajnath Singh donated 2 L&amp;T class Fast interceptor boats to the Navy. A team from Indian Coast Guard will also be stationed to train the crew, support for maintenance and operation of the two boats. 

In January 2022, two Solas Marine fast interceptor boat were transferred from Indian Navy to Mozambique on board . Mozambique Navy personnel were given training to operate the new interceptor boats. On 8 November 2024, the Indian Navy gifted another two Fast Interceptor Crafts of the same class to Mozambique. They were delivered via . The Fast Interceptor Craft are capable of reaching speeds of and equipped with machine guns and bullet-resistant cabins. They will enhance Mozambique&#x27;s capability to address maritime threats.

===Equipment===
* PCI-class inshore patrol boat (3 ordered, non-operational)
* 2 × L&amp;T-class fast interceptor craft (donated by India)
* 4 × Solas Marine fast interceptor boat (donated by India)

* MNS Pebane (P-001) ex-Spanish navy &quot;Dragonera&quot; (P-32) (85 tons, 32 meters) transferred after refit 2012 from the Spanish Navy for a symbolic price (€100).
* 20 - 25 DV 15 interceptors. An unknown number of units in active service.
* 3 × HSI32 Interceptors 
* 3 × Ocean Eagle 43 OPV. Three were acquired as part of the CMN deal. Currently all three are based at Pemba.

=== Decommissioned ships ===

* 2x Yevgenya-class minesweeper. Decommissioned in 1993

== See also ==

* Conscription in Mozambique

== References ==
===Works cited===
* 
*Hoyle, Craig. &quot;World Air Forces Directory&quot;. &quot;Flight International&quot;, Vol. 182 No. 5370. pp. 40–64. 
*

==Further reading==
*Protocol on the Formation of the FADM , Rome 1992
*Cameron R. Hume, Ending Mozambique&#x27;s War: The Role of Mediation and Good Offices, U.S. Institute of Peace, Washington DC, 1994
*Lundin, Irae B, Martinho Chachiua, Anthonio Gaspar, Habiba Guebuzua, and Guilherme Mbilana (2000). Reducing Costs through an Expensive Exercise: The Impact of Demobilization in Mozambique, in Kees Kingma (ed.) &quot;Demobilization in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Development and Security Impacts,&quot; Basingstoke, UK: MacMillan, 173-212
*Anica Lala, Security sector reform in post-conflict environments: An analysis of coherence and sequencing in Mozambique. Examining Peacebuilding Challenges of Defence, Police and Justice Reforms in a Neo-Liberal Era, 2014 Bradford thesis
*Anica Lala, Security and Democracy in Southern Africa: Mozambique, 2007
*Paulino Macaringue, &quot;Civil-Military Relations in Post-Cold War Mozambique,&quot; Ourselves to Know, Institute for Security Studies, 2002.
*Martin Rupiya, &#x27;Historical Context: War and Peace in Mozambique,&#x27; in Jeremy Armon, Dylan Henrickson and Alex Vines, eds, The Mozambican Peace Process in Perspective, London: Conciliation Resources Accord Series, 1998
*Richard Synge, Mozambique: UN Peacekeeping in Action, 1992–94, United States Institute of Peace Press, Washington, D.C., 1997 - includes details on formation of FADM, but has multiple mistakes, including concluding from mid-mission rather than final ONUMOZ report that new army had five (rather than final seven) battalions.
*Eric T. Young, The Development of the FADM in Mozambique: Internal and External Dynamics, African Security Review, Vol. 5, No. 1, 1996
*Joao Porto, Mozambique contributes to the African Union Mission in Burundi, April 2003

==External links==

*United States Marine Corps, Brotherhood of Arms - story of one Mozambiqican officer&#x27;s career
* https://wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/1976MAPUTO00888_b.html - details in 1976
* &quot;7000 ghost soldiers found. Soldiers have been paid in cash, and in March actually had to show up to collect. According to Carta de Moçambique (4, 6 May) 7000 ghost soldiers were found. &quot;Among the irregularities detected in recent months is the growing number of children of former combatants, generals, colonels and politicians, who swell the ranks of the FADM and receive salaries without ever having been in military training, let alone setting foot in a military unit,&quot; noted Carta. And many salaries of fake soldier were being channelled to senior officials. The scheme also includes the distribution of food, alcoholic beverage, fuel vouchers and rent subsidy. The military will now switch to electronic payments.&quot; Joseph Hanlon, &quot;Mozambique News Reports and Clippings 596,&quot; 16 May 2022, accessible via https://www.open.ac.uk/technology/mozambique/news-reports-clippings-2022 . </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q198527" start="4" end="35" title="Mozambique Defence Armed Forces" label="Mozambique Defence Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q198527" start="42" end="46" title="Mozambique Defence Armed Forces" label="FADM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="64" end="76" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="80" end="90" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="328" end="334" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="493" end="500" title="Frelimo" label="Frelimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711973" start="886" end="910" title="Alberto Joaquim Chipande" label="Alberto Joaquim Chipande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="1697" end="1727" title="Mozambican National Resistance" label="Mozambican National Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="1782" end="1802" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="Mozambican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q488011" start="2347" end="2385" title="United Nations Operation in Mozambique" label="United Nations Operation in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="2458" end="2465" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643918" start="2728" end="2737" title="Hama Thai" label="Hama Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022170" start="2807" end="2813" title="Chokwe, Mozambique" label="Chokwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142811" start="2815" end="2821" title="Cuamba" label="Cuamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q318306" start="2827" end="2836" title="Quelimane" label="Quelimane"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="2857" end="2864" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448556" start="3199" end="3212" title="Filipe Nyussi" label="Filipe Nyussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811637" start="3277" end="3295" title="Tobias Joaquim Dai" label="Tobias Joaquim Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="3420" end="3427" title="Armory (military)" label="armoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="3431" end="3437" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="3557" end="3567" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3878" end="3909" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448556" start="4459" end="4471" title="Filipe Nyusi" label="Filipe Nyusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="4626" end="4633" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="4651" end="4658" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="4660" end="4692" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="4694" end="4704" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="4802" end="4810" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="4982" end="4990" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="5027" end="5033" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="5287" end="5298" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072052" start="5606" end="5628" title="5th Brigade (Zimbabwe)" label="Zimbabwean 5th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6550" end="6571" title="Eugènio Dias Da Silva" label="Eugènio Dias Da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652708" start="7535" end="7553" title="South African Navy" label="South African Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961201" start="7579" end="7614" title="Namacurra class harbour patrol boat" label="Namacurra class harbour patrol boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013370" start="7688" end="7705" title="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town" label="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="7780" end="7791" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q616827" start="7809" end="7834" title="Durance-class tanker" label="&amp;quot;Durance&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="7920" end="7926" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837017" start="7943" end="7951" title="ALINDIEN" label="ALINDIEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="7976" end="7988" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="8006" end="8015" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128357" start="8047" end="8056" title="Constructions Mécaniques de Normandie" label="CMN Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8143" end="8148" title="HSI 32" label="HSI32"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533315" start="8198" end="8223" title="Defence Minister of India" label="Defence Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506475" start="8224" end="8237" title="Rajnath Singh" label="Rajnath Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455448" start="8248" end="8261" title="L&amp;amp;T-class fast interceptor craft" label="L&amp;amp;T class"/>
<link wikidata="Q356379" start="8310" end="8328" title="Indian Coast Guard" label="Indian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557098" start="8450" end="8484" title="Solas Marine fast interceptor boat" label="Solas Marine fast interceptor boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="8845" end="8857" title="machine guns" label="machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455448" start="9047" end="9083" title="L&amp;amp;T-class fast interceptor craft" label="L&amp;amp;T-class fast interceptor craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557098" start="9109" end="9143" title="Solas Marine fast interceptor boat" label="Solas Marine fast interceptor boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131617073" start="9166" end="9176" title="MNS Pebane" label="MNS Pebane"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="9289" end="9301" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9341" end="9359" title="DV15 Interceptor" label="DV 15 interceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679564" start="9580" end="9606" title="Yevgenya-class minesweeper" label="Yevgenya-class minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q126709456" start="9650" end="9676" title="Conscription in Mozambique" label="Conscription in Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="9777" end="9797" title="Flight International" label="Flight International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484897" start="11126" end="11158" title="United States Institute of Peace" label="United States Institute of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11166" end="11182" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="11634" end="11660" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19310" wikidata="Q5468520" url="?curid=19310" title="Foreign relations of Mozambique">
<text>While alliances dating back to the Mozambican War of Independence remain relevant, [[Mozambique]]&#x27;s foreign policy has become increasingly pragmatic. The twin pillars of the policy are maintenance of good relations with its neighbors and maintenance and expansion of ties to development partners.

== History ==
During the 1970s and early 1980s, Mozambique&#x27;s foreign policy was inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in Rhodesia and South Africa as well as superpower competition and the Cold War. Mozambique&#x27;s decision to enforce United Nations sanctions against Rhodesia and support Rhodesian guerrillas led Ian Smith&#x27;s regime to undertake overt and covert actions to destabilize the country. Although the change of government in Zimbabwe in 1980 removed this threat, the apartheid regime in South Africa continued to finance the destabilization of Mozambique.

The 1984 Nkomati Accord, while failing in its goal of ending South African support to RENAMO, opened initial diplomatic contacts between the Mozambican and South African governments. This process gained momentum with South Africa&#x27;s elimination of apartheid, which culminated in the establishment of full diplomatic relations in October 1993. While relations with neighboring Zimbabwe, Malawi, Zambia, and Tanzania show occasional strains, Mozambique&#x27;s ties to these countries remain strong.
In the years immediately following its independence, Mozambique benefited from considerable assistance from some western countries, notably the Scandinavians. The Soviet Union and its allies, however, became Mozambique&#x27;s primary economic, military, and political supporters and its foreign policy reflected this linkage. This began to change in 1983; in 1984 Mozambique joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. Western aid quickly replaced Soviet support, with the Scandinavians, Finland, the United States, the Netherlands, and the European Union becoming increasingly important sources of development assistance. Italy also maintains a profile in Mozambique as a result of its key role during the peace process. Relations with Portugal, the former colonial power, are complex and of some importance as Portuguese investors play a visible role in Mozambique&#x27;s economy.

Mozambique is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and ranks among the moderate members of the African Bloc in the United Nations and other international organizations. Mozambique also belongs to the Organisation of African Unity/African Union and the Southern African Development Community. In 1994, the Government became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation), in part to broaden its base of international support but also to please the country&#x27;s sizeable Muslim population. Similarly, in early 1996 Mozambique joined its Anglophone neighbors in the Commonwealth. In the same year, Mozambique became a founding member and the first President of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), and maintains close ties with other Lusophone states. The country is also a member of the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa (PMAESA).

Illicit drugs:
Southern African transit point for South Asian hashish, South Asian heroin, and South American cocaine probably destined for the European and South African markets; producer of cannabis (for local consumption) and methaqualone (for export to South Africa); corruption and poor regulatory capability makes the banking system vulnerable to money laundering, but the lack of a well-developed financial infrastructure limits the country&#x27;s utility as a money-laundering center.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Mozambique maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
==See also==
*List of diplomatic missions of Mozambique
*List of diplomatic missions in Mozambique

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2002270" start="35" end="65" title="Mozambican War of Independence" label="Mozambican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468520" start="83" end="119" title="Foreign relations of Mozambique" label="[[Mozambique]]&amp;#x27;s foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="446" end="454" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="459" end="471" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="514" end="522" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="562" end="576" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="641" end="650" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301424" start="909" end="923" title="Nkomati Accord" label="Nkomati Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="986" end="992" title="RENAMO" label="RENAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1152" end="1161" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="1280" end="1288" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="1290" end="1296" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="1298" end="1304" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="1310" end="1318" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1545" end="1556" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1564" end="1576" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1787" end="1797" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1802" end="1829" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1913" end="1926" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1932" end="1943" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1953" end="1967" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="2149" end="2157" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="2496" end="2525" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="2548" end="2586" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="2688" end="2723" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2826" end="2832" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2920" end="2932" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="3019" end="3061" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230780" start="3160" end="3218" title="Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa" label="Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="3292" end="3299" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="3313" end="3319" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="3340" end="3347" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="3422" end="3430" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q423912" start="3459" end="3471" title="methaqualone" label="methaqualone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600823" start="3861" end="3902" title="List of diplomatic missions of Mozambique" label="List of diplomatic missions of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622796" start="3904" end="3945" title="List of diplomatic missions in Mozambique" label="List of diplomatic missions in Mozambique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19312" wikidata="Q978" url="?curid=19312" title="Meme">
<text>A meme (; ) is an idea, behavior, or style that spreads by means of imitation from person to person within a culture and often carries symbolic meaning representing a particular phenomenon or theme. A meme acts as a unit for carrying cultural ideas, symbols, or practices, that can be transmitted from one mind to another through writing, speech, gestures, rituals, or other imitable phenomena with a mimicked theme. Supporters of the concept regard memes as cultural analogues to genes in that they self-replicate, mutate, and respond to selective pressures. In popular language, a meme may refer to an Internet meme, typically an image, that is remixed, copied, and circulated in a shared cultural experience online.

Proponents theorize that memes are a viral phenomenon that may evolve by natural selection in a manner analogous to that of biological evolution. Memes do this through processes analogous to those of variation, mutation, competition, and inheritance, each of which influences a meme&#x27;s reproductive success. Memes spread through the behavior that they generate in their hosts. Memes that propagate less prolifically may become extinct, while others may survive, spread, and (for better or for worse) mutate. Memes that replicate most effectively enjoy more success, and some may replicate effectively even when they prove to be detrimental to the welfare of their hosts.

A field of study called &quot;memetics&quot; arose in the 1990s to explore the concepts and transmission of memes in terms of an evolutionary model. Criticism from a variety of fronts has challenged the notion that academic study can examine memes empirically. However, developments in neuroimaging may make empirical study possible. Some commentators in the social sciences question the idea that one can meaningfully categorize culture in terms of discrete units, and are especially critical of the biological nature of the theory&#x27;s underpinnings. Others have argued that this use of the term is the result of a misunderstanding of the original proposal.

The word &quot;meme&quot; itself is a neologism coined by Richard Dawkins, originating from his 1976 book &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;. Dawkins&#x27;s own position is somewhat ambiguous. He welcomed N. K. Humphrey&#x27;s suggestion that &quot;memes should be considered as living structures, not just metaphorically&quot;, and proposed to regard memes as &quot;physically residing in the brain&quot;. Although Dawkins said his original intentions had been simpler, he approved Humphrey&#x27;s opinion and he endorsed Susan Blackmore&#x27;s 1999 project to give a scientific theory of memes, complete with predictions and empirical support.

==Etymology==

The term &quot;meme&quot; is a shortening (modeled on &quot;gene&quot;) of &quot;mimeme&quot;, which comes from Ancient Greek (; ), meaning &#x27;imitated thing&#x27;, itself from (, &#x27;to imitate&#x27;), from (, &#x27;mime&#x27;).

The word was coined by British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; (1976) as a concept for discussion of evolutionary principles in explaining the spread of ideas and cultural phenomena. Examples of memes given in Dawkins&#x27; book include melodies, catchphrases, fashion, and the technology of building arches.

== Origins ==

=== Early formulations ===
Although Richard Dawkins invented the term &quot;meme&quot; and developed meme theory, he has not claimed that the idea was entirely novel, and there have been other expressions for similar ideas in the past.

For instance, the possibility that ideas were subject to the same pressures of evolution as were biological attributes was discussed in the time of Charles Darwin. T. H. Huxley (1880) claimed that &quot;The struggle for existence holds as much in the intellectual as in the physical world. A theory is a species of thinking, and its right to exist is coextensive with its power of resisting extinction by its rivals.&quot; G. K. Chesterton (1922) observed the similarity between intellectual systems and living organisms, noting that a certain degree of complexity, rather than being a hindrance, is a necessity for continued survival.

In 1904, Richard Semon published &quot;Die Mneme&quot; (which appeared in English in 1924 as &quot;The Mneme&quot;). The term &quot;mneme&quot; was also used in Maurice Maeterlinck&#x27;s &quot;The Life of the White Ant&quot; (1926), with some parallels to Dawkins&#x27;s concept. Kenneth Pike had, in 1954, coined the related terms &quot;emic&quot; and &quot;etic&quot;, generalizing the linguistic units of phoneme, morpheme, grapheme, lexeme, and tagmeme (as set out by Leonard Bloomfield), distinguishing insider and outside views of communicative behavior.

=== Dawkins ===
The word &quot;meme&quot; originated with Richard Dawkins&#x27; 1976 book &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;.

Dawkins cites as inspiration the work of geneticist L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, anthropologist F. T. Cloak, and ethologist J. M. Cullen. Dawkins wrote that evolution depended not on the particular chemical basis of genetics, but only on the existence of a self-replicating unit of transmission—in the case of biological evolution, the gene. For Dawkins, the meme exemplified another self-replicating unit with potential significance in explaining human behavior and cultural evolution.
Dawkins used the term to refer to any cultural entity that an observer might consider a replicator. He hypothesized that one could view many cultural entities as replicators, and pointed to melodies, fashions and learned skills as examples. Memes generally replicate through exposure to humans, who have evolved as efficient copiers of information and behavior. Because humans do not always copy memes perfectly, and because they may refine, combine or otherwise modify them with other memes to create new memes, they can change over time. Dawkins likened the process by which memes survive and change through the evolution of culture to the natural selection of genes in biological evolution.
Dawkins noted that in a society with culture a person need not have biological descendants to remain influential in the actions of individuals thousands of years after their death:But if you contribute to the world&#x27;s culture, if you have a good idea...it may live on, intact, long after your genes have dissolved in the common pool. Socrates may or may not have a gene or two alive in the world today, as G.C. Williams has remarked, but who cares? The meme-complexes of Socrates, Leonardo, Copernicus and Marconi are still going strong.

In that context, Dawkins defined the &quot;meme&quot; as a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation and replication, but later definitions would vary. The lack of a consistent, rigorous, and precise understanding of what typically makes up one unit of cultural transmission remains a problem in debates about memetics. In contrast, the concept of genetics gained concrete evidence with the discovery of the biological functions of DNA. Meme transmission requires a physical medium, such as photons, sound waves, touch, taste, or smell because memes can be transmitted only through the senses.

=== After Dawkins: Role of physical media ===
Initially, Dawkins did not seriously give context to the material of memetics. He considered a meme to be an idea, and thus a mental concept. However, from Dawkins&#x27; initial conception, it is how a medium might function in relation to the meme which has garnered the most attention. For example, David Hull suggested that while memes might exist as Dawkins conceives of them, he finds it important to suggest that instead of determining them as idea &quot;replicators&quot; (i.e. mind-determinant influences) one might notice that the medium itself has an influence in the meme&#x27;s evolutionary outcomes. Thus, he refers to the medium as an &quot;interactor&quot; to avoid this determinism. Alternatively, Daniel Dennett suggests that the medium and the idea are not distinct in that memes only exist because of their medium. Dennett argued this in order to remain consistent with his denial of qualia and the notion of materially deterministic evolution which was consistent with Dawkins&#x27; account. A particularly more divergent theory is that of Limor Shifman, a communication and media scholar of &quot;Internet memetics&quot;. She argues that any memetic argument which claims the distinction between the meme and the meme-vehicle (i.e. the meme&#x27;s medium) are empirically observable is mistaken from the offset. Shifman claims to be following a similar theoretical direction as Susan Blackmore; however, her attention to the media surrounding Internet culture has enabled Internet memetic research to depart in empirical interests from previous memetic goals. Regardless of Internet Memetic&#x27;s divergence in theoretical interests, it plays a significant role in theorizing and empirically investigating the connection between cultural ideologies, behaviors, and their mediation processes.

== Memetic lifecycle: transmission, retention ==

Memes, analogously to genes, vary in their aptitude to replicate; successful memes remain and spread, whereas unfit ones stall and are forgotten. Thus, memes that prove more effective at replicating and surviving are selected in the meme pool.

Memes first need retention. The longer a meme stays in its hosts, the higher its chances of propagation are. When a host uses a meme, the meme&#x27;s life is extended. The reuse of the neural space hosting a certain meme&#x27;s copy to host different memes is the greatest threat to that meme&#x27;s copy. A meme that increases the longevity of its hosts will generally survive longer. On the contrary, a meme that shortens the longevity of its hosts will tend to disappear faster. However, as hosts are mortal, retention is not sufficient to perpetuate a meme in the long term; memes also need transmission.

Life-forms can transmit information both vertically (from parent to child, via replication of genes) and horizontally (through viruses and other means).
Memes can replicate vertically or horizontally within a single biological generation. They may also lie dormant for long periods of time.

Memes reproduce by copying from a nervous system to another one, either by communication or imitation. Imitation often involves the copying of an observed behavior of another individual. Communication may be direct or indirect, where memes transmit from one individual to another through a copy recorded in an inanimate source, such as a book or a musical score. Adam McNamara has suggested that memes can be thereby classified as either internal or external memes (i-memes or e-memes).

Some commentators have likened the transmission of memes to the spread of contagions. Social contagions such as fads, hysteria, copycat crime, and copycat suicide exemplify memes seen as the contagious imitation of ideas. Observers distinguish the contagious imitation of memes from instinctively contagious phenomena such as yawning and laughing, which they consider innate (rather than socially learned) behaviors.

Aaron Lynch described seven general patterns of meme transmission, or &quot;thought contagion&quot;:

# Quantity of parenthood: an idea that influences the number of children one has. Children respond particularly receptively to the ideas of their parents, and thus ideas that directly or indirectly encourage a higher birth rate will replicate themselves at a higher rate than those that discourage higher birth rates.
# Efficiency of parenthood: an idea that increases the proportion of children who will adopt ideas of their parents. Cultural separatism exemplifies one practice in which one can expect a higher rate of meme-replication—because the meme for separation creates a barrier from exposure to competing ideas.
# Proselytic: ideas generally passed to others beyond one&#x27;s own children. Ideas that encourage the proselytism of a meme, as seen in many religious or political movements, can replicate memes horizontally through a given generation, spreading more rapidly than parent-to-child meme-transmissions do.
# Preservational: ideas that influence those that hold them to continue to hold them for a long time. Ideas that encourage longevity in their hosts, or leave their hosts particularly resistant to abandoning or replacing these ideas, enhance the preservability of memes and afford protection from the competition or proselytism of other memes.
# Adversative: ideas that influence those that hold them to attack or sabotage competing ideas and/or those that hold them. Adversative replication can give an advantage in meme transmission when the meme itself encourages aggression against other memes.
# Cognitive: ideas perceived as cogent by most in the population who encounter them. Cognitively transmitted memes depend heavily on a cluster of other ideas and cognitive traits already widely held in the population, and thus usually spread more passively than other forms of meme transmission. Memes spread in cognitive transmission do not count as self-replicating.
# Motivational: ideas that people adopt because they perceive some self-interest in adopting them. Strictly speaking, motivationally transmitted memes do not self-propagate, but this mode of transmission often occurs in association with memes self-replicated in the efficiency parental, proselytic and preservational modes.

According to Richard Brodie, a &quot;&quot; is a self-propagating idea, belief, or cultural concept that spreads from person to person, much like a biological virus. These &quot;viruses&quot; replicate by infecting minds, influencing thoughts and behaviors, and using communication and social structures to multiply. Mind viruses can be benign, beneficial, or harmful, depending on their effects. Examples include religious doctrines, political ideologies, advertising slogans, and even internet trends. Brodie argues that mind viruses exploit cognitive vulnerabilities—like emotional triggers, repetition, or authority figures—to ensure their survival and reproduction in human minds. Some spread deliberately, such as through marketing or propaganda, while others evolve naturally through human interaction.

== Memes as discrete units ==

Dawkins initially defined &quot;meme&quot; as a noun that &quot;conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of &quot;imitation&quot;&quot;. John S. Wilkins retained the notion of meme as a kernel of cultural imitation while emphasizing the meme&#x27;s evolutionary aspect, defining the meme as &quot;the least unit of sociocultural information relative to a selection process that has favorable or unfavorable selection bias that exceeds its endogenous tendency to change&quot;. The meme as a unit provides a convenient means of discussing &quot;a piece of thought copied from person to person&quot;, regardless of whether that thought contains others inside it, or forms part of a larger meme. A meme could consist of a single word, or a meme could consist of the entire speech in which that word first occurred. This forms an analogy to the idea of a gene as a single unit of self-replicating information found on the self-replicating chromosome.

While the identification of memes as &quot;units&quot; conveys their nature to replicate as discrete, indivisible entities, it does not imply that thoughts somehow become quantized or that &quot;atomic&quot; ideas exist that cannot be dissected into smaller pieces. A meme has no given size. Susan Blackmore writes that melodies from Beethoven&#x27;s symphonies are commonly used to illustrate the difficulty involved in delimiting memes as discrete units. She notes that while the first four notes of Beethoven&#x27;s Fifth Symphony () form a meme widely replicated as an independent unit, one can regard the entire symphony as a single meme as well.

The inability to pin an idea or cultural feature to quantifiable key units is widely acknowledged as a problem for memetics. It has been argued however that the traces of memetic processing can be quantified utilizing neuroimaging techniques which measure changes in the &quot;connectivity profiles between brain regions&quot;. Blackmore meets such criticism by stating that memes compare with genes in this respect: that while a gene has no particular size, nor can we ascribe every phenotypic feature directly to a particular gene, it has value because it encapsulates that key unit of inherited expression subject to evolutionary pressures. To illustrate, she notes evolution selects for the gene for features such as eye color; it does not select for the individual nucleotide in a strand of DNA. Memes play a comparable role in understanding the evolution of imitated behaviors.

&quot;Genes, Mind, and Culture: The Coevolutionary Process&quot; (1981) by Charles J. Lumsden and E. O. Wilson proposes the theory that genes and culture co-evolve, and that the fundamental biological units of culture must correspond to neuronal networks that function as nodes of semantic memory. Lumsden and Wilson coined their own word, &quot;culturgen&quot;, which did not catch on. Coauthor Wilson later acknowledged the term &quot;meme&quot; as the best label for the fundamental unit of cultural inheritance in his 1998 book &quot;&quot;, which elaborates upon the fundamental role of memes in unifying the natural and social sciences.

At present, the existence of discrete cultural units which satisfy memetic theory has been challenged in a variety of ways. What is critical from this perspective is that in denying memetics unitary status is to deny a particularly fundamental part of Dawkins&#x27; original argument. In particular, denying memes are a unit, or are explainable in some clear unitary structure denies the cultural analogy that inspired Dawkins to define them. If memes are not describable as unitary, memes are not accountable within a neo-Darwinian model of evolutionary culture.

Within cultural anthropology, materialist approaches are skeptical of such units. In particular, Dan Sperber argues that memes are not unitary in the sense that there are no two instances of exactly the same cultural idea, all that can be argued is that there is material mimicry of an idea. Thus every instance of a &quot;meme&quot; would not be a true evolutionary unit of replication.

Dan Deacon, Kalevi Kull separately argued memes are degenerate Signs in that they offer only a partial explanation of the triadic in Charles Sanders Peirce&#x27;s semiotic theory: a sign (a reference to an object), an object (the thing being referred to), and an interpretant (the interpreting actor of a sign). They argue the meme unit is a sign which only is defined by its replication ability. Accordingly, in the broadest sense, the objects of copying are memes, whereas the objects of translation and interpretation are signs. Later, Sara Cannizzaro more fully develops out this semiotic relation in order to reframe memes as being a kind of semiotic activity, however she too denies that memes are units, referring to them as &quot;sign systems&quot; instead.

In Limor Shifman&#x27;s account of Internet memetics, she also denies memetics as being unitary. She argues memes are not unitary, however many assume they are because many previous memetic researchers confounded memes with the cultural interest in &quot;virals&quot;: singular informational objects which spread with a particular rate and veracity such as a video or a picture. As such, Shifman argues that Dawkins&#x27; original notion of meme is closer to what communication and information studies consider digitally viral replication.

==Evolutionary influences on memes==
Dawkins noted the three conditions that must exist for evolution to occur:
# variation, or the introduction of new change to existing elements;
# heredity or replication, or the capacity to create copies of elements;
# differential &quot;fitness&quot;, or the opportunity for one element to be more or less suited to the environment than another.
Dawkins emphasizes that the process of evolution naturally occurs whenever these conditions co-exist, and that evolution does not apply only to organic elements such as genes. He regards memes as also having the properties necessary for evolution, and thus sees meme evolution as not simply analogous to genetic evolution, but as a real phenomenon subject to the laws of natural selection. Dawkins noted that as various ideas pass from one generation to the next, they may either enhance or detract from the survival of the people who obtain those ideas, or influence the survival of the ideas themselves. For example, a certain culture may develop unique designs and methods of tool-making that give it a competitive advantage over another culture. Each tool-design thus acts somewhat similarly to a biological gene in that some populations have it and others do not, and the meme&#x27;s function directly affects the presence of the design in future generations. In keeping with the thesis that in evolution one can regard organisms simply as suitable &quot;hosts&quot; for reproducing genes, Dawkins argues that one can view people as &quot;hosts&quot; for replicating memes. Consequently, a successful meme may or may not need to provide any benefit to its host.

Unlike genetic evolution, memetic evolution can show both Darwinian and Lamarckian traits. Cultural memes will have the characteristic of Lamarckian inheritance when a host aspires to replicate the given meme through inference rather than by exactly copying it. Take for example the case of the transmission of a simple skill such as hammering a nail, a skill that a learner imitates from watching a demonstration without necessarily imitating every discrete movement modeled by the teacher in the demonstration, stroke for stroke. Susan Blackmore distinguishes the difference between the two modes of inheritance in the evolution of memes, characterizing the Darwinian mode as &quot;copying the instructions&quot; and the Lamarckian as &quot;copying the product&quot;.

Clusters of memes, or &quot;memeplexes&quot; (also known as &quot;meme complexes&quot; or as &quot;memecomplexes&quot;), such as cultural or political doctrines and systems, may also play a part in the acceptance of new memes. Memeplexes comprise groups of memes that replicate together and coadapt. Memes that fit within a successful memeplex may gain acceptance by &quot;piggybacking&quot; on the success of the memeplex.
As an example, John D. Gottsch discusses the transmission, mutation and selection of religious memeplexes and the theistic memes contained. Theistic memes discussed include the &quot;prohibition of aberrant sexual practices such as incest, adultery, homosexuality, bestiality, castration, and religious prostitution&quot;, which may have increased vertical transmission of the parent religious memeplex. Similar memes are thereby included in the majority of religious memeplexes, and harden over time; they become an &quot;inviolable canon&quot; or set of dogmas, eventually finding their way into secular law. This could also be referred to as the propagation of a taboo.

==Memetics==
Memetics is the name of the field of science that studies memes and their evolution and culture spread. While the term &quot;meme&quot; appeared in various forms in German and Austrian texts near the turn of the 20th century, Dawkin&#x27;s unrelated use of the term in The Selfish Gene marked its emergence into mainstream study. Based on the Dawkin&#x27;s framing of a meme as a cultural analogue to a gene, meme theory originated as an attempt to apply biological evolutionary principles to cultural information transfer and cultural evolution. Thus, memetics attempts to apply conventional scientific methods (such as those used in population genetics and epidemiology) to explain existing patterns and transmission of cultural ideas.

Principal criticisms of memetics include the claim that memetics ignores established advances in other fields of cultural study, such as sociology, cultural anthropology, cognitive psychology, and social psychology. Questions remain whether or not the meme concept counts as a validly disprovable scientific theory. This view regards memetics as a theory in its infancy: a protoscience to proponents, or a pseudoscience to some detractors.

=== Criticism of meme theory ===
One frequent criticism of meme theory looks at the perceived gap in the gene/meme analogy. For example, Luis Benitez-Bribiesca points to the lack of a &quot;code script&quot; for memes (analogous to the DNA of genes), and to the excessive instability of the meme mutation mechanism (that of an idea going from one brain to another), which would lead to a low replication accuracy and a high mutation rate, rendering the evolutionary process chaotic. In his book &quot;Darwin&#x27;s Dangerous Idea&quot;, Daniel C. Dennett points to the existence of self-regulating correction mechanisms (vaguely resembling those of gene transcription) enabled by the redundancy and other properties of most meme expression languages which stabilize information transfer. Dennett notes that spiritual narratives, including music and dance forms, can survive in full detail across any number of generations even in cultures with oral tradition only. In contrast, when applying only meme theory, memes for which stable copying methods are available will inevitably get selected for survival more often than those which can only have unstable mutations (such as the noted music and dance forms), which, according to meme theory, should have resulted in those forms of cultural expression going extinct.

A second common criticism of meme theory views it as a reductionist and inadequate version of more accepted anthropological theories. Kim Sterelny and Paul Griffiths noted the cumulative evolution of genes depends on biological selection-pressures neither too great nor too small in relation to mutation-rates, while pointing out there is no reason to think that the same balance will exist in the selection pressures on memes. Semiotic theorists such as Terrence Deacon and Kalevi Kull regard the concept of a meme as a primitivized or degenerate concept of a sign, containing only a sign&#x27;s basic ability to be copied, but lacks other core elements of the sign concept such as translation and interpretation. Evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr similarly disapproved of Dawkins&#x27;s gene-based view of meme, asserting it to be an &quot;unnecessary synonym&quot; for a concept, reasoning that concepts are not restricted to an individual or a generation, may persist for long periods of time, and may evolve. 

==Applications==
Opinions differ as to how best to apply the concept of memes within a &quot;proper&quot; disciplinary framework. One view sees memes as providing a useful philosophical perspective with which to examine cultural evolution. Proponents of this view (such as Susan Blackmore and Daniel Dennett) argue that considering cultural developments from a meme&#x27;s-eye view—&quot;as if&quot; memes themselves respond to pressure to maximise their own replication and survival—can lead to useful insights and yield valuable predictions into how culture develops over time. Others such as Bruce Edmonds and Robert Aunger have focused on the need to provide an empirical grounding for memetics to become a useful and respected scientific discipline.

A third approach, described by Joseph Poulshock, as &quot;radical memetics&quot; seeks to place memes at the centre of a materialistic theory of mind and of personal identity.

Prominent researchers in evolutionary psychology and anthropology, including Scott Atran, Dan Sperber, Pascal Boyer, John Tooby and others, argue the possibility of incompatibility between modularity of mind and memetics. In their view, minds structure certain communicable aspects of the ideas produced, and these communicable aspects generally trigger or elicit ideas in other minds through inference (to relatively rich structures generated from often low-fidelity input) and not high-fidelity replication or imitation. Atran discusses communication involving religious beliefs as a case in point. In one set of experiments he asked religious people to write down on a piece of paper the meanings of the Ten Commandments. Despite the subjects&#x27; own expectations of consensus, interpretations of the commandments showed wide ranges of variation, with little evidence of consensus. In another experiment, subjects with autism and subjects without autism interpreted ideological and religious sayings (for example, &quot;Let a thousand flowers bloom&quot; or &quot;To everything there is a season&quot;). People with autism showed a significant tendency to closely paraphrase and repeat content from the original statement (for example: &quot;Don&#x27;t cut flowers before they bloom&quot;). Controls tended to infer a wider range of cultural meanings with little replicated content (for example: &quot;Go with the flow&quot; or &quot;Everyone should have equal opportunity&quot;). Only the subjects with autism—who lack the degree of inferential capacity normally associated with aspects of theory of mind—came close to functioning as &quot;meme machines&quot;.

In his book &quot;The Robot&#x27;s Rebellion&quot;, Keith Stanovich uses the memes and memeplex concepts to describe a program of cognitive reform that he refers to as a &quot;rebellion&quot;. Specifically, Stanovich argues that the use of memes as a descriptor for cultural units is beneficial because it serves to emphasize transmission and acquisition properties that parallel the study of epidemiology. These properties make salient the sometimes parasitic nature of acquired memes, and as a result individuals should be motivated to reflectively acquire memes using what he calls a &quot;Neurathian bootstrap&quot; process.

===Memetic explanations of racism===
In &quot;Cultural Software: A Theory of Ideology&quot;, Jack Balkin argued that memetic processes can explain many of the most familiar features of ideological thought. His theory of &quot;cultural software&quot; maintained that memes form narratives, social networks, metaphoric and metonymic models, and a variety of different mental structures. Balkin maintains that the same structures used to generate ideas about free speech or free markets also serve to generate racistic beliefs. To Balkin, whether memes become harmful or maladaptive depends on the environmental context in which they exist rather than in any special source or manner to their origination. Balkin describes racist beliefs as &quot;fantasy&quot; memes that become harmful or unjust &quot;ideologies&quot; when diverse peoples come together, as through trade or competition.

==Religion==

Richard Dawkins called for a re-analysis of religion in terms of the evolution of self-replicating ideas &quot;apart from&quot; any resulting biological advantages they might bestow.
He argued that the role of key replicator in cultural evolution belongs not to genes, but to memes replicating thought from person to person by means of imitation. These replicators respond to selective pressures that may or may not affect biological reproduction or survival.

In her book &quot;The Meme Machine&quot;, Susan Blackmore regards religions as particularly tenacious memes. Many of the features common to the most widely practiced religions provide built-in advantages in an evolutionary context, she writes. For example, religions that preach of the value of faith over evidence from everyday experience or reason inoculate societies against many of the most basic tools people commonly use to evaluate their ideas. By linking altruism with religious affiliation, religious memes can proliferate more quickly because people perceive that they can reap societal as well as personal rewards. The longevity of religious memes improves with their documentation in revered religious texts.

Aaron Lynch attributed the robustness of religious memes in human culture to the fact that such memes incorporate multiple modes of meme transmission. Religious memes pass down the generations from parent to child and across a single generation through the meme-exchange of proselytism. Most people will hold the religion taught them by their parents throughout their life. Many religions feature adversarial elements, punishing apostasy, for instance, or demonizing infidels. In &quot;Thought Contagion&quot; Lynch identifies the memes of transmission in Christianity as especially powerful in scope. Believers view the conversion of non-believers both as a religious duty and as an act of altruism. The promise of heaven to believers and threat of hell to non-believers provide a strong incentive for members to retain their belief. Lynch asserts that belief in the Crucifixion of Jesus in Christianity amplifies each of its other replication advantages through the indebtedness believers have to their Savior for sacrifice on the cross. The image of the crucifixion recurs in religious sacraments, and the proliferation of symbols of the cross in homes and churches potently reinforces the wide array of Christian memes.

Although religious memes have proliferated in human cultures, the modern scientific community has been relatively resistant to religious belief. Robertson (2007) reasoned that if evolution is accelerated in conditions of propagative difficulty, then we would expect to encounter variations of religious memes, established in general populations, addressed to scientific communities. Using a memetic approach, Robertson deconstructed two attempts to privilege religiously held spirituality in scientific discourse. Advantages of a memetic approach as compared to more traditional &quot;modernization&quot; and &quot;supply side&quot; theses in understanding the evolution and propagation of religion were explored.

==Architectural memes==
In &quot;A Theory of Architecture&quot;, Nikos Salingaros speaks of memes as &quot;freely propagating clusters of information&quot; which can be beneficial or harmful. He contrasts memes to patterns and true knowledge, characterizing memes as &quot;greatly simplified versions of patterns&quot; and as &quot;unreasoned matching to some visual or mnemonic prototype&quot;. Taking reference to Dawkins, Salingaros emphasizes that they can be transmitted due to their own communicative properties, that &quot;the simpler they are, the faster they can proliferate&quot;, and that the most successful memes &quot;come with a great psychological appeal&quot;.

Architectural memes, according to Salingaros, can have destructive power: &quot;Images portrayed in architectural magazines representing buildings that could not possibly accommodate everyday uses become fixed in our memory, so we reproduce them unconsciously.&quot; He lists various architectural memes that circulated since the 1920s and which, in his view, have led to contemporary architecture becoming quite decoupled from human needs. They lack connection and meaning, thereby preventing &quot;the creation of true connections necessary to our understanding of the world&quot;. He sees them as no different from antipatterns in software design—as solutions that are false but are re-utilized nonetheless.

==Internet culture==
An &quot;Internet meme&quot; is a concept that spreads rapidly from person to person via the Internet. Memes can spread from person to person via social networks, blogs, direct email, or news sources. Sending memes as a form of affection is known as pebbling.

In 2013, Dawkins characterized an Internet meme as one deliberately altered by human creativity, distinguished from his original idea involving mutation &quot;by random change and a form of Darwinian selection&quot;.

Internet memes are an example of Dawkins&#x27; meme theory at work in the sense of how they so rapidly mirror current cultural events and become a part of how the time period is defined. Limor Shifman uses the example of the &#x27;Gangnam Style&#x27; Music video by South Korean pop-star, Psy that went viral in 2012. Shifman cites examples of how the meme mutated itself into the cultural sphere, mixing with other things going on at the time such as the 2012 U.S. presidential election, which led to the creation of Mitt Romney Style, a parody of the original Gangnam style, intended to be a jab at the 2012 Republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney.

===Meme stocks===

Meme stocks, a particular subset of Internet memes in general, are listed companies lauded for the social media buzz they create, rather than their operating performance. Meme stocks find themselves surging in popularity after gaining the interest of individuals or groups through the internet. r/wallstreetbets, a subreddit where participants discuss stock and option trading, and the financial services company Robinhood Markets, became notable in 2021 for their involvement on the popularization and enhancement of meme stocks. One of the most commonly recognized instances of a meme stock is GameStop, whose stocks saw a sudden increase after a Reddit-led idea to invest in 2021.

==Politics==
In the United States the presidential campaigns have utilized memes on the Internet in the last three cycles. Disinformation has been charged by political contestants with memes being a concern of the complaints.
==See also==
* Baldwin effect
* &quot;The Beginning of Infinity&quot;
* Biosemiotics
* Chain letter
* Darwin machine
* Dual inheritance theory
* Evolutionary biology
* Framing (social sciences)
* Infodemic
* The Leiden school
* Memetic algorithm
* Memetic engineering
* Muslim meme
* Phraseme
* Propaganda
* Psycholinguistics
* Snowclone
* Survivals
* Universal Darwinism
* Viral marketing
* Viral video
==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* [trade paperback (1999), (2000)]
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Dawkins&#x27;s speech on the 30th anniversary of the publication of &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, Dawkins 2006
* &quot;Evolution and Memes: The human brain as a selective imitation device&quot;: article by Susan Blackmore.
* Journal of Memetics, a peer-refereed journal of memetics published from 1997 until 2005.
* Susan Blackmore: Memes and &quot;temes&quot;, TED Talks February 2008.
* Christopher von Bülow: &quot;Article Meme&quot;, translated from: Jürgen Mittelstraß (ed.), &quot;Enzyklopädie Philosophie und Wissenschaftstheorie&quot;, 2nd edn, vol. 5, Stuttgart/Weimar: Metzler 2013.
* Richard Dawkins explains the real meaning of the word &#x27;meme&#x27;
* Richard Dawkins |Memes |Oxford Union </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978" start="2" end="6" title="Meme" label="meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="234" end="242" title="culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="481" end="485" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q374294" start="500" end="514" title="Self-replication" label="self-replicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="539" end="558" title="natural selection" label="selective pressures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="604" end="617" title="Internet meme" label="Internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287668" start="757" end="773" title="viral phenomenon" label="viral phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="844" end="864" title="evolution" label="biological evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="920" end="929" title="genetic diversity" label="variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="931" end="939" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="941" end="952" title="competition" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="958" end="969" title="heredity" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587899" start="1112" end="1121" title="fecundity" label="propagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="1151" end="1158" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q23399" start="1426" end="1434" title="memetics" label="memetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888417" start="1525" end="1543" title="evolutionary model" label="evolutionary model"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="1644" end="1653" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="1682" end="1694" title="Functional neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="1755" end="1770" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="2097" end="2106" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="2117" end="2132" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q212789" start="2171" end="2187" title="The Selfish Gene" label="The Selfish Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984899" start="2258" end="2272" title="Nicholas Keynes Humphrey" label="N. K. Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="2576" end="2591" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q470114" start="2599" end="2611" title="The Meme Machine" label="1999 project"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2827" end="2840" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="3005" end="3020" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q212789" start="3030" end="3046" title="The Selfish Gene" label="The Selfish Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="3091" end="3100" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="3227" end="3235" title="Melody" label="melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="3237" end="3248" title="catchphrase" label="catchphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="3716" end="3728" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="T. H. Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="3975" end="3991" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q723897" start="4106" end="4116" title="complexity" label="complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q69820" start="4198" end="4211" title="Richard Semon" label="Richard Semon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49747" start="4350" end="4369" title="Maurice Maeterlinck" label="Maurice Maeterlinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359106" start="4470" end="4482" title="Kenneth Pike" label="Kenneth Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337916" start="4522" end="4559" title="Emic and etic" label="&amp;quot;emic&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;etic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="4598" end="4605" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="4607" end="4615" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="4617" end="4625" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q111352" start="4627" end="4633" title="lexeme" label="lexeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q10377818" start="4639" end="4646" title="tagmeme" label="tagmeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q215957" start="4662" end="4680" title="Leonard Bloomfield" label="Leonard Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="4810" end="4825" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q212789" start="4848" end="4864" title="The Selfish Gene" label="The Selfish Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q315454" start="4925" end="4945" title="L. L. Cavalli-Sforza" label="L. L. Cavalli-Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q374294" start="5441" end="5451" title="self-replication" label="replicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031891" start="5967" end="5987" title="cultural evolution" label="evolution of culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="6036" end="6045" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="6385" end="6393" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q552019" start="6457" end="6470" title="George C. Williams (biologist)" label="G.C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="6532" end="6540" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="6542" end="6552" title="Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="6557" end="6564" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193384" start="6657" end="6678" title="Cultural Transmission" label="cultural transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23399" start="6912" end="6920" title="memetics" label="memetics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6993" end="7002" title="DNA#History" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7010" end="7030" title="DNA#Biological functions" label="biological functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7034" end="7037" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495105" start="7543" end="7553" title="David Hull (philosopher)" label="David Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="7956" end="7970" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="8145" end="8151" title="qualia" label="qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116180818" start="8302" end="8315" title="Limor Shifman" label="Limor Shifman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="8360" end="8373" title="Internet meme" label="Internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="8641" end="8656" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131737" start="10346" end="10355" title="imitation" label="imitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="10400" end="10408" title="observation" label="observed"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="10602" end="10615" title="Sheet music" label="musical score"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="10816" end="10826" title="infectious disease" label="contagions"/>
<link wikidata="Q955199" start="10854" end="10858" title="Bandwagon effect" label="fads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962366" start="10860" end="10868" title="Hysterical contagion" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q109931" start="10870" end="10883" title="copycat crime" label="copycat crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047483" start="10889" end="10904" title="copycat suicide" label="copycat suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662230" start="11160" end="11171" title="Aaron Lynch (writer)" label="Aaron Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="11706" end="11716" title="separatism" label="separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="11988" end="11999" title="proselytism" label="proselytism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="15279" end="15289" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q636027" start="15463" end="15472" title="Quantization (physics)" label="quantized"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="15487" end="15491" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="15584" end="15599" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="15626" end="15635" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q188709" start="15794" end="15825" title="Symphony No. 5 (Beethoven)" label="Beethoven&amp;#x27;s Fifth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="16375" end="16379" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="16429" end="16439" title="phenotype" label="phenotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="16741" end="16744" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079359" start="16905" end="16923" title="Charles J. Lumsden" label="Charles J. Lumsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="16928" end="16940" title="E. O. Wilson" label="E. O. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="17120" end="17126" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193694" start="17176" end="17185" title="culturgen" label="culturgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="17444" end="17451" title="Natural science" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="17456" end="17471" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q187363" start="18136" end="18147" title="Dan Sperber" label="Dan Sperber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618902" start="18440" end="18451" title="Kalevi Kull" label="Kalevi Kull"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="18491" end="18496" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="18561" end="18590" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="20491" end="20508" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="20560" end="20570" title="generation" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="20799" end="20803" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="20932" end="20936" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="21446" end="21455" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208800" start="21460" end="21470" title="Lamarckism" label="Lamarckian"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="21920" end="21935" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333178" start="22187" end="22195" title="memeplex" label="memeplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="23139" end="23144" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="23189" end="23192" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="23249" end="23254" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="23736" end="23748" title="Evolution" label="evolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350200" start="23772" end="23792" title="information transfer" label="information transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050187" start="23797" end="23815" title="Sociocultural evolution" label="cultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="23905" end="23924" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="23929" end="23941" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="23992" end="24000" title="culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="24146" end="24155" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="24157" end="24178" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="24180" end="24200" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="24206" end="24223" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="24286" end="24305" title="philosophy of science" label="validly disprovable"/>
<link wikidata="Q375843" start="24382" end="24394" title="protoscience" label="protoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="24415" end="24428" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q725569" start="24951" end="24979" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s Dangerous Idea" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s Dangerous Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="25822" end="25834" title="Reductionism" label="reductionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="26195" end="26203" title="Semiotic" label="Semiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703450" start="26222" end="26237" title="Terrence Deacon" label="Terrence Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618902" start="26242" end="26253" title="Kalevi Kull" label="Kalevi Kull"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="26328" end="26332" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="26505" end="26515" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="26641" end="26648" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031891" start="27003" end="27021" title="cultural evolution" label="cultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="27056" end="27071" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="27076" end="27090" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="27515" end="27536" title="scientific discipline" label="scientific discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329497" start="27660" end="27673" title="Eliminative materialism" label="materialistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="27674" end="27688" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254571" start="27696" end="27713" title="personal identity" label="personal identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="27741" end="27764" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="27769" end="27781" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260782" start="27793" end="27804" title="Scott Atran" label="Scott Atran"/>
<link wikidata="Q187363" start="27806" end="27817" title="Dan Sperber" label="Dan Sperber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371728" start="27819" end="27831" title="Pascal Boyer" label="Pascal Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701956" start="27833" end="27843" title="John Tooby" label="John Tooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317963" start="27905" end="27923" title="modularity of mind" label="modularity of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="28423" end="28439" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="29312" end="29326" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385058" start="29436" end="29451" title="Keith Stanovich" label="Keith Stanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="29777" end="29789" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002086" start="29977" end="29997" title="Neurathian bootstrap" label="Neurathian bootstrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111128" start="30107" end="30118" title="Jack Balkin" label="Jack Balkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="30199" end="30210" title="ideology" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="30291" end="30300" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="30335" end="30344" title="metonymy" label="metonymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145290" start="31014" end="31019" title="Idea in anthropology" label="ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q470114" start="31394" end="31410" title="The Meme Machine" label="The Meme Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="31418" end="31433" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="31671" end="31676" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="31682" end="31690" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="31719" end="31725" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="31839" end="31847" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="32080" end="32095" title="scripture" label="religious texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662230" start="32098" end="32109" title="Aaron Lynch (writer)" label="Aaron Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="32372" end="32383" title="proselytism" label="proselytism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="32527" end="32535" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587978" start="32565" end="32573" title="infidels" label="infidels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="32654" end="32666" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="32814" end="32820" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="32848" end="32852" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="32966" end="32986" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="Crucifixion of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305703" start="33103" end="33109" title="Redeemer (Christianity)" label="Savior"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="33187" end="33196" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="33239" end="33244" title="Christian cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660050" start="34071" end="34095" title="A Theory of Architecture" label="A Theory of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400218" start="34103" end="34119" title="Nikos Salingaros" label="Nikos Salingaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294584" start="34252" end="34260" title="Pattern language" label="patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q76438" start="35335" end="35346" title="antipattern" label="antipattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="35543" end="35551" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="35596" end="35610" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="35613" end="35617" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="35627" end="35632" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q978" start="35659" end="35663" title="meme" label="meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q131292920" start="35700" end="35708" title="pebbling" label="pebbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q20150" start="36218" end="36221" title="Psy" label="Psy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="36385" end="36416" title="2012 U.S. presidential election" label="2012 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="36447" end="36458" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q88239185" start="36902" end="36918" title="r/wallstreetbets" label="r/wallstreetbets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36922" end="36931" title="Reddit#Subreddits" label="subreddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997173" start="36959" end="36983" title="stock trader" label="stock and option trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155123" start="37020" end="37037" title="Robinhood Markets" label="Robinhood Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q202210" start="37203" end="37211" title="GameStop" label="GameStop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="37256" end="37262" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="37312" end="37325" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="37415" end="37429" title="Disinformation" label="Disinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q789352" start="37533" end="37547" title="Baldwin effect" label="Baldwin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716343" start="37556" end="37581" title="The Beginning of Infinity" label="The Beginning of Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q864714" start="37590" end="37602" title="Biosemiotics" label="Biosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q371008" start="37605" end="37617" title="Chain letter" label="Chain letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226043" start="37620" end="37634" title="Darwin machine" label="Darwin machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699472" start="37637" end="37660" title="Dual inheritance theory" label="Dual inheritance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="37663" end="37683" title="Evolutionary biology" label="Evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q594739" start="37686" end="37711" title="Framing (social sciences)" label="Framing (social sciences)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94438711" start="37714" end="37723" title="Infodemic" label="Infodemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746892" start="37726" end="37743" title="The Leiden school" label="The Leiden school"/>
<link wikidata="Q324793" start="37746" end="37763" title="Memetic algorithm" label="Memetic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815212" start="37766" end="37785" title="Memetic engineering" label="Memetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q115736276" start="37788" end="37799" title="Muslim meme" label="Muslim meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551966" start="37802" end="37810" title="Phraseme" label="Phraseme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="37813" end="37823" title="Propaganda" label="Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="37826" end="37843" title="Psycholinguistics" label="Psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338287" start="37846" end="37855" title="Snowclone" label="Snowclone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37858" end="37867" title="Edward Burnett Tylor#Survivals" label="Survivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893935" start="37870" end="37889" title="Universal Darwinism" label="Universal Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204255" start="37892" end="37907" title="Viral marketing" label="Viral marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="37910" end="37921" title="Viral video" label="Viral video"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="38257" end="38272" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q95189" start="38506" end="38524" title="Jürgen Mittelstraß" label="Jürgen Mittelstraß"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19314" wikidata="Q224028" url="?curid=19314" title="Monroe">
<text>Monroe or Monroes may refer to:
==People and fictional characters==
* Monroe (surname)
* Monroe (given name)
* James Monroe, 5th President of the United States
* Marilyn Monroe, actress and model

==Places==
===United States===
* Monroe, Arkansas, an unincorporated community and census-designated place
* Fort Monroe (Yosemite), California, a historic site
* Monroe, Connecticut, a town
* Lake Monroe (Florida)
* Monroe, Georgia, a city
* Monroe, Adams County, Indiana, a town
* Monroe, Tippecanoe County, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Lake Monroe (Indiana), a reservoir
* Monroe, Iowa, a city
* Monroe, Kentucky, an unincorporated community
* Monroe, Louisiana, a city
* Monroe, Maine, a town
* Monroe, Massachusetts, a town
* Monroe, Michigan, a city
* Lake Monroe (Mississippi), Monroe County, Mississippi
* Monroe Island, in the Yellowstone River in Montana
* Monroe, Nebraska, a village
* Monroe, New Hampshire a town
* Mount Monroe, a peak in the White Mountains of New Hampshire
* Monroe, New York, a town
** Monroe (village), New York, in the town of Monroe
* Monroe, North Carolina, a city
* Monroe, Ohio, a city
* Monroe, Jackson County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Monroe, Oklahoma, an unincorporated community and census-designated place
* Monroe, Oregon, a city
* Monroe, Pennsylvania, a borough
* Monroe, South Dakota, a town
* Monroe, Tennessee, an unincorporated community
* Monroe, Utah, a city
* Monroe, Virginia, an unincorporated community
* Fort Monroe, Hampton, Virginia, a former military installation
* Monroe Park, Richmond, Virginia
* Monroe Bay, Virginia
* Monroe, Washington, a city
* Monroe, Adams County, Wisconsin, a town
* Monroe (town), Green County, Wisconsin, a town
* Monroe, Wisconsin, a city partially within the town of Monroe
* Monroe Township (disambiguation)
* Monroe County (disambiguation)

=== Elsewhere ===
* Monroe Island, South Orkney Islands, Antarctica
* Monroe Point, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica
* Monroe, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, a settlement
* Monroe, County Westmeath, Ireland, a townland
* 3768 Monroe, an asteroid

==Arts and entertainment==
===Television===
* &quot;Monroe&quot; (TV series), a British medical drama series
* &quot;The Monroes&quot; (1966 TV series), an American Western series
* &quot;The Monroes&quot; (1995 TV series), an American prime-time soap opera

===Music===
* The Monroes (American band), a 1980s New Wave pop band
* The Monroes (Norwegian band), a 1980s pop/ska duo

===Other arts and entertainment===
: &quot;For fictional characters, see Monroe (given name) and Monroe (surname).&quot;
* &quot;Monroe&quot; (comic strip), a comic strip published in &quot;Mad Magazine&quot;
* Monroe Republic, an area of the US in the television series &quot;Revolution&quot;

==Schools==
* Monroe College, a former name of Tift College, a private liberal arts women&#x27;s college located in Forsyth, Georgia
* Monroe College, an American for-profit college based in New York
* Monroe School (Phoenix, Arizona), a former school on the National Register of Historic Places
* Monroe School (Sandusky, Ohio), on the National Register of Historic Places in Sandusky, Ohio
* Monroe High School (disambiguation)
* Monroe Elementary School (disambiguation)

==Transportation==
* Monroe (automobile), a vintage American automobile of the Brass Era
* , a steamship
* Monroe Airport (disambiguation)
* Monroe Expressway, North Carolina
* Monroe Railroad (disambiguation)
* Monroe station (disambiguation)

==Other uses==
* Monroe (tree), a giant sequoia in the Giant Forest, California
* Monroe Correctional Complex, Monroe, Washington, United States
* Monroe (avocado), a commercial avocado cultivar
* Monroe Calculating Machine Company, an American calculator company
* Monroe, a division of the Tenneco corporation
* Monroe piercing, body piercing of the upper lip area
* Palácio Monroe, a former building in Rio de Janeiro

==See also==
* 
* Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy of opposing European colonialism in the Americas
* Monroe Center (disambiguation)
* Monroe City (disambiguation)
* Monroe County (disambiguation)
* Monroeville (disambiguation)
* Monro (disambiguation)
* Munro (disambiguation)
* Munroe (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224028" start="0" end="6" title="Monroe" label="Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q224028" start="10" end="17" title="Monroe" label="Monroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780460" start="70" end="86" title="Monroe (surname)" label="Monroe (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29562528" start="89" end="108" title="Monroe (given name)" label="Monroe (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="111" end="123" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="162" end="176" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14681250" start="230" end="246" title="Monroe, Arkansas" label="Monroe, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981236" start="306" end="328" title="Fort Monroe (Yosemite)" label="Fort Monroe (Yosemite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446258" start="360" end="379" title="Monroe, Connecticut" label="Monroe, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347900" start="390" end="411" title="Lake Monroe (Florida)" label="Lake Monroe (Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150751" start="414" end="429" title="Monroe, Georgia" label="Monroe, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883097" start="440" end="469" title="Monroe, Adams County, Indiana" label="Monroe, Adams County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013058" start="480" end="514" title="Monroe, Tippecanoe County, Indiana" label="Monroe, Tippecanoe County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476979" start="546" end="567" title="Lake Monroe (Indiana)" label="Lake Monroe (Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926338" start="583" end="595" title="Monroe, Iowa" label="Monroe, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20658072" start="606" end="622" title="Monroe, Kentucky" label="Monroe, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q947115" start="654" end="671" title="Monroe, Louisiana" label="Monroe, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447373" start="682" end="695" title="Monroe, Maine" label="Monroe, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q951490" start="706" end="727" title="Monroe, Massachusetts" label="Monroe, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q995533" start="738" end="754" title="Monroe, Michigan" label="Monroe, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="765" end="790" title="Lake Monroe (Mississippi)" label="Lake Monroe (Mississippi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q491276" start="792" end="818" title="Monroe County, Mississippi" label="Monroe County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="843" end="860" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289000" start="874" end="890" title="Monroe, Nebraska" label="Monroe, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417400" start="904" end="925" title="Monroe, New Hampshire" label="Monroe, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922237" start="935" end="947" title="Mount Monroe" label="Mount Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916618" start="998" end="1014" title="Monroe, New York" label="Monroe, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q930299" start="1026" end="1052" title="Monroe (village), New York" label="Monroe (village), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019160" start="1078" end="1100" title="Monroe, North Carolina" label="Monroe, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018314" start="1111" end="1123" title="Monroe, Ohio" label="Monroe, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786146" start="1134" end="1162" title="Monroe, Jackson County, Ohio" label="Monroe, Jackson County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902101" start="1194" end="1210" title="Monroe, Oklahoma" label="Monroe, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q576754" start="1270" end="1284" title="Monroe, Oregon" label="Monroe, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182612" start="1295" end="1315" title="Monroe, Pennsylvania" label="Monroe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240090" start="1329" end="1349" title="Monroe, South Dakota" label="Monroe, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902103" start="1360" end="1377" title="Monroe, Tennessee" label="Monroe, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q483264" start="1409" end="1421" title="Monroe, Utah" label="Monroe, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902105" start="1432" end="1448" title="Monroe, Virginia" label="Monroe, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="1480" end="1491" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902235" start="1545" end="1556" title="Monroe Park" label="Monroe Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902123" start="1579" end="1589" title="Monroe Bay" label="Monroe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055861" start="1602" end="1620" title="Monroe, Washington" label="Monroe, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783975" start="1631" end="1662" title="Monroe, Adams County, Wisconsin" label="Monroe, Adams County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5817097" start="1673" end="1711" title="Monroe (town), Green County, Wisconsin" label="Monroe (town), Green County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006179" start="1722" end="1739" title="Monroe, Wisconsin" label="Monroe, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222944" start="1786" end="1818" title="Monroe Township (disambiguation)" label="Monroe Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945225" start="1821" end="1851" title="Monroe County (disambiguation)" label="Monroe County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115912" start="1873" end="1886" title="Monroe Island" label="Monroe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902243" start="1923" end="1959" title="Monroe Point, South Shetland Islands" label="Monroe Point, South Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902099" start="1974" end="2007" title="Monroe, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Monroe, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084153" start="2032" end="2056" title="Monroe, County Westmeath" label="Monroe, County Westmeath"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="2080" end="2091" title="3768 Monroe" label="3768 Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321302" start="2152" end="2182" title="Monroe (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Monroe&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752070" start="2217" end="2257" title="The Monroes (1966 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Monroes&amp;quot; (1966 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409493" start="2288" end="2328" title="The Monroes (1995 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Monroes&amp;quot; (1995 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752071" start="2379" end="2406" title="The Monroes (American band)" label="The Monroes (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752073" start="2436" end="2464" title="The Monroes (Norwegian band)" label="The Monroes (Norwegian band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29562528" start="2560" end="2579" title="Monroe (given name)" label="Monroe (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780460" start="2584" end="2600" title="Monroe (surname)" label="Monroe (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="2610" end="2642" title="Monroe (comic strip)" label="&amp;quot;Monroe&amp;quot; (comic strip)"/>
<link wikidata="Q289592" start="2698" end="2713" title="Monroe Republic" label="Monroe Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686872" start="2829" end="2841" title="Tift College" label="Tift College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321306" start="2917" end="2931" title="Monroe College" label="Monroe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044835" start="2984" end="3016" title="Monroe School (Phoenix, Arizona)" label="Monroe School (Phoenix, Arizona)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3080" end="3110" title="Monroe School (Sandusky, Ohio)" label="Monroe School (Sandusky, Ohio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063331" start="3119" end="3173" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Sandusky, Ohio" label="National Register of Historic Places in Sandusky, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902211" start="3176" end="3211" title="Monroe High School (disambiguation)" label="Monroe High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902185" start="3214" end="3255" title="Monroe Elementary School (disambiguation)" label="Monroe Elementary School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902113" start="3278" end="3297" title="Monroe (automobile)" label="Monroe (automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902119" start="3364" end="3395" title="Monroe Airport (disambiguation)" label="Monroe Airport (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59279394" start="3398" end="3415" title="Monroe Expressway" label="Monroe Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902251" start="3434" end="3466" title="Monroe Railroad (disambiguation)" label="Monroe Railroad (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796517" start="3469" end="3500" title="Monroe station (disambiguation)" label="Monroe station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625010" start="3519" end="3532" title="Monroe (tree)" label="Monroe (tree)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902145" start="3584" end="3611" title="Monroe Correctional Complex" label="Monroe Correctional Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902112" start="3649" end="3665" title="Monroe (avocado)" label="Monroe (avocado)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902126" start="3699" end="3733" title="Monroe Calculating Machine Company" label="Monroe Calculating Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509038" start="3794" end="3801" title="Tenneco" label="Tenneco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989552" start="3816" end="3831" title="Monroe piercing" label="Monroe piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890513" start="3871" end="3885" title="Palácio Monroe" label="Palácio Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="3942" end="3957" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30705817" start="4033" end="4063" title="Monroe Center (disambiguation)" label="Monroe Center (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q401890" start="4066" end="4094" title="Monroe City (disambiguation)" label="Monroe City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945225" start="4097" end="4127" title="Monroe County (disambiguation)" label="Monroe County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q404439" start="4130" end="4158" title="Monroeville (disambiguation)" label="Monroeville (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41588071" start="4161" end="4183" title="Monro (disambiguation)" label="Monro (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q400831" start="4186" end="4208" title="Munro (disambiguation)" label="Munro (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688287" start="4211" end="4234" title="Munroe (disambiguation)" label="Munroe (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19316" wikidata="Q56539799" url="?curid=19316" title="Maugham">
<text>Maugham is a surname most commonly associated with the English literary family. The name is a variant of Malham, Malgham, and Malghum. Families with the name originate from the area surrounding Malham and Kirkby Malham.

Well-known persons with this surname include:
* Robert Ormond Maugham, English barrister and father of Somerset Maugham
** Frederic Maugham, 1st Viscount Maugham, English statesman, the eldest son of the previous
*** Robin Maugham, English writer, the only son of the previous
*** Honor Earl, English painter, daughter of Frederic Maugham
** W. Somerset Maugham, English writer, best known of the Maughams
*** Syrie Maugham, wife 
* Daphne Mabel Maugham, painter
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56539799" start="0" end="7" title="Maugham" label="Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247558" start="194" end="200" title="Malham" label="Malham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415592" start="205" end="218" title="Kirkby Malham" label="Kirkby Malham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="269" end="290" title="Robert Ormond Maugham" label="Robert Ormond Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271495" start="344" end="382" title="Frederic Maugham, 1st Viscount Maugham" label="Frederic Maugham, 1st Viscount Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352644" start="438" end="451" title="Robin Cecil Romer Maugham, 2nd Viscount Maugham" label="Robin Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21454274" start="502" end="512" title="Honor Earl" label="Honor Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="563" end="582" title="W. Somerset Maugham" label="W. Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663337" start="631" end="644" title="Syrie Maugham" label="Syrie Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625563" start="654" end="674" title="Daphne Mabel Maugham" label="Daphne Mabel Maugham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19318" wikidata="Q4616" url="?curid=19318" title="Marilyn Monroe">
<text>Marilyn Monroe ( ; born Norma Jeane Mortenson; June 1, 1926 August 4, 1962) was an American actress, model, and singer. Known for playing comic &quot;blonde bombshell&quot; characters, she became one of the most popular sex symbols of the 1950s and early 1960s, as well as an emblem of the era&#x27;s sexual revolution. She was a top-billed actress for a decade, and her films grossed $200 million (equivalent to $ billion in ) by her death in 1962.

Born in Los Angeles, Monroe spent most of her childhood in foster homes and an orphanage before marrying James Dougherty at the age of 16. She was working in a factory during World War II when she met a photographer from the First Motion Picture Unit and began a successful pin-up modeling career, which led to short-lived film contracts with 20th Century Fox and Columbia Pictures. After roles as a freelancer, she began a longer contract with Fox in 1951, becoming a popular actress with roles in several comedies, including &quot;As Young as You Feel&quot; and &quot;Monkey Business&quot;, and in the dramas &quot;Clash by Night&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Bother to Knock&quot;. Monroe faced a scandal when it was revealed that she had posed for nude photographs prior to fame, but the story resulted in increased interest in her films.

Monroe became one of the most marketable Hollywood stars in 1953. She had leading roles in the film noir &quot;Niagara&quot;, which overtly relied on her sex appeal, and the comedies &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot; and &quot;How to Marry a Millionaire&quot;, which established her star image as a &quot;dumb blonde&quot;. The same year, her nude images were used as the centerfold and cover of the first issue of &quot;Playboy&quot;. Monroe played a significant role in the creation and management of her public image, but felt disappointed when typecast and underpaid by the studio. She was briefly suspended in early 1954 for refusing a film project but returned to star in &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; (1955), one of the biggest box office successes of her career.

When the studio was still reluctant to change Monroe&#x27;s contract, she founded her own film production company in 1954 with her friend Milton Greene. She dedicated 1955 to building the company and began studying method acting under Lee Strasberg at the Actors Studio. Later that year, Fox awarded her a new contract, which gave her more control and a larger salary. Her subsequent roles included a critically acclaimed performance in &quot;Bus Stop&quot; (1956) and her first independent production in &quot;The Prince and the Showgirl&quot; (1957), for which she received a BAFTA nomination. She won a Golden Globe for her role in &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot; (1959), a critical and commercial success. Her last completed film was the drama &quot;The Misfits&quot; (1961).

Monroe&#x27;s troubled private life received much attention. Her marriages to retired baseball star Joe DiMaggio and to playwright Arthur Miller were highly publicized; both ended in divorce. She is also known for singing &quot;Diamonds Are a Girl&#x27;s Best Friend&quot; (1953) and &quot;Happy Birthday, Mr. President&quot; (1962). On August 4, 1962, Monroe died at age 36 of an overdose of barbiturates at her Los Angeles home. Her death was ruled a probable suicide. Monroe remains a pop culture icon, with the American Film Institute ranking her as the sixth-greatest female screen legend from the Golden Age of Hollywood.

== Life and career ==
=== 1926–1943: Childhood and first marriage ===
Monroe was born Norma Jeane Mortenson at Los Angeles General Hospital on June 1, 1926. Her mother, Gladys Pearl Baker ( Monroe), was born in Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico, into a poor Midwestern family who migrated to California at the turn of the century. At the age of 14, Gladys had married John Newton Baker, an abusive man nine years her senior. They had two children together, Robert and Berniece. Gladys successfully filed for divorce and sole custody of her two oldest in 1923, but Baker kidnapped the children soon after and moved with them to his native Kentucky. Monroe first learnt about her sister when she was 12 years old, and met her for the first time in her late teens.

Following the divorce, Gladys worked as a film negative cutter at Consolidated Film Industries. In 1924, she married Martin Edward Mortensen, but the union lasted only a few months, although they did not legally divorce until four years later. Gladys named Mortensen (misspelled &quot;Mortenson&quot;) as Monroe&#x27;s father in the birth certificate, but most of Monroe&#x27;s biographers agree that this was unlikely as their separation had taken place well before she became pregnant. According to biographers Fred Guiles and Lois Banner, her father was likely Charles Stanley Gifford, Gladys&#x27;s superior at RKO Studios, with whom she had an affair in 1925. This was supported by a comparison conducted in 2022 between Monroe&#x27;s DNA and that of one of Gifford&#x27;s descendants.

Although Gladys was mentally and financially unprepared for a child, Monroe&#x27;s early childhood was stable and happy. Gladys placed her daughter with evangelical Christian foster parents Albert and Ida Bolender in the suburban town of Hawthorne. She also lived there for six months until she was forced to move back to the city for employment. She then began visiting her daughter on weekends. In the summer of 1933, Gladys bought a small house in Hollywood with a loan from the Home Owners&#x27; Loan Corporation and moved seven-year-old Monroe in with her. They shared the house with lodgers, actors George and Maude Atkinson and their daughter, Nellie. In January 1934, Gladys had a mental breakdown and was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. After several months in a rest home, she was committed to the Metropolitan State Hospital. She spent the rest of her life in and out of hospitals and was rarely in contact with Monroe. Monroe became a ward of the state, and her mother&#x27;s friend Grace Goddard took responsibility over her and her mother&#x27;s affairs.

For the next 16 months, Monroe continued living with the Atkinsons and may have been sexually abused during this time. Always a shy girl, she developed a stutter and became withdrawn. In the summer of 1935, she briefly stayed with Grace and her husband Erwin &quot;Doc&quot; Goddard and two other families. In September 1935, Grace placed her in the Los Angeles Orphans Home #2, Hollygrove.&lt;ref name=&quot;flickr/7416642764&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;pcad/7187&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;latimes/2005-12-20/me-hollygrove20&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The orphanage was &quot;a model institution&quot; and was described in positive terms by her peers, but Monroe felt abandoned. Encouraged by the orphanage staff, who thought that Monroe would be happier living in a family, Grace became her legal guardian in 1936 but did not take her out of the orphanage until the summer of 1937. Monroe&#x27;s second stay with the Goddards lasted only a few months because Doc allegedly molested her. She then lived for brief periods with her relatives and Grace&#x27;s friends and relatives in Los Angeles and Compton.

Monroe&#x27;s childhood experiences first made her want to become an actress: I didn&#x27;t like the world around me because it was kind of grim ... When I heard that this was acting, I said that&#x27;s what I want to be ... Some of my foster families used to send me to the movies to get me out of the house and there I&#x27;d sit all day and way into the night. Up in front, there with the screen so big, a little kid all alone, and I loved it.

Monroe found a more permanent home in September 1938, when she began living with Grace&#x27;s aunt Ana Lower in Sawtelle. Monroe was enrolled at Emerson Junior High School and went to weekly Christian Science services with Lower. She excelled in writing and contributed to the school newspaper, but was otherwise a mediocre student. Owing to the elderly Lower&#x27;s health problems, Monroe returned to live with the Goddards in Van Nuys in about early 1941. That same year, she began attending Van Nuys High School.

In 1942, the company that employed Doc relocated him to West Virginia. California child protection laws prevented the Goddards from taking Monroe out of state, and she faced having to return to the orphanage. To avoid this, it was decided that she leave high school and marry their neighbor, factory worker James Dougherty, who was five years her senior. The marriage took place just after her 16th birthday on June 19, 1942. Monroe found herself and Dougherty mismatched, and later said she was &quot;dying of boredom&quot; during the marriage. In 1943, Dougherty enlisted in the Merchant Marine and was stationed on Santa Catalina Island, where Monroe moved with him.

=== 1944–1948: Modeling, divorce, and first film roles ===

In April 1944, Dougherty was shipped out to the Pacific, where he remained for most of the next two years. After Dougherty left, Monroe moved in with Dougherty&#x27;s parents and began a job at the Radioplane Company, a munitions factory in Van Nuys, to help the war effort. In late 1944, she met photographer David Conover, then working in the U.S. Army Air Forces&#x27; First Motion Picture Unit, who had been sent to the factory to shoot morale-boosting pictures of female workers. Although none of her pictures were used, she quit working at the factory in January 1945 and began modeling for Conover and his friends. Defying her deployed husband and his disapproving mother, she moved on her own and signed a contract with the Blue Book Model Agency in August 1945.

The agency deemed Monroe&#x27;s figure more suitable for pin-up than high fashion modeling, and she was featured mostly in advertisements and men&#x27;s magazines. She straightened her naturally curly brown hair and dyed it platinum blonde. According to Emmeline Snively, the agency&#x27;s owner, Monroe quickly became one of its most ambitious and hard-working models; by early 1946, she had appeared on 33 magazine covers for publications such as &quot;Pageant&quot;, &quot;U.S. Camera&quot;, &quot;Laff&quot;, and &quot;Peek&quot;. As a model, Monroe occasionally used the pseudonym Jean Norman.

Through Snively, Monroe signed a contract with an acting agency in June 1946. After an unsuccessful interview at Paramount Pictures, she was given a screen-test by Ben Lyon, a 20th Century-Fox executive. Head executive Darryl F. Zanuck was unenthusiastic about it, but he gave her a standard six-month contract to avoid her being signed by rival studio RKO Pictures. Monroe&#x27;s contract began in August 1946, and she and Lyon selected the stage name &quot;Marilyn Monroe&quot;. The first name was picked by Lyon, who was reminded of Broadway star Marilyn Miller; the surname was Monroe&#x27;s mother&#x27;s maiden name. In September 1946, she divorced Dougherty, who had been opposed to her career.

Monroe spent her first six months at Fox learning acting, singing, and dancing, and observing the film-making process. Her contract was renewed in February 1947, and she was given her first film roles, bit parts in &quot;Dangerous Years&quot; (1947) and &quot;Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!&quot; (1948). The studio also enrolled her in the Actors&#x27; Laboratory Theatre, an acting school teaching the techniques of the Group Theatre; she later stated that it was &quot;my first taste of what real acting in a real drama could be, and I was hooked&quot;. Despite her enthusiasm, her teachers thought her too shy and insecure to have a future in acting, and Fox did not renew her contract in August 1947. She returned to modeling while also doing occasional odd jobs at film studios, such as working as a dancing &quot;pacer&quot; behind the scenes to keep the leads on point at musical sets.

Monroe was determined to make it as an actress, and continued studying at the Actors&#x27; Lab. She had a small role in the play &quot;Glamour Preferred&quot; at the Bliss-Hayden Theater, but it ended after a couple of performances. To network, she frequented producers&#x27; offices, befriended gossip columnist Sidney Skolsky, and entertained influential male guests at studio functions, a practice she had begun at Fox. She also became a friend and occasional sex partner of Fox executive Joseph M. Schenck, who persuaded his friend Harry Cohn, the head executive of Columbia Pictures, to sign her in March 1948.

At Columbia, Monroe&#x27;s look was modeled after Rita Hayworth and her hair was bleached platinum blonde. She began working with the studio&#x27;s head drama coach, Natasha Lytess, who would remain her mentor until 1955. Her only film at the studio was the low-budget musical &quot;Ladies of the Chorus&quot; (1948), in which she had her first starring role as a chorus girl courted by a wealthy man. She also screen-tested for the lead role in &quot;Born Yesterday&quot; (1950), but her contract was not renewed in September 1948. &quot;Ladies of the Chorus&quot; was released the following month and was not a success.

=== 1949–1952: Breakthrough years ===

When her contract at Columbia ended, Monroe returned again to modeling. She shot a commercial for Pabst beer and posed for artistic nude photographs by Tom Kelley for John Baumgarth calendars, using the name &#x27;Mona Monroe&#x27;. Monroe had previously posed topless or clad in a bikini for other artists including Earl Moran, and felt comfortable with nudity. Shortly after leaving Columbia, she also met and became the protégée and mistress of Johnny Hyde, the vice president of the William Morris Agency.

Through Hyde, Monroe landed small roles in several films, including two critically acclaimed works. The first was Joseph Mankiewicz&#x27;s drama &quot;All About Eve&quot; (1950), which received 14 Academy Award nominations. The film&#x27;s star Bette Davis later praised Monroe&#x27;s performance, saying, &quot;Definitely, no question, I knew she was going to make it. She was a very ambitious girl, [and] knew what she wanted [and was] very serious about it...I thought she had talent.&quot; The second film was John Huston&#x27;s noir &quot;The Asphalt Jungle&quot; (1950). Despite her screen time being only a few minutes, Monroe gained a mention in &quot;Photoplay&quot; and according to biographer Donald Spoto &quot;moved effectively from movie model to serious actress&quot;.

In December 1950, Hyde negotiated a seven-year contract for Monroe with 20th Century-Fox. According to its terms, Fox could opt not to renew the contract after each year. Hyde died of a heart attack only days later, which left Monroe devastated. In 1951, Monroe had supporting roles in three moderately successful Fox comedies: &quot;As Young as You Feel&quot;, &quot;Love Nest&quot;, and &quot;Let&#x27;s Make It Legal&quot;. According to Spoto all three films featured her &quot;essentially [as] a sexy ornament&quot;, but she received some praise from critics: Bosley Crowther of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described her as &quot;superb&quot; in &quot;As Young As You Feel&quot; and Ezra Goodman of the &quot;Los Angeles Daily News&quot; called her &quot;one of the brightest up-and-coming [actresses]&quot; for &quot;Love Nest&quot;.

Her popularity with audiences was also growing: she received several thousand fan letters a week, and was declared &quot;Miss Cheesecake of 1951&quot; by the army newspaper &quot;Stars and Stripes&quot;, reflecting the preferences of soldiers in the Korean War. In February 1952, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association named Monroe the &quot;best young box office personality&quot;. In her private life, Monroe had a short relationship with director Elia Kazan and also briefly dated several other men, including director Nicholas Ray and actors Yul Brynner and Peter Lawford. In early 1952, she began a highly publicized romance with retired New York Yankees baseball star Joe DiMaggio, one of the most famous sports personalities of the era.
Monroe found herself at the center of a scandal in March 1952, when she revealed publicly that she had posed for a nude calendar in 1949. The studio had learned about the photos and that she was publicly rumored to be the model some weeks prior, and together with Monroe decided that to prevent damaging her career it was best to admit to them while stressing that she had been broke at the time. The strategy gained her public sympathy and increased interest in her films, for which she was now receiving top billing. In the wake of the scandal, Monroe was featured on the cover of &quot;Life&quot; magazine as the &quot;Talk of Hollywood&quot;, and gossip columnist Hedda Hopper declared her the &quot;cheesecake queen&quot; turned &quot;box office smash&quot;. Three of Monroe&#x27;s films—&quot;Clash by Night&quot;, &quot;Don&#x27;t Bother to Knock&quot; and &quot;We&#x27;re Not Married!&quot;—were released soon after to capitalize on the public interest.

Despite her newfound popularity as a sex symbol, Monroe also wished to showcase more of her acting range. She had begun taking acting classes with Michael Chekhov and mime Lotte Goslar soon after beginning the Fox contract, and &quot;Clash by Night&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Bother to Knock&quot; showed her in different roles. In the former, a drama starring Barbara Stanwyck and directed by Fritz Lang, she played a fish cannery worker; to prepare, she spent time in a fish cannery in Monterey. She received positive reviews for her performance: &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; stated that &quot;she deserves starring status with her excellent interpretation&quot;, and &quot;Variety&quot; wrote that she &quot;has an ease of delivery which makes her a cinch for popularity&quot;. The latter was a thriller in which Monroe starred as a mentally disturbed babysitter and which Zanuck used to test her abilities in a heavier dramatic role. It received mixed reviews from critics, with Crowther deeming her too inexperienced for the difficult role, and &quot;Variety&quot; blaming the script for the film&#x27;s problems.
Monroe&#x27;s three other films in 1952 continued with her typecasting in comedic roles that highlighted her sex appeal. In &quot;We&#x27;re Not Married!&quot;, her role as a beauty pageant contestant was created solely to &quot;present Marilyn in two bathing suits&quot;, according to its writer Nunnally Johnson. In Howard Hawks&#x27;s &quot;Monkey Business&quot;, in which she acted opposite Cary Grant, she played a secretary who is a &quot;dumb, childish blonde, innocently unaware of the havoc her sexiness causes around her&quot;. In &quot;O. Henry&#x27;s Full House&quot;, with Charles Laughton she appeared in a passing vignette as a nineteenth-century street walker. Monroe added to her reputation as a new sex symbol with publicity stunts that year: she wore a revealing dress when acting as Grand Marshal at the Miss America Pageant parade, and told gossip columnist Earl Wilson that she usually wore no underwear. By the end of the year, gossip columnist Florabel Muir named Monroe the &quot;it girl&quot; of 1952.

During this period, Monroe gained a reputation for being difficult to work with, which would worsen as her career progressed. She was often late or did not show up at all, did not remember her lines, and would demand several re-takes before she was satisfied with her performance. Her dependence on her acting coaches—Natasha Lytess and then Paula Strasberg—also irritated directors. Monroe&#x27;s problems have been attributed to a combination of perfectionism, low self-esteem, and stage fright. She disliked her lack of control on film sets and never experienced similar problems during photo shoots, in which she had more say over her performance and could be more spontaneous instead of following a script. To alleviate her anxiety and chronic insomnia, she began to use barbiturates, amphetamines, and alcohol, which also exacerbated her problems, although she did not become severely addicted until 1956. According to Sarah Churchwell, some of Monroe&#x27;s behavior, especially later in her career, was also in response to the condescension and sexism of her male co-stars and directors. Biographer Lois Banner said that she was bullied by many of her directors.

=== 1953: Rising star ===
Monroe starred in three movies that were released in 1953 and emerged as a major sex symbol and one of Hollywood&#x27;s most bankable performers. The first was the Technicolor film noir &quot;Niagara&quot;, in which she played a &quot;femme fatale&quot; scheming to murder her husband, played by Joseph Cotten. By then, Monroe and her make-up artist Allan &quot;Whitey&quot; Snyder had developed her &quot;trademark&quot; make-up look: dark arched brows, pale skin, &quot;glistening&quot; red lips and a beauty mark. According to Sarah Churchwell, &quot;Niagara&quot; was one of the most overtly sexual films of Monroe&#x27;s career. In some scenes, Monroe&#x27;s body was covered only by a sheet or a towel, considered shocking by contemporary audiences. &quot;Niagara&quot;s most famous scene is a 30-second long shot behind Monroe where she is seen walking with her hips swaying, which was used heavily in the film&#x27;s marketing.

When &quot;Niagara&quot; was released in January 1953, women&#x27;s clubs protested it as immoral, but it proved popular with audiences. While &quot;Variety&quot; deemed it &quot;clichéd&quot; and &quot;morbid&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot; commented that &quot;the falls and Miss Monroe are something to see&quot;, as although Monroe may not be &quot;the perfect actress at this point ... she can be seductive—even when she walks&quot;.
Monroe continued to attract attention by wearing revealing outfits, most famously at the &quot;Photoplay&quot; Awards in January 1953, where she won the &quot;Fastest Rising Star&quot; award. A pleated &quot;sunburst&quot; waist-tight, deep décolleté gold lamé dress designed by William Travilla for &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot;, but barely seen at all in the film, was to become a sensation. Prompted by such imagery, veteran star Joan Crawford publicly called the behavior &quot;unbecoming an actress and a lady&quot;.

While &quot;Niagara&quot; made Monroe a sex symbol and established her &quot;look&quot;, her second film of 1953, the satirical musical comedy &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot;, cemented her screen persona as a &quot;dumb blonde&quot;. Based on Anita Loos&#x27; novel and its Broadway version, the film focuses on two &quot;gold-digging&quot; showgirls played by Monroe and Jane Russell. Monroe&#x27;s role was originally intended for Betty Grable, who had been 20th Century-Fox&#x27;s most popular &quot;blonde bombshell&quot; in the 1940s; Monroe was fast eclipsing her as a star who could appeal to both male and female audiences. As part of the film&#x27;s publicity campaign, she and Russell pressed their hand and footprints in wet concrete outside Grauman&#x27;s Chinese Theatre in June. &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot; was released shortly after and became one of the biggest box office successes of the year. Crowther of &quot;The New York Times&quot; and William Brogdon of &quot;Variety&quot; both commented favorably on Monroe, especially noting her performance of &quot;Diamonds Are a Girl&#x27;s Best Friend&quot;; according to the latter, she demonstrated the &quot;ability to sex a song as well as point up the eye values of a scene by her presence&quot;.

In September, Monroe made her television debut in the &quot;Jack Benny Show&quot;, playing Jack&#x27;s fantasy woman in the episode &quot;Honolulu Trip&quot;. She co-starred with Grable and Lauren Bacall in her third movie of the year, &quot;How to Marry a Millionaire&quot;, released in November. It featured Monroe as a naïve model who teams up with her friends to find rich husbands, repeating the successful formula of &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot;. It was the second film ever released in CinemaScope, a widescreen format that Fox hoped would draw audiences back to theaters as television was beginning to cause losses to film studios. Despite mixed reviews, the film was Monroe&#x27;s biggest box office success at that point in her career.

Monroe was listed in the annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll in both 1953 and 1954, and according to Fox historian Aubrey Solomon became the studio&#x27;s &quot;greatest asset&quot; alongside CinemaScope. Monroe&#x27;s position as a leading sex symbol was confirmed in December 1953, when Hugh Hefner featured her on the cover and as centerfold in the first issue of &quot;Playboy&quot;; Monroe did not consent to the publication. The cover image was a photograph taken of her at the Miss America Pageant parade in 1952, and the centerfold featured one of her 1949 nude photographs.

=== 1954–1955: Conflicts with 20th Century-Fox and marriage to Joe DiMaggio ===
Monroe had become one of 20th Century-Fox&#x27;s biggest stars, but her contract had not changed since 1950, so that she was paid far less than other stars of her stature and could not choose her projects. Her attempts to appear in films that would not focus on her as a pin-up had been thwarted by the studio head executive, Darryl F. Zanuck, who had a strong personal dislike of her and did not think she would earn the studio as much revenue in other types of roles. Under pressure from the studio&#x27;s owner, Spyros Skouras, Zanuck had also decided that Fox should focus exclusively on entertainment to maximize profits and canceled the production of any &quot;serious films&quot;. In January 1954, he suspended Monroe when she refused to begin shooting yet another musical comedy, &quot;The Girl in Pink Tights&quot;. 

This was front-page news, and Monroe immediately took action to counter negative publicity. She and DiMaggio, who had been dating for two years, were married at the San Francisco City Hall on January 14, 1954. Fifteen days later, they flew to Japan, combining a &quot;honeymoon&quot; with his business trip. From Tokyo, she traveled to Korea, where she participated in a USO show, singing for over 60,000 U.S. Marines over a four-day period. After returning to the U.S., she was awarded &quot;Photoplay&quot;″s &quot;Most Popular Female Star&quot; prize. Monroe settled with Fox in March, with the promise of a new contract, a bonus of $100,000, and a starring role in the film adaptation of the Broadway success &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot;.

In April 1954, Otto Preminger&#x27;s western &quot;River of No Return&quot;, the last film that Monroe had filmed prior to the suspension, was released. She called it a &quot;Z-grade cowboy movie in which the acting finished second to the scenery and the CinemaScope process&quot;, but it was popular with audiences. The first film she made after the suspension was the musical &quot;There&#x27;s No Business Like Show Business&quot;, which she strongly disliked but the studio required her to do for dropping &quot;The Girl in Pink Tights&quot;. It was unsuccessful upon its release in late 1954, with Monroe&#x27;s performance considered vulgar by many critics.
In September 1954, Monroe began filming Billy Wilder&#x27;s comedy &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot;, starring opposite Tom Ewell as a woman who becomes the object of her married neighbor&#x27;s sexual fantasies. Although the film was shot in Hollywood, the studio decided to generate advance publicity by staging the filming of a scene in which Monroe is standing on a subway grate with the air blowing up the skirt of her white dress on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan. The shoot lasted for several hours and attracted nearly 2,000 spectators. The &quot;subway grate scene&quot; became one of Monroe&#x27;s most famous, and &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; became one of the biggest commercial successes of the year after its release in June 1955.

The publicity stunt placed Monroe on international front pages, and it also marked the end of her marriage to DiMaggio. The union had been troubled from the start by his jealousy and controlling attitude; he was also physically abusive. After returning from NYC to Hollywood in October 1954, Monroe filed for divorce, after only nine months of marriage.

After filming for &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; wrapped up in November 1954, Monroe left Hollywood for the East Coast, where she and photographer Milton Greene founded their own production company, Marilyn Monroe Productions (MMP)—an action that has later been called &quot;instrumental&quot; in the collapse of the studio system. Monroe stated that she was &quot;tired of the same old sex roles&quot; and asserted that she was no longer under contract to Fox, as it had not fulfilled its duties, such as paying her the promised bonus. This began a year-long legal battle between her and Fox in January 1955. The press largely ridiculed Monroe, and she was parodied in the Broadway play &quot;Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?&quot; (1955), in which her lookalike Jayne Mansfield played a dumb actress who starts her own production company.
After founding MMP, Monroe moved to Manhattan and spent 1955 studying acting. She took classes with Constance Collier and attended workshops on method acting at the Actors Studio, run by Lee Strasberg. She grew close to Strasberg and his wife Paula, receiving private lessons at their home due to her shyness, and soon became a family member. She replaced her old acting coach, Natasha Lytess, with Paula; the Strasbergs remained an important influence for the rest of her career. Monroe also started undergoing psychoanalysis, as Strasberg believed that an actor must confront their emotional traumas and use them in their performances.

Monroe continued her relationship with DiMaggio despite the ongoing divorce process; she also briefly dated actor Marlon Brando. According to Brando, they maintained an intermittent relationship until she died. She began a more serious affair with playwright Arthur Miller. Their relationship became increasingly serious after October 1955, when Monroe&#x27;s divorce was finalized and Miller left his wife Mary Slattery. The studio urged her to end it, as Miller was being investigated by the FBI for allegations of communism and had been subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee, but Monroe refused. The relationship led to the FBI opening a file on her.

By the end of the year, Monroe and Fox signed a new seven-year contract, as MMP would not be able to finance films alone, and the studio was eager to have Monroe working for them again. Fox would pay her $400,000 to make four films, and granted her the right to choose her own projects, directors and cinematographers. She would also be free to make one film with MMP per each completed film for Fox.

=== 1956–1959: Critical acclaim and marriage to Arthur Miller ===
Monroe began 1956 by announcing her win over 20th Century-Fox. On February 23, 1956, she legally changed her name to &quot;Marilyn Monroe&quot;. The press wrote favorably about her decision to fight the studio; &quot;Time&quot; called her a &quot;shrewd businesswoman&quot; and &quot;Look&quot; predicted that the win would be &quot;an example of the individual against the herd for years to come&quot;. In contrast, Monroe&#x27;s relationship with Miller prompted some negative comments, such as Walter Winchell&#x27;s statement that &quot;America&#x27;s best-known blonde moving picture star is now the darling of the left-wing intelligentsia.&quot;

In March, Monroe began filming the drama &quot;Bus Stop&quot;, her first film under the new contract. She played Chérie, a saloon singer whose dreams of stardom are complicated by a naïve cowboy who falls in love with her. For the role, she learned an Ozark accent, chose costumes and makeup that lacked the glamor of her earlier films, and provided deliberately mediocre singing and dancing. Broadway director Joshua Logan agreed to direct, despite initially doubting Monroe&#x27;s acting abilities and knowing of her difficult reputation. The filming took place in Idaho and Arizona, with Monroe &quot;technically in charge&quot; as the head of MMP, occasionally making decisions on cinematography and with Logan adapting to her chronic lateness and perfectionism. The experience changed Logan&#x27;s opinion of Monroe, and he later compared her to Charlie Chaplin in her ability to blend comedy and tragedy.On June 29, 1956, Monroe and Miller were married in a four-minute civil ceremony at the Westchester County Court in White Plains, New York; two days later they had a Jewish ceremony at the home of Kay Brown, Miller&#x27;s literary agent, in Waccabuc, New York. With the marriage, Monroe converted to Judaism, which led Egypt to ban all of her films. Due to Monroe&#x27;s status as a sex symbol and Miller&#x27;s image as an intellectual, the media saw the union as a mismatch, as evidenced by &quot;Variety&quot;″s headline, &quot;Egghead Weds Hourglass&quot;.

&quot;Bus Stop&quot; was released in August 1956 and became a critical and commercial success. &quot;The Saturday Review of Literature&quot; wrote that Monroe&#x27;s performance &quot;effectively dispels once and for all the notion that she is merely a glamour personality&quot; and Crowther proclaimed: &quot;Hold on to your chairs, everybody, and get set for a rattling surprise. Marilyn Monroe has finally proved herself an actress.&quot; She also received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Leading Role - Musical or Comedy for her performance.

In August, Monroe also began filming MMP&#x27;s first independent production, &quot;The Prince and the Showgirl&quot;, at Pinewood Studios in England. Based on a 1953 stage play by Terence Rattigan, it was to be directed and co-produced by, and to co-star, Laurence Olivier. The production was complicated by conflicts between him and Monroe. Olivier, who had also directed and starred in the stage play, angered her with the patronizing statement &quot;All you have to do is be sexy&quot;, and with his demand she replicate Vivien Leigh&#x27;s stage interpretation of the character. He also disliked the constant presence of Paula Strasberg, Monroe&#x27;s acting coach, on set. In retaliation, Monroe became uncooperative and began to deliberately arrive late, later saying, &quot;if you don&#x27;t respect your artists, they can&#x27;t work well.&quot;

Monroe also experienced other problems during the production. Her dependence on pharmaceuticals escalated and, according to Spoto, she had a miscarriage. She and Greene also argued over how MMP should be run. Despite the difficulties, filming was completed on schedule by the end of 1956. &quot;The Prince and the Showgirl&quot; was released to mixed reviews in June 1957 and proved unpopular with American audiences. It was better received in Europe, where she was awarded the Italian David di Donatello and the French Crystal Star awards and nominated for a BAFTA.

After returning from England, Monroe took an 18-month hiatus to concentrate on family life. She and Miller split their time between NYC, Connecticut and Long Island. She had an ectopic pregnancy in mid-1957, and a miscarriage a year later; these problems were most likely linked to her endometriosis. Monroe was also briefly hospitalized due to a barbiturate overdose. As she and Greene could not settle their disagreements over MMP, Monroe bought his share of the company.
Monroe returned to Hollywood in July 1958 to act opposite Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis in Billy Wilder&#x27;s comedy on gender roles, &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot;. She considered the role of Sugar Kane another &quot;dumb blonde&quot;, but accepted it due to Miller&#x27;s encouragement and the offer of 10% of the film&#x27;s profits on top of her standard pay. The film&#x27;s difficult production has since become &quot;legendary&quot;. Monroe demanded dozens of retakes, and did not remember her lines or act as directed—Curtis famously said that kissing her was &quot;like kissing Hitler&quot; due to the number of retakes. Monroe privately likened the production to a sinking ship and commented on her co-stars and director saying why should I worry, I have no phallic symbol to lose.&quot; Many of the problems stemmed from her and Wilder—who also had a reputation for being difficult—disagreeing on how she should play the role. She angered him by asking to alter many of her scenes, which in turn made her stage fright worse, and it is suggested that she deliberately ruined several scenes to act them her way.

In the end, Wilder was happy with Monroe&#x27;s performance, saying: &quot;Anyone can remember lines, but it takes a real artist to come on the set and not know her lines and yet give the performance she did!&quot; &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot; was a critical and commercial success when it was released in March 1959. Monroe&#x27;s performance earned her a Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Leading Role - Musical or Comedy, and prompted &quot;Variety&quot; to call her &quot;a comedienne with that combination of sex appeal and timing that just can&#x27;t be beat&quot;. It has been voted one of the best films ever made in polls by the BBC, the American Film Institute, and &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot;.

=== 1960–1962: Career setbacks and personal difficulties ===
After &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot;, Monroe took another hiatus until late 1959, when she starred in the musical comedy &quot;Let&#x27;s Make Love&quot;. She chose George Cukor to direct and Miller rewrote some of the script, which she considered weak. She accepted the part solely because she was behind on her contract with Fox. The film&#x27;s production was delayed by her frequent absences from the set. During the shoot, Monroe had an affair with co-star Yves Montand that was widely reported by the press and used in the film&#x27;s publicity campaign. &quot;Let&#x27;s Make Love&quot; was unsuccessful upon its release in September 1960. Crowther described Monroe as appearing &quot;rather untidy&quot; and &quot;lacking ... the old Monroe dynamism&quot;, and Hedda Hopper called the film &quot;the most vulgar picture she&#x27;s ever done&quot;. Truman Capote lobbied for Monroe to play Holly Golightly in a film adaptation of &quot;Breakfast at Tiffany&#x27;s&quot;, but the role went to Audrey Hepburn as its producers feared that Monroe would complicate the production.

The last film Monroe completed was John Huston&#x27;s &quot;The Misfits&quot; (1961), which Miller had written to provide her with a dramatic role. She played Roslyn, who has just received a quickie divorce in Reno, Nevada and befriends three aging cowboys, played by Clark Gable, Eli Wallach and Montgomery Clift. The filming in the Nevada desert between July and November 1960 was difficult. Monroe and Miller&#x27;s marriage was effectively over, and he began a relationship with on-set photographer Inge Morath. Monroe resented that he had based Roslyn partly on herself and thought the character inferior to the male roles. She also struggled with Miller&#x27;s habit of rewriting scenes the night before filming. Her health was also failing: she was in pain from gallstones, and her drug addiction was so severe that her makeup usually had to be applied while she was still asleep under the influence of barbiturates. In August, filming was halted for her to spend a week in a hospital detox. Despite her problems, Huston said that when Monroe was acting, she &quot;was not pretending to an emotion. It was the real thing. She would go deep down within herself and find it and bring it up into consciousness.&quot;

Monroe and Miller separated after filming ended, and she obtained a Mexican divorce in January 1961. &quot;The Misfits&quot; was released the following month, failing at the box office. Its reviews were mixed, with &quot;Variety&quot; complaining of frequently &quot;choppy&quot; character development, and Bosley Crowther calling Monroe &quot;completely blank and unfathomable&quot; and writing that &quot;unfortunately for the film&#x27;s structure, everything turns upon her&quot;. It has received more favorable reviews in the 21st century. Geoff Andrew of the British Film Institute has called it a classic, Huston scholar Tony Tracy called Monroe&#x27;s performance the &quot;most mature interpretation of her career&quot;, and Geoffrey McNab of &quot;The Independent&quot; praised her &quot;extraordinary&quot; portrayal of the character&#x27;s &quot;power of empathy&quot;.

Monroe was next to star in a television adaptation of W. Somerset Maugham&#x27;s &quot;Rain&quot; for NBC, but the project fell through as the network did not want to hire her choice of director, Lee Strasberg. She did not film any new projects in 1961 but instead focused on her health. She had surgery for her endometriosis and gall bladder problems, and underwent four weeks of hospital treatment for depression. She first admitted herself to the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic, but was erroneously placed on a ward meant for people with psychosis, where she was locked in a padded cell and not allowed to move to a more suitable ward or leave the hospital. After three days she was able to move to the more suitable Columbia University Medical Center with the help of her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio, with whom she rekindled a friendship. In later 1961, she dated Frank Sinatra for several months, and returned to live in California, where she purchased a house at 12305 Fifth Helena Drive in Brentwood, Los Angeles.
Monroe returned to the public eye in the spring of 1962. She received a &quot;World Film Favorite&quot; at the 19th Golden Globe Awards and began to shoot a film for Fox, &quot;Something&#x27;s Got to Give&quot;, a remake of &quot;My Favorite Wife&quot; (1940). It was to be co-produced by MMP, directed by George Cukor and to co-star Dean Martin and Cyd Charisse. Days before filming began, Monroe caught sinusitis. Despite medical advice to postpone the production, Fox began it as planned in late April.
Monroe was too sick to work for most of the next six weeks, but despite confirmations by multiple doctors, the studio pressured her by alleging publicly that she was faking it. On May 19, she took a break to sing &quot;Happy Birthday, Mr. President&quot; on stage at President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s early birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden in New York. She drew attention with her costume: a beige, skintight dress covered in rhinestones, which made her appear as if she were nude. Monroe&#x27;s trip to New York caused even more irritation for Fox executives, who had wanted her to cancel it.

Monroe next filmed a scene for &quot;Something&#x27;s Got to Give&quot; in which she swam naked in a swimming pool. To generate advance publicity, the press was invited to take photographs; these were later published in &quot;Life&quot;. This was the first time that a major star had posed nude at the height of their career. When she was again on sick leave for several days, Fox decided that it could not afford to have another film running behind schedule when it was already struggling with the rising costs of &quot;Cleopatra&quot; (1963). On June 7, Fox fired Monroe and sued her for $750,000 in damages. She was replaced by Lee Remick, but after Martin refused to make the film with anyone other than Monroe, Fox sued him as well and shut down the production. The studio blamed Monroe for the film&#x27;s demise and began spreading negative publicity about her, even alleging that she was mentally disturbed.

Fox soon regretted its decision and reopened negotiations with Monroe later in June; a settlement about a new contract, including recommencing &quot;Something&#x27;s Got to Give&quot; and a starring role in the black comedy &quot;What a Way to Go!&quot; (1964), was reached later that summer. She was also planning on starring in a biopic of Jean Harlow. To repair her public image, Monroe engaged in several publicity ventures, including interviews for &quot;Life&quot; and &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; and her first photo shoot for &quot;Vogue&quot;. For &quot;Vogue&quot;, she and photographer Bert Stern collaborated for two series of photographs over three days, one a standard fashion editorial and another of her posing nude, which were published posthumously with the title &quot;The Last Sitting&quot;.

== Death and funeral ==

During her final months, Monroe lived at 12305 Fifth Helena Drive in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles. Her housekeeper Eunice Murray was staying overnight at the home on the evening of August 4, 1962. Murray woke at 3:00a.m. on August 5 and sensed that something was wrong. She saw light from under Monroe&#x27;s bedroom door but was unable to get a response and found the door locked. Murray then called Monroe&#x27;s psychiatrist Ralph Greenson, who arrived at the house shortly after and broke into the bedroom through a window. He found a nude Monroe dead in her bed, covered by a sheet, with her hand clamped around a telephone receiver. Monroe&#x27;s physician, Hyman Engelberg, arrived at around 3:50a.m. and pronounced her dead. At 4:25a.m., the Los Angeles Police Department was notified.

Monroe died between 8:30 p.m. and 10:30p.m. on August 4; the toxicology report showed that the cause of death was acute barbiturate poisoning. She had 8 mg% (milligrams per 100 milliliters of solution) chloral hydrate and 4.5 mg% of pentobarbital (Nembutal) in her blood, and 13 mg% of pentobarbital in her liver. Empty medicine bottles were found next to her bed. The possibility that Monroe had accidentally overdosed was ruled out because the dosages found in her body were several times the lethal limit.
The Los Angeles County Coroners Office was assisted in their investigation by the Los Angeles Suicide Prevention Team, who had expert knowledge on suicide. Monroe&#x27;s doctors stated that she had been &quot;prone to severe fears and frequent depressions&quot; with &quot;abrupt and unpredictable mood changes&quot;, and had overdosed several times in the past, possibly intentionally. From these facts and the lack of any indication of foul play, deputy coroner Thomas Noguchi classified her death as a probable suicide. 

Monroe&#x27;s sudden death was front-page news in the United States and Europe. According to historian Lois Banner, &quot;it&#x27;s said that the suicide rate in Los Angeles doubled the month after she died; the circulation rate of most newspapers expanded that month&quot;, and the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; reported that they had received hundreds of phone calls from members of the public requesting information about her death. French artist Jean Cocteau commented that her death &quot;should serve as a terrible lesson to all those whose chief occupation consists of spying on and tormenting film stars&quot;, her former co-star Laurence Olivier deemed her &quot;the complete victim of ballyhoo and sensation&quot;, and &quot;Bus Stop&quot; director Joshua Logan said that she was &quot;one of the most unappreciated people in the world&quot;.
Monroe&#x27;s funeral, held at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery on August 8, was private and attended by only her closest associates. The service was arranged by DiMaggio, Miracle, and Monroe&#x27;s business manager Inez Melson. DiMaggio was the only one of her ex-husbands to attend. He barred most of Hollywood from attending and believed that they held a responsibility for her death. Hundreds of spectators crowded the streets around the cemetery. Monroe was later entombed at the Corridor of Memories.

In the following decades, several conspiracy theories, including murder and accidental overdose, have been introduced to contradict suicide as the cause of Monroe&#x27;s death. The speculation that Monroe had been murdered first gained mainstream attention with the publication of Norman Mailer&#x27;s &quot;&quot; in 1973, and in the following years became widespread enough for the Los Angeles County District Attorney John Van de Kamp to conduct a &quot;threshold investigation&quot; in 1982 to see whether a criminal investigation should be opened. No evidence of foul play was found.

== Screen persona and reception ==

The 1940s had been the heyday for actresses who were perceived as tough and smart—such as Katharine Hepburn and Barbara Stanwyck—who had appealed to women-dominated audiences during the war years. 20th Century-Fox wanted Monroe to be a star of the new decade who would draw men to movie theaters, and saw her as a replacement for the aging Betty Grable, their most popular &quot;blonde bombshell&quot; of the 1940s. According to film scholar Richard Dyer, Monroe&#x27;s star image was crafted mostly for the male gaze.

From the beginning, Monroe played a significant part in the creation of her public image, and towards the end of her career exerted almost full control over it. She devised many of her publicity strategies, cultivated friendships with gossip columnists such as Sidney Skolsky and Louella Parsons, and controlled the use of her images. In addition to Grable, she was often compared to another well-known blonde, 1930s film star Jean Harlow. The comparison was prompted partly by Monroe, who named Harlow as her childhood idol, wanted to play her in a biopic, and even employed Harlow&#x27;s hair stylist to color her hair.

Monroe&#x27;s screen persona focused on her blonde hair and the stereotypes that were associated with it, especially dumbness, naïveté, sexual availability and artificiality. She often used a breathy, childish voice in her films, and in interviews gave the impression that everything she said was &quot;utterly innocent and uncalculated&quot;, parodying herself with double entendres that came to be known as &quot;Monroeisms&quot;. For example, when she was asked what she had on in the 1949 nude photo shoot, she replied, &quot;I had the radio on&quot;.

In her films, Monroe usually played &quot;the girl&quot;, who is defined solely by her gender. Her roles were almost always chorus girls, secretaries, or models: occupations where &quot;the woman is on show, there for the pleasure of men.&quot; Monroe began her career as a pin-up model, and was noted for her hourglass figure. She was often positioned in film scenes so that her curvy silhouette was on display, and frequently posed like a pin-up in publicity photos. Her distinctive, hip-swinging walk also drew attention to her body and earned her the nickname &quot;the girl with the horizontal walk&quot;.

Monroe often wore white to emphasize her blondness and drew attention by wearing revealing outfits that showed off her figure. Her publicity stunts often revolved around her clothing either being shockingly revealing or even malfunctioning, such as when a shoulder strap of her dress snapped during a press conference. In press stories, Monroe was portrayed as the embodiment of the American Dream, a girl who had risen from a miserable childhood to Hollywood stardom. Stories of her time spent in foster families and an orphanage were exaggerated and even partly fabricated. Film scholar Thomas Harris wrote that her working-class roots and lack of family made her appear more sexually available, &quot;the ideal playmate&quot;, in contrast to her contemporary, Grace Kelly, who was also marketed as an attractive blonde, but due to her upper-class background was seen as a sophisticated actress, unattainable for the majority of male viewers.
Although Monroe&#x27;s screen persona as a dim-witted but sexually attractive blonde was a carefully crafted act, audiences and film critics believed it to be her real personality. This became a hindrance when she wanted to pursue other kinds of roles, or to be respected as a businesswoman. The academic Sarah Churchwell studied narratives about Monroe and wrote:
Biographer Lois Banner writes that Monroe often subtly parodied her sex symbol status in her films and public appearances, and that &quot;the &#x27;Marilyn Monroe&#x27; character she created was a brilliant archetype, who stands between Mae West and Madonna in the tradition of twentieth-century gender tricksters.&quot; Monroe herself stated that she was influenced by West, learning &quot;a few tricks from her—that impression of laughing at, or mocking, her own sexuality&quot;. She studied comedy in classes by mime and dancer Lotte Goslar, famous for her comic stage performances, and Goslar also instructed her on film sets. In &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot;, one of the films in which she played an archetypal dumb blonde, Monroe had the sentence &quot;I can be smart when it&#x27;s important, but most men don&#x27;t like it&quot; added to her character&#x27;s lines.

According to Dyer, Monroe became &quot;virtually a household name for sex&quot; in the 1950s and &quot;her image has to be situated in the flux of ideas about morality and sexuality that characterised the Fifties in America&quot;, such as Freudian ideas about sex, the Kinsey report (1953), and Betty Friedan&#x27;s &quot;The Feminine Mystique&quot; (1963). By appearing vulnerable and unaware of her sex appeal, Monroe was the first sex symbol to present sex as natural and without danger, in contrast to the 1940s &quot;femmes fatales&quot;. Spoto likewise describes her as the embodiment of &quot;the postwar ideal of the American girl, soft, transparently needy, worshipful of men, naïve, offering sex without demands&quot;, which is echoed in Molly Haskell&#x27;s statement that &quot;she was the Fifties fiction, the lie that a woman had no sexual needs, that she is there to cater to, or enhance, a man&#x27;s needs.&quot; Monroe&#x27;s contemporary Norman Mailer wrote that &quot;Marilyn suggested sex might be difficult and dangerous with others, but ice cream with her&quot;, while Groucho Marx characterized her as &quot;Mae West, Theda Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one&quot;. According to Haskell, due to her sex symbol status, Monroe was less popular with women than with men, as they &quot;couldn&#x27;t identify with her and didn&#x27;t support her&quot;, although this would change after her death.

Dyer has also argued that Monroe&#x27;s blonde hair became her defining feature because it made her &quot;racially unambiguous&quot; and exclusively white just as the civil rights movement was beginning, and that she should be seen as emblematic of racism in twentieth-century popular culture. Banner agreed that it may not be a coincidence that Monroe launched a trend of platinum blonde actresses during the civil rights movement, but has also criticized Dyer, pointing out that in her highly publicized private life, Monroe associated with people who were seen as &quot;white ethnics&quot;, such as Joe DiMaggio (Italian-American) and Arthur Miller (Jewish). According to Banner, she sometimes challenged prevailing racial norms in her publicity photographs; for example, in an image featured in &quot;Look&quot; in 1951, she was shown in revealing clothes while practicing with African-American singing coach Phil Moore.
Monroe was perceived as a specifically American star, &quot;a national institution as well known as hot dogs, apple pie, or baseball&quot; according to &quot;Photoplay&quot;. Banner calls her the symbol of populuxe, a star whose joyful and glamorous public image &quot;helped the nation cope with its paranoia in the 1950s about the Cold War, the atom bomb, and the totalitarian communist Soviet Union&quot;. Historian Fiona Handyside writes that the French female audiences associated whiteness/blondness with American modernity and cleanliness, and so Monroe came to symbolize a modern, &quot;liberated&quot; woman whose life takes place in the public sphere. Film historian Laura Mulvey has written of her as an endorsement for American consumer culture:

Twentieth Century-Fox further profited from Monroe&#x27;s popularity by cultivating several lookalike actresses, such as Jayne Mansfield and Sheree North. Other studios also attempted to create their own Monroes: Universal Pictures with Mamie Van Doren, Columbia Pictures with Kim Novak, and The Rank Organisation with Diana Dors.

In a profile, Truman Capote quoted Monroe&#x27;s acting teacher, Constance Collier: She is a beautiful child. I don&#x27;t mean that in the obvious way—the perhaps too obvious way. I don&#x27;t think she&#x27;s an actress at all, not in any traditional sense. What she has—this presence, this luminosity, this flickering intelligence—could never surface on the stage. It&#x27;s so fragile and subtle, it can only be caught by the camera. It&#x27;s like a hummingbird in flight: only a camera can freeze the poetry of it.

== Filmography ==
* &quot;Dangerous Years&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Ladies of the Chorus&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Love Happy&quot; (1949)
* &quot;A Ticket to Tomahawk&quot; (1950)
* &quot;The Asphalt Jungle&quot; (1950)
* &quot;All About Eve&quot; (1950)
* &quot;The Fireball&quot; (1950)
* &quot;Right Cross&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Home Town Story&quot; (1951)
* &quot;As Young as You Feel&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Love Nest&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Make It Legal&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Clash by Night&quot; (1952)
* &quot;We&#x27;re Not Married!&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Bother to Knock&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Monkey Business&quot; (1952)
* &quot;O. Henry&#x27;s Full House&quot; (1952)
* &quot;Niagara&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot; (1953)
* &quot;How to Marry a Millionaire&quot; (1953)
* &quot;River of No Return&quot; (1954)
* &quot;There&#x27;s No Business Like Show Business&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; (1955)
* &quot;Bus Stop&quot; (1956)
* &quot;The Prince and the Showgirl&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot; (1959)
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Make Love&quot; (1960)
* &quot;The Misfits&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Something&#x27;s Got to Give&quot; (1962–unfinished)
== Legacy ==
According to &quot;The Guide to United States Popular Culture&quot;, &quot;as an icon of American popular culture, Monroe&#x27;s few rivals in popularity include Elvis Presley and Mickey Mouse... no other star has ever inspired such a wide range of emotions—from lust to pity, from envy to remorse.&quot; Art historian Gail Levin stated that Monroe may have been &quot;the most photographed person of the 20th century&quot;, and The American Film Institute has named her the sixth greatest female screen legend in American film history. The Smithsonian Institution has included her on their list of &quot;100 Most Significant Americans of All Time&quot;, and both &quot;Variety&quot; and VH1 have placed her in the top ten in their rankings of the greatest popular culture icons of the twentieth century.

Hundreds of books have been written about Monroe. She has been the subject of numerous films, plays, operas, and songs, and has influenced artists and entertainers such as Andy Warhol and Madonna. She also remains a valuable brand: her image and name have been licensed for hundreds of products, and she has been featured in advertising for brands such as Max Factor, Chanel, Mercedes-Benz, and Absolut Vodka.

Monroe&#x27;s enduring popularity is tied to her conflicted public image. On the one hand, she remains a sex symbol, beauty icon and one of the most famous stars of classical Hollywood cinema. On the other, she is also remembered for her troubled private life, unstable childhood, struggle for professional respect, as well as her death and the conspiracy theories that surrounded it. She has been written about by scholars and journalists who are interested in gender and feminism; these writers include Gloria Steinem, Jacqueline Rose, Molly Haskell, Sarah Churchwell, and Lois Banner. Some, such as Steinem, have viewed her as a victim of the studio system. Others, such as Haskell, Rose, and Churchwell, have instead stressed Monroe&#x27;s proactive role in her career and in the creation of her public persona.
Owing to the contrast between her stardom and troubled private life, Monroe is closely linked to broader discussions about modern phenomena such as mass media, fame, and consumer culture. According to academic Susanne Hamscha, Monroe has continued relevance to ongoing discussions about modern society, and she is &quot;never completely situated in one time or place&quot; but has become &quot;a surface on which narratives of American culture can be (re)constructed&quot;. Similarly, Banner has called Monroe the &quot;eternal shapeshifter&quot; who is re-created by &quot;each generation, even each individual... to their own specifications&quot;.

Monroe remains a cultural icon, but critics are divided on her legacy as an actress. David Thomson called her body of work &quot;insubstantial&quot; and Pauline Kael wrote that she &quot;used her lack of an actress&#x27;s skills to amuse the public. She had the wit or crassness or desperation to turn cheesecake into acting—and vice versa; she did what others had the &#x27;good taste&#x27; not to do&quot;. In contrast, Peter Bradshaw wrote that Monroe was a talented comedian who &quot;understood how comedy achieved its effects&quot;, and Roger Ebert wrote that &quot;Monroe&#x27;s eccentricities and neuroses on sets became notorious, but studios put up with her long after any other actress would have been blackballed because what they got back on the screen was magical&quot;. Jonathan Rosenbaum stated that &quot;she subtly subverted the sexist content of her material&quot; and that &quot;the difficulty some people have discerning Monroe&#x27;s intelligence as an actress seems rooted in the ideology of a repressive era, when super feminine women weren&#x27;t supposed to be smart&quot;. In 2024, the Los Angeles City Council approved Monroe&#x27;s house being designated as a Historic Cultural Monument.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* Marilyn Monroe collection at the Smithsonian National Museum of American History
* 
* 
* Monroe&#x27;s file at the Federal Bureau of Investigation website
* &quot;Marilyn Monroe: Still Life&quot; A website containing clips and essays related to PBS&#x27;s &quot;American Masters&quot; documentary on Monroe</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="0" end="14" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="24" end="45" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Norma Jeane Mortenson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="150" end="166" title="Blonde stereotype#Blonde bombshell" label="blonde bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q330742" start="220" end="230" title="sex symbol" label="sex symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="301" end="318" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802702" start="431" end="440" title="Death of Marilyn Monroe" label="her death"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="459" end="470" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q946783" start="556" end="571" title="James Dougherty (police officer)" label="James Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="626" end="638" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453356" start="676" end="701" title="First Motion Picture Unit" label="First Motion Picture Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q151092" start="725" end="737" title="pin-up model" label="pin-up model"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="794" end="810" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="815" end="832" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q438272" start="984" end="1004" title="As Young as You Feel" label="As Young as You Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q545725" start="1021" end="1036" title="Monkey Business (1952 film)" label="Monkey Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766802" start="1068" end="1082" title="Clash by Night" label="Clash by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637360" start="1099" end="1125" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Bother to Knock" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Bother to Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347783" start="1403" end="1410" title="Niagara (1953 film)" label="Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q383355" start="1481" end="1505" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953 film)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q284362" start="1522" end="1548" title="How to Marry a Millionaire" label="How to Marry a Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502290" start="1600" end="1611" title="Blonde stereotype" label="dumb blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986639" start="1667" end="1677" title="centerfold" label="centerfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="1716" end="1723" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="1843" end="1851" title="Typecasting" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="1979" end="1998" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347414" start="2207" end="2220" title="Milton Greene" label="Milton Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="2284" end="2297" title="method acting" label="method acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="2304" end="2317" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="2325" end="2338" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q547368" start="2512" end="2520" title="Bus Stop (1956 film)" label="Bus Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161196" start="2580" end="2607" title="The Prince and the Showgirl" label="The Prince and the Showgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q687123" start="2647" end="2652" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="2675" end="2687" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="2710" end="2726" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q645574" start="2820" end="2831" title="The Misfits (1961 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="2947" end="2959" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="2978" end="2991" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910654" start="3075" end="3113" title="Diamonds Are a Girl&amp;#x27;s Best Friend" label="Diamonds Are a Girl&amp;#x27;s Best Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q950694" start="3137" end="3166" title="Happy Birthday, Mr. President" label="Happy Birthday, Mr. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802702" start="3200" end="3211" title="Death of Marilyn Monroe" label="Monroe died"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="3240" end="3251" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624525" start="3256" end="3276" title="12305 Fifth Helena Drive" label="her Los Angeles home"/>
<link wikidata="Q582878" start="3335" end="3351" title="pop culture icon" label="pop culture icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="3362" end="3385" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022110" start="3405" end="3473" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Stars" label="sixth-greatest female screen legend from the Golden Age of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682058" start="3587" end="3615" title="Los Angeles General Hospital" label="Los Angeles General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q96200519" start="3645" end="3663" title="Gladys Pearl Baker" label="Gladys Pearl Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856408" start="3687" end="3711" title="Piedras Negras, Coahuila" label="Piedras Negras, Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="3733" end="3743" title="Midwestern" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638839" start="3943" end="3951" title="Berniece Baker Miracle" label="Berniece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="4113" end="4121" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="4280" end="4293" title="film negative" label="film negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163271" start="4304" end="4332" title="Consolidated Film Industries" label="Consolidated Film Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668201" start="4767" end="4778" title="Lois Banner" label="Lois Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="4853" end="4864" title="RKO Studios" label="RKO Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="5183" end="5204" title="evangelical Christian" label="evangelical Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q688596" start="5268" end="5277" title="Hawthorne, California" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="5481" end="5490" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139614" start="5512" end="5546" title="Home Owners&amp;#x27; Loan Corporation" label="Home Owners&amp;#x27; Loan Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="5759" end="5781" title="paranoid schizophrenia" label="paranoid schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825259" start="5845" end="5872" title="Metropolitan State Hospital (California)" label="Metropolitan State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="5984" end="6001" title="ward of the state" label="ward of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="6192" end="6207" title="child sexual abuse" label="sexually abused"/>
<link wikidata="Q186676" start="6261" end="6268" title="stutter" label="stutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q157509" start="6921" end="6935" title="legal guardian" label="legal guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="7103" end="7111" title="molested" label="molested"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="7227" end="7234" title="Compton, California" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428691" start="7797" end="7805" title="Sawtelle, Los Angeles" label="Sawtelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724146" start="7830" end="7856" title="Emerson Junior High School" label="Emerson Junior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q624477" start="7876" end="7893" title="Christian Science" label="Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q769446" start="8114" end="8122" title="Van Nuys" label="Van Nuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008476" start="8180" end="8200" title="Van Nuys High School" label="Van Nuys High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="8259" end="8272" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q946783" start="8510" end="8525" title="James Dougherty (police officer)" label="James Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="8784" end="8799" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q845229" start="8821" end="8842" title="Santa Catalina Island (California)" label="Santa Catalina Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="8982" end="8989" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868340" start="9132" end="9150" title="Radioplane Company" label="Radioplane Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703147" start="9244" end="9257" title="David Conover" label="David Conover"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="9279" end="9299" title="U.S. Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453356" start="9306" end="9331" title="First Motion Picture Unit" label="First Motion Picture Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q151092" start="9763" end="9769" title="pin-up" label="pin-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q202466" start="9930" end="9945" title="Blond" label="platinum blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124297" start="10161" end="10168" title="Pageant (magazine)" label="Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="10419" end="10437" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446692" start="10470" end="10478" title="Ben Lyon" label="Ben Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="10482" end="10498" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century-Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q364342" start="10525" end="10541" title="Darryl F. Zanuck" label="Darryl F. Zanuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="10659" end="10671" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q450386" start="10856" end="10870" title="Marilyn Miller" label="Marilyn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757840" start="11230" end="11245" title="Dangerous Years" label="Dangerous Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755114" start="11269" end="11292" title="Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!" label="Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148255" start="11343" end="11374" title="Actors&amp;#x27; Laboratory Theatre" label="Actors&amp;#x27; Laboratory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q378577" start="11424" end="11437" title="Group Theatre (New York City)" label="Group Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900388" start="12063" end="12083" title="Bliss-Hayden Theater" label="Bliss-Hayden Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960172" start="12210" end="12224" title="Sidney Skolsky" label="Sidney Skolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707966" start="12389" end="12406" title="Joseph M. Schenck" label="Joseph M. Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586470" start="12433" end="12443" title="Harry Cohn" label="Harry Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="12467" end="12484" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q42745" start="12564" end="12577" title="Rita Hayworth" label="Rita Hayworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802795" start="12680" end="12694" title="Natasha Lytess" label="Natasha Lytess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478405" start="12797" end="12817" title="Ladies of the Chorus" label="Ladies of the Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q375594" start="12966" end="12980" title="Born Yesterday (1950 film)" label="Born Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="13274" end="13279" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992492" start="13328" end="13338" title="Tom Kelley (photographer)" label="Tom Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046403" start="13493" end="13503" title="Earl Moran" label="Earl Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182916" start="13624" end="13635" title="Johnny Hyde" label="Johnny Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091483" start="13663" end="13684" title="William Morris Agency" label="William Morris Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q51583" start="13801" end="13818" title="Joseph Mankiewicz" label="Joseph Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q200299" start="13838" end="13851" title="All About Eve" label="All About Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="13932" end="13943" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="14201" end="14212" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q728485" start="14231" end="14249" title="The Asphalt Jungle" label="The Asphalt Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381612" start="14347" end="14356" title="Photoplay" label="Photoplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q438272" start="14806" end="14826" title="As Young as You Feel" label="As Young as You Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754461" start="14840" end="14849" title="Love Nest" label="Love Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755108" start="14867" end="14891" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Make It Legal" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Make It Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="15036" end="15051" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15061" end="15079" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682116" start="15188" end="15210" title="Los Angeles Daily News (historic)" label="Los Angeles Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q151092" start="15441" end="15451" title="pin-up" label="Cheesecake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813221" start="15494" end="15511" title="Stars and Stripes (newspaper)" label="Stars and Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="15565" end="15575" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347340" start="15599" end="15634" title="Hollywood Foreign Press Association" label="Hollywood Foreign Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q72717" start="15766" end="15776" title="Elia Kazan" label="Elia Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="15838" end="15850" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q102813" start="15862" end="15873" title="Yul Brynner" label="Yul Brynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q345517" start="15878" end="15891" title="Peter Lawford" label="Peter Lawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="15959" end="15975" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="15990" end="16002" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911899" start="16570" end="16577" title="billing (filmmaking)" label="billing"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="16643" end="16668" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q271324" start="16728" end="16740" title="Hedda Hopper" label="Hedda Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766802" start="16859" end="16873" title="Clash by Night" label="Clash by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637360" start="16887" end="16913" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Bother to Knock" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Bother to Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289882" start="16930" end="16953" title="We&amp;#x27;re Not Married!" label="We&amp;#x27;re Not Married!"/>
<link wikidata="Q49492" start="17171" end="17186" title="Michael Chekhov" label="Michael Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650107" start="17196" end="17208" title="Lotte Goslar" label="Lotte Goslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="17385" end="17401" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="17418" end="17428" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="17512" end="17520" title="Monterey" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="17579" end="17601" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="17706" end="17713" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005146" start="18446" end="18462" title="Nunnally Johnson" label="Nunnally Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="18467" end="18479" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q545725" start="18493" end="18508" title="Monkey Business (1952 film)" label="Monkey Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="18544" end="18554" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481710" start="18696" end="18722" title="O. Henry&amp;#x27;s Full House" label="O. Henry&amp;#x27;s Full House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264" start="18735" end="18751" title="Charles Laughton" label="Charles Laughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="18973" end="18993" title="Miss America Pageant" label="Miss America Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326170" start="19028" end="19039" title="Earl Wilson (columnist)" label="Earl Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460453" start="19117" end="19130" title="Florabel Muir" label="Florabel Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674997" start="19154" end="19161" title="it girl" label="it girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805151" start="19520" end="19535" title="Paula Strasberg" label="Paula Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="19927" end="19935" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="19954" end="19965" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="19968" end="19980" title="amphetamines" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422186" start="20103" end="20119" title="Sarah Churchwell" label="Sarah Churchwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668201" start="20285" end="20296" title="Lois Banner" label="Lois Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="20540" end="20551" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="20552" end="20561" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347783" start="20568" end="20575" title="Niagara (1953 film)" label="Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="20611" end="20623" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q95148" start="20672" end="20685" title="Joseph Cotten" label="Joseph Cotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612340" start="20726" end="20757" title="Allan &amp;quot;Whitey&amp;quot; Snyder" label="Allan &amp;quot;Whitey&amp;quot; Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q115574142" start="20880" end="20891" title="beauty mark" label="beauty mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294287" start="21186" end="21195" title="long shot" label="long shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093151" start="21368" end="21386" title="women&amp;#x27;s club (United States)" label="women&amp;#x27;s clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="21462" end="21469" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21536" end="21554" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801748" start="22014" end="22018" title="Lamé (fabric)" label="lamé"/>
<link wikidata="Q945402" start="22037" end="22053" title="William Travilla" label="William Travilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="22198" end="22211" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q383355" start="22437" end="22461" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953 film)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22508" end="22519" title="Blonde stereotype#Dumb blonde" label="dumb blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q272088" start="22536" end="22546" title="Anita Loos" label="Anita Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248760" start="22553" end="22558" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (novel)" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q736979" start="22563" end="22583" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (musical)" label="its Broadway version"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482594" start="22634" end="22642" title="showgirl" label="showgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q217033" start="22665" end="22677" title="Jane Russell" label="Jane Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q233852" start="22726" end="22738" title="Betty Grable" label="Betty Grable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502290" start="22796" end="22812" title="blonde bombshell (stereotype)" label="blonde bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122565" start="23046" end="23076" title="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre" label="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23232" end="23250" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910654" start="23379" end="23417" title="Diamonds Are a Girl&amp;#x27;s Best Friend" label="Diamonds Are a Girl&amp;#x27;s Best Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565777" start="23629" end="23644" title="Jack Benny Show" label="Jack Benny Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q104000" start="23759" end="23772" title="Lauren Bacall" label="Lauren Bacall"/>
<link wikidata="Q284362" start="23811" end="23837" title="How to Marry a Millionaire" label="How to Marry a Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q485544" start="24070" end="24081" title="CinemaScope" label="CinemaScope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425741" start="24356" end="24387" title="Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll" label="Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q194280" start="24616" end="24627" title="Hugh Hefner" label="Hugh Hefner"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="24700" end="24707" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="24811" end="24831" title="Miss America Pageant" label="Miss America Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q364342" start="25317" end="25333" title="Darryl F. Zanuck" label="Darryl F. Zanuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494323" start="25506" end="25520" title="Spyros Skouras" label="Spyros Skouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990159" start="25785" end="25808" title="The Girl in Pink Tights" label="The Girl in Pink Tights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093944" start="25983" end="26006" title="San Francisco City Hall" label="San Francisco City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="26189" end="26192" title="United Service Organizations" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="26491" end="26506" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="26514" end="26522" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763468" start="26537" end="26556" title="The Seven Year Itch (play)" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q52997" start="26580" end="26594" title="Otto Preminger" label="Otto Preminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="26602" end="26609" title="western (genre)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470997" start="26616" end="26634" title="River of No Return" label="River of No Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117103" start="26740" end="26747" title="Z movie" label="Z-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225134" start="26949" end="26992" title="There&amp;#x27;s No Business Like Show Business (film)" label="There&amp;#x27;s No Business Like Show Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="27269" end="27281" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q427388" start="27347" end="27356" title="Tom Ewell" label="Tom Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q247262" start="27647" end="27662" title="white dress of Marilyn Monroe" label="her white dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q109739" start="27666" end="27682" title="Lexington Avenue" label="Lexington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347414" start="28478" end="28491" title="Milton Greene" label="Milton Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11307668" start="28648" end="28661" title="studio system" label="studio system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003133" start="29025" end="29056" title="Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter? (play)" label="Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="29094" end="29109" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q443743" start="29271" end="29288" title="Constance Collier" label="Constance Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="29315" end="29328" title="method acting" label="method acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="29336" end="29349" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="29358" end="29371" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="29683" end="29697" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="29924" end="29937" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="30069" end="30082" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="30304" end="30307" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="30327" end="30336" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="30350" end="30358" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="30368" end="30406" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="31169" end="31173" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740768" start="31236" end="31240" title="Look (American magazine)" label="Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097952" start="31449" end="31464" title="Walter Winchell" label="Walter Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q547368" start="31652" end="31660" title="Bus Stop (1956 film)" label="Bus Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802476" start="31857" end="31869" title="Ozark English" label="Ozark accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="31998" end="32006" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="32016" end="32028" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="32456" end="32471" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462177" start="32631" end="32653" title="White Plains, New York" label="White Plains, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079817" start="32681" end="32696" title="Jewish wedding" label="Jewish ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380148" start="32712" end="32721" title="Kay B. Barrett" label="Kay Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958722" start="32756" end="32774" title="Waccabuc, New York" label="Waccabuc, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q131446562" start="32802" end="32822" title="Gerim" label="converted to Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="33178" end="33211" title="The Saturday Review of Literature" label="The Saturday Review of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="33539" end="33551" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="33567" end="33617" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actress in a Leading Role - Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161196" start="33724" end="33751" title="The Prince and the Showgirl" label="The Prince and the Showgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="33762" end="33778" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33800" end="33817" title="The Sleeping Prince (play)" label="a 1953 stage play"/>
<link wikidata="Q544627" start="33821" end="33837" title="Terence Rattigan" label="Terence Rattigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="33897" end="33913" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="34165" end="34177" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q31579" start="34982" end="35000" title="David di Donatello" label="David di Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q174389" start="35016" end="35028" title="César Award" label="Crystal Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="35056" end="35061" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="35201" end="35212" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="35217" end="35228" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207087" start="35241" end="35258" title="ectopic pregnancy" label="ectopic pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205764" start="35350" end="35363" title="endometriosis" label="endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q94123" start="35596" end="35607" title="Jack Lemmon" label="Jack Lemmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="35612" end="35623" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="35677" end="35693" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="36122" end="36128" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="37259" end="37279" title="List of films considered the best" label="best films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="37296" end="37299" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="37305" end="37328" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="37340" end="37357" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348409" start="37552" end="37572" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Make Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Make Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q56014" start="37590" end="37602" title="George Cukor" label="George Cukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106057" start="37887" end="37899" title="Yves Montand" label="Yves Montand"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="38281" end="38294" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q193066" start="38341" end="38358" title="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s (film)" label="a film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849930" start="38368" end="38395" title="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s (novella)" label="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="38424" end="38438" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="38544" end="38555" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q645574" start="38569" end="38580" title="The Misfits (1961 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284676" start="38700" end="38715" title="divorce mill" label="quickie divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="38719" end="38731" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="38777" end="38788" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q104067" start="38790" end="38801" title="Eli Wallach" label="Eli Wallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q193102" start="38806" end="38822" title="Montgomery Clift" label="Montgomery Clift"/>
<link wikidata="Q112033" start="39012" end="39023" title="Inge Morath" label="Inge Morath"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="39278" end="39287" title="gallstone" label="gallstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345789" start="39501" end="39506" title="drug detoxification" label="detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557696" start="39799" end="39814" title="Mexican divorce" label="Mexican divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279141" start="40276" end="40288" title="Geoff Andrew" label="Geoff Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="40296" end="40318" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="40489" end="40504" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="40668" end="40687" title="W. Somerset Maugham" label="W. Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205260" start="40701" end="40705" title="Rain (short story)" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="40716" end="40719" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898408" start="41064" end="41096" title="Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic" label="Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="41157" end="41166" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415975" start="41336" end="41370" title="Columbia University Medical Center" label="Columbia University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="41480" end="41493" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624525" start="41581" end="41605" title="12305 Fifth Helena Drive" label="12305 Fifth Helena Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q909975" start="41609" end="41631" title="Brentwood, Los Angeles" label="Brentwood, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534952" start="41744" end="41768" title="19th Golden Globe Awards" label="19th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753740" start="41810" end="41838" title="Something&amp;#x27;s Got to Give" label="Something&amp;#x27;s Got to Give"/>
<link wikidata="Q589729" start="41864" end="41880" title="My Favorite Wife" label="My Favorite Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="41968" end="41979" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62558" start="41984" end="41996" title="Cyd Charisse" label="Cyd Charisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="42039" end="42048" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q950694" start="42359" end="42388" title="Happy Birthday, Mr. President" label="Happy Birthday, Mr. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="42417" end="42432" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728098" start="42470" end="42491" title="Madison Square Garden (1925)" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430" start="43268" end="43277" title="Cleopatra (1963 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q230011" start="43378" end="43388" title="Lee Remick" label="Lee Remick"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="43875" end="43887" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q521136" start="43894" end="43911" title="What a Way to Go!" label="What a Way to Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="44006" end="44017" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="44145" end="44157" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="44200" end="44205" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q388964" start="44257" end="44267" title="Bert Stern" label="Bert Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521530" start="44448" end="44464" title="The Last Sitting" label="The Last Sitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802702" start="44626" end="44639" title="Eunice R. Murray" label="Eunice Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q631702" start="44939" end="44953" title="Ralph Greenson" label="Ralph Greenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="45261" end="45290" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="45367" end="45377" title="toxicology" label="toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931388" start="45401" end="45415" title="cause of death" label="cause of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184752" start="45420" end="45447" title="Barbiturate overdose" label="acute barbiturate poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781239" start="45459" end="45462" title="milligram per cent" label="mg%"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="45464" end="45474" title="milligrams" label="milligrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q412340" start="45508" end="45523" title="chloral hydrate" label="chloral hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409632" start="45539" end="45552" title="pentobarbital" label="pentobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682074" start="45819" end="45853" title="Los Angeles County Department of Medical Examiner-Coroner" label="Los Angeles County Coroners Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q456856" start="46279" end="46293" title="Thomas Noguchi" label="Thomas Noguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668201" start="46443" end="46454" title="Lois Banner" label="Lois Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="46629" end="46644" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="46788" end="46800" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="47097" end="47109" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358639" start="47226" end="47265" title="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="47744" end="47763" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="47991" end="48004" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242890" start="48094" end="48130" title="Los Angeles County District Attorney" label="Los Angeles County District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261787" start="48131" end="48147" title="John Van de Kamp" label="John Van de Kamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="48426" end="48443" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="48448" end="48464" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q233852" start="48676" end="48688" title="Betty Grable" label="Betty Grable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325332" start="48778" end="48790" title="Richard Dyer" label="Richard Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15930278" start="48844" end="48853" title="male gaze" label="male gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960172" start="49117" end="49131" title="Sidney Skolsky" label="Sidney Skolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q249143" start="49136" end="49151" title="Louella Parsons" label="Louella Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="49283" end="49294" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="49846" end="49861" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825093" start="50873" end="50887" title="Wardrobe malfunction" label="malfunctioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q214100" start="51031" end="51045" title="American Dream" label="American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="51411" end="51422" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422186" start="51898" end="51914" title="Sarah Churchwell" label="Sarah Churchwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668201" start="51969" end="51980" title="Lois Banner" label="Lois Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q330742" start="52026" end="52036" title="sex symbol" label="sex symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="52195" end="52203" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="52208" end="52215" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650107" start="52489" end="52501" title="Lotte Goslar" label="Lotte Goslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="53080" end="53088" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q870953" start="53110" end="53123" title="Kinsey Reports" label="Kinsey report"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="53136" end="53149" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438791" start="53163" end="53184" title="The Feminine Mystique" label="The Feminine Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896590" start="53589" end="53602" title="Molly Haskell" label="Molly Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="53933" end="53945" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="53973" end="53981" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q234615" start="53983" end="53993" title="Theda Bara" label="Theda Bara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649200" start="53999" end="54006" title="Little Bo Peep" label="Bo Peep"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="54429" end="54450" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995606" start="54835" end="54847" title="white ethnic" label="white ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085690" start="55175" end="55185" title="Phil Moore (jazz musician)" label="Phil Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964253" start="55393" end="55401" title="populuxe" label="populuxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="55520" end="55528" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q440887" start="55864" end="55876" title="Laura Mulvey" label="Laura Mulvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="56067" end="56082" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q468435" start="56087" end="56099" title="Sheree North" label="Sheree North"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="56159" end="56177" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q264596" start="56183" end="56198" title="Mamie Van Doren" label="Mamie Van Doren"/>
<link wikidata="Q212879" start="56223" end="56232" title="Kim Novak" label="Kim Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535788" start="56238" end="56259" title="The Rank Organisation" label="The Rank Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q239849" start="56265" end="56275" title="Diana Dors" label="Diana Dors"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="56292" end="56305" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q443743" start="56343" end="56360" title="Constance Collier" label="Constance Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757840" start="56826" end="56841" title="Dangerous Years" label="Dangerous Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755114" start="56863" end="56886" title="Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!" label="Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478405" start="56908" end="56928" title="Ladies of the Chorus" label="Ladies of the Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q957026" start="56950" end="56960" title="Love Happy" label="Love Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q300589" start="56982" end="57002" title="A Ticket to Tomahawk" label="A Ticket to Tomahawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q728485" start="57024" end="57042" title="The Asphalt Jungle" label="The Asphalt Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200299" start="57064" end="57077" title="All About Eve" label="All About Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767174" start="57099" end="57111" title="The Fireball" label="The Fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758744" start="57133" end="57144" title="Right Cross" label="Right Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757393" start="57166" end="57181" title="Home Town Story" label="Home Town Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q438272" start="57203" end="57223" title="As Young as You Feel" label="As Young as You Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754461" start="57245" end="57254" title="Love Nest" label="Love Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755108" start="57276" end="57300" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Make It Legal" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Make It Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766802" start="57322" end="57336" title="Clash by Night" label="Clash by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289882" start="57358" end="57381" title="We&amp;#x27;re Not Married!" label="We&amp;#x27;re Not Married!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637360" start="57403" end="57429" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Bother to Knock" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Bother to Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q545725" start="57451" end="57466" title="Monkey Business (1952 film)" label="Monkey Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481710" start="57488" end="57514" title="O. Henry&amp;#x27;s Full House" label="O. Henry&amp;#x27;s Full House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347783" start="57536" end="57543" title="Niagara (1953 film)" label="Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q383355" start="57565" end="57589" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953 film)" label="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q284362" start="57611" end="57637" title="How to Marry a Millionaire" label="How to Marry a Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470997" start="57659" end="57677" title="River of No Return" label="River of No Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225134" start="57699" end="57742" title="There&amp;#x27;s No Business Like Show Business (film)" label="There&amp;#x27;s No Business Like Show Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="57764" end="57783" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q547368" start="57805" end="57813" title="Bus Stop (1956 film)" label="Bus Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161196" start="57835" end="57862" title="The Prince and the Showgirl" label="The Prince and the Showgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="57884" end="57900" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348409" start="57922" end="57942" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Make Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Make Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q645574" start="57964" end="57975" title="The Misfits (1961 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753740" start="57997" end="58025" title="Something&amp;#x27;s Got to Give" label="Something&amp;#x27;s Got to Give"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="58225" end="58238" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="58243" end="58255" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926160" start="58382" end="58392" title="Gail Levin (art historian)" label="Gail Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022110" start="58534" end="58573" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Stars" label="the sixth greatest female screen legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="58577" end="58598" title="Cinema of the United States" label="American film history"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="58604" end="58627" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="58751" end="58754" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="59041" end="59052" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="59057" end="59064" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354647" start="59225" end="59235" title="Max Factor" label="Max Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="59237" end="59243" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="59245" end="59258" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q332378" start="59264" end="59277" title="Absolut Vodka" label="Absolut Vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166646" start="59445" end="59471" title="classical Hollywood cinema" label="classical Hollywood cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="59785" end="59799" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157793" start="59801" end="59816" title="Jacqueline Rose" label="Jacqueline Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="60764" end="60777" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176847" start="60832" end="60845" title="David Thomson (film critic)" label="David Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="60900" end="60912" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376474" start="61169" end="61183" title="Peter Bradshaw" label="Peter Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="61290" end="61301" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343526" start="61532" end="61550" title="Jonathan Rosenbaum" label="Jonathan Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870447" start="61860" end="61884" title="Los Angeles City Council" label="Los Angeles City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624525" start="61894" end="61913" title="12305 Fifth Helena Drive" label="Monroe&amp;#x27;s house"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="62109" end="62156" title="National Museum of American History" label="Smithsonian National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="62191" end="62222" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="62321" end="62324" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="62338" end="62354" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19319" wikidata="Q105790271" url="?curid=19319" title="Myelin">
<text>Myelin ( ) is a lipid-rich material that surrounds nerve cell axons to insulate them and increase the rate at which electrical impulses (called action potentials) pass along the axon. The myelinated axon can be likened to an electrical wire (the axon) with insulating material (myelin) around it. However, unlike the plastic covering on an electrical wire, myelin does not form a single long sheath over the entire length of the axon. Rather, myelin ensheaths the axon segmentally: in general, each axon is encased in multiple long sheaths with short gaps between, called nodes of Ranvier. At the nodes of Ranvier, which are approximately one thousandth of a mm (one micrometre (μm) in length, the axon&#x27;s membrane (axolemma) is bare of myelin.

Myelin&#x27;s best known function is to increase the rate at which information, encoded as electrical charges, passes along the axon&#x27;s length. Myelin achieves this by eliciting saltatory conduction. Saltatory conduction refers to the fact that electrical impulses &#x27;jump&#x27; along the axon, over long myelin sheaths, from one node of Ranvier to the next. Thus, information is passed around 100 times faster along a myelinated axon than a non-myelinated one.

At the molecular level, the myelin sheath increases the distance between extracellular and intracellular ions, reducing the accumulation of electrical charges. The discontinuous structure of the myelin sheath results in the action potential &quot;jumping&quot; from one node of Ranvier over a long (c. 0.1 mm – &gt;1 mm, or 100–1000 micron) myelinated stretch of the axon called the internodal segment or &quot;internode&quot;, before &quot;recharging&quot; at the next node of Ranvier. This &#x27;jumping&#x27; continues until the action potential reaches the axon terminal. Once there, the electrical signal provokes the release of chemical neurotransmitters across the synapse, which bind to receptors on the post-synaptic cell (e.g. another neuron, myocyte or secretory cell).

Myelin is made by glial cells, which are non-neuronal cells that provide nutritional and homeostatic support to the axons. This is because axons, being elongated structures, are too far from the soma to be supported by the neurons themselves. In the central nervous system (brain, spinal cord and optic nerves), myelination is formed by specialized glial cells called oligodendrocytes, each of which sends out processes (limb-like extensions from the cell body) to myelinate multiple nearby axons; while in the peripheral nervous system, myelin is formed by Schwann cells (neurolemmocytes), which only myelinate a section of one axon. In the CNS, axons carry electrical signals from one nerve cell body to another. 
The &quot;insulating&quot; function for myelin is essential for efficient motor function (i.e. movement such as walking), sensory function (e.g. sight, hearing, smell, the feeling of touch or pain) and cognition (e.g. acquiring and recalling knowledge), as demonstrated by the consequence of disorders that affect myelination, such as the genetically determined leukodystrophies; the acquired inflammatory demyelinating disorder, multiple sclerosis; and the inflammatory demyelinating peripheral neuropathies. Due to its high prevalence, multiple sclerosis, which specifically affects the central nervous system (brain, spinal cord and optic nerve), is the best known disorder of myelin.

== Development ==

The process of generating myelin is called myelination or myelinogenesis. In the CNS, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) differentiate into mature oligodendrocytes, which form myelin. In humans, myelination begins early in the 3rd trimester, although only little myelin is present in either the CNS or the PNS at the time of birth. During infancy, myelination progresses rapidly, with increasing numbers of axons acquiring myelin sheaths. This corresponds with the development of cognitive and motor skills, including language comprehension, speech acquisition, crawling and walking. Myelination continues through adolescence and early adulthood and although largely complete at this time, myelin sheaths can be added in grey matter regions such as the cerebral cortex, throughout life.

== Species distribution ==
=== Vertebrates ===
Myelin is considered a defining characteristic of the jawed vertebrates (gnathostomes), though axons are ensheathed by a type of cell, called glial cells, in invertebrates. These glial wraps are quite different from vertebrate compact myelin, formed, as indicated above, by concentric wrapping of the myelinating cell process multiple times around the axon. Myelin was first described in 1854 by Rudolf Virchow, although it was over a century later, following the development of electron microscopy, that its glial cell origin and its ultrastructure became apparent.

In vertebrates, not all axons are myelinated. For example, in the PNS, a large proportion of axons are unmyelinated. Instead, they are ensheathed by non-myelinating Schwann cells known as Remak SCs and arranged in Remak bundles. In the CNS, non-myelinated axons (or intermittently myelinated axons, meaning axons with long non-myelinated regions between myelinated segments) intermingle with myelinated ones and are entwined, at least partially, by the processes of another type of glial cell the astrocyte.

=== Invertebrates ===
Functionally equivalent myelin-like sheaths are found in several invertebrate taxa, including oligochaete annelids, and crustacean taxa such as penaeids, palaemonids, and calanoids. These myelin-like sheaths share several structural features with the sheaths found in vertebrates including multiplicity of membranes, condensation of membrane, and nodes. However, the nodes in vertebrates are annular; i.e. they encircle the axon. In contrast, nodes found in the sheaths of invertebrates are either annular or fenestrated; i.e. they are restricted to &quot;spots&quot;. The fastest recorded conduction speed (across both vertebrates and invertebrates) is found in the ensheathed axons of the Kuruma shrimp, an invertebrate, ranging between 90 and 200 m/s (cf. 100–120 m/s for the fastest myelinated vertebrate axon).

==Composition==
CNS myelin differs slightly in composition and configuration from PNS myelin, but both perform the same &quot;insulating&quot; function (see above). Being rich in lipid, myelin appears white, hence the name given to the &quot;white matter&quot; of the CNS. Both CNS white matter tracts (e.g. the optic nerve, corticospinal tract and corpus callosum) and PNS nerves (e.g. the sciatic nerve and the auditory nerve, which also appear white) each comprise thousands to millions of axons, largely aligned in parallel. Blood vessels provide the route for oxygen and energy substrates such as glucose to reach these fibre tracts, which also contain other cell types including astrocytes and microglia in the CNS and macrophages in the PNS.

In terms of total mass, myelin comprises approximately 40% water; the dry mass comprises between 60% and 75% lipid and between 15% and 25% protein. Protein content includes myelin basic protein (MBP), which is abundant in the CNS where it plays a critical, non-redundant role in formation of compact myelin; myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), which is specific to the CNS; and proteolipid protein (PLP), which is the most abundant protein in CNS myelin, but only a minor component of PNS myelin. In the PNS, myelin protein zero (MPZ or P0) has a similar role to that of PLP in the CNS in that it is involved in holding together the multiple concentric layers of glial cell membrane that constitute the myelin sheath. The primary lipid of myelin is a glycolipid called galactocerebroside. The intertwining hydrocarbon chains of sphingomyelin strengthen the myelin sheath. Cholesterol is an essential lipid component of myelin, without which myelin fails to form.

== Function ==

The main purpose of myelin is to increase the speed at which electrical impulses (known as action potentials) propagate along the myelinated fiber. In unmyelinated fibers, action potentials travel as continuous waves, but, in myelinated fibers, they &quot;hop&quot; or propagate by saltatory conduction. The latter is markedly faster than the former, at least for axons over a certain diameter. Myelin decreases capacitance and increases electrical resistance across the axonal membrane (the axolemma). It has been suggested that myelin permits larger body size by maintaining agile communication between distant body parts.

Myelinated fibers lack voltage-gated sodium channels along the myelinated internodes, exposing them only at the nodes of Ranvier. Here, they are highly abundant and densely packed. Positively charged sodium ions can enter the axon through these voltage-gated channels, leading to depolarisation of the membrane potential at the node of Ranvier. The resting membrane potential is then rapidly restored due to positively charged potassium ions leaving the axon through potassium channels. The sodium ions inside the axon then diffuse rapidly through the axoplasm (axonal cytoplasm), to the adjacent myelinated internode and ultimately to the next (distal) node of Ranvier, triggering the opening of the voltage gated sodium channels and entry of sodium ions at this site. Although the sodium ions diffuse through the axoplasm rapidly, diffusion is decremental by nature, thus nodes of Ranvier have to be (relatively) closely spaced, to secure action potential propagation. The action potential &quot;recharges&quot; at consecutive nodes of Ranvier as the axolemmal membrane potential depolarises to approximately +35 mV. Along the myelinated internode, energy-dependent sodium/potassium pumps pump the sodium ions back out of the axon and potassium ions back into the axon to restore the balance of ions between the intracellular (inside the cell, i.e. axon in this case) and extracellular (outside the cell) fluids.

Whilst the role of myelin as an &quot;axonal insulator&quot; is well-established, other functions of myelinating cells are less well known or only recently established. The myelinating cell &quot;sculpts&quot; the underlying axon by promoting the phosphorylation of neurofilaments, thus increasing the diameter or thickness of the axon at the internodal regions; helps cluster molecules on the axolemma (such as voltage-gated sodium channels) at the node of Ranvier; and modulates the transport of cytoskeletal structures and organelles such as mitochondria, along the axon. In 2012, evidence came to light to support a role for the myelinating cell in &quot;feeding&quot; the axon. In other words, the myelinating cell seems to act as a local &quot;fueling station&quot; for the axon, which uses a great deal of energy to restore the normal balance of ions between it and its environment, following the generation of action potentials.

When a peripheral fiber is severed, the myelin sheath provides a track along which regrowth can occur. However, the myelin layer does not ensure a perfect regeneration of the nerve fiber. Some regenerated nerve fibers do not find the correct muscle fibers, and some damaged motor neurons of the peripheral nervous system die without regrowth. Damage to the myelin sheath and nerve fiber is often associated with increased functional insufficiency.

Unmyelinated fibers and myelinated axons of the mammalian central nervous system do not regenerate.

==Clinical significance==
===Demyelination===

Demyelination is the loss of the myelin sheath insulating the nerves, and is the hallmark of some neurodegenerative autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, neuromyelitis optica, transverse myelitis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, Guillain–Barré syndrome, central pontine myelinosis, inherited demyelinating diseases such as leukodystrophy, and Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease. People with pernicious anaemia can also develop nerve damage if the condition is not diagnosed quickly. Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord secondary to pernicious anaemia can lead to slight peripheral nerve damage to severe damage to the central nervous system, affecting speech, balance, and cognitive awareness. When myelin degrades, conduction of signals along the nerve can be impaired or lost, and the nerve eventually withers. A more serious case of myelin deterioration is called Canavan disease.

The immune system may play a role in demyelination associated with such diseases, including inflammation causing demyelination by overproduction of cytokines via upregulation of tumor necrosis factor or interferon. MRI evidence that docosahexaenoic acid DHA ethyl ester improves myelination in generalized peroxisomal disorders.

====Symptoms====
Demyelination results in diverse symptoms determined by the functions of the affected neurons. It disrupts signals between the brain and other parts of the body; symptoms differ from patient to patient, and have different presentations upon clinical observation and in laboratory studies.

Typical symptoms include blurriness in the central visual field that affects only one eye, may be accompanied by pain upon eye movement, double vision, loss of vision/hearing, odd sensation in legs, arms, chest, or face, such as tingling or numbness (neuropathy), weakness of arms or legs, cognitive disruption, including speech impairment and memory loss, heat sensitivity (symptoms worsen or reappear upon exposure to heat, such as a hot shower), loss of dexterity, difficulty coordinating movement or balance disorder, difficulty controlling bowel movements or urination, fatigue, and tinnitus.

====Myelin repair====

Research to repair damaged myelin sheaths is ongoing. Techniques include surgically implanting oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the central nervous system and inducing myelin repair with certain antibodies. While results in mice have been encouraging (via stem cell transplantation), whether this technique can be effective in replacing myelin loss in humans is still unknown. Cholinergic treatments, such as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs), may have beneficial effects on myelination, myelin repair, and myelin integrity. Increasing cholinergic stimulation also may act through subtle trophic effects on brain developmental processes and particularly on oligodendrocytes and the lifelong myelination process they support. Increasing oligodendrocyte cholinergic stimulation, AChEIs, and other cholinergic treatments, such as nicotine, possibly could promote myelination during development and myelin repair in older age. Glycogen synthase kinase 3β inhibitors such as lithium chloride have been found to promote myelination in mice with damaged facial nerves. Cholesterol is a necessary nutrient for the myelin sheath, along with vitamin B12.

===Dysmyelination===
Dysmyelination is characterized by a defective structure and function of myelin sheaths; unlike demyelination, it does not produce lesions. Such defective sheaths often arise from genetic mutations affecting the biosynthesis and formation of myelin. The shiverer mouse represents one animal model of dysmyelination. Human diseases where dysmyelination has been implicated include leukodystrophies (Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease, Canavan disease, phenylketonuria) and schizophrenia.

== See also ==
*Lesional demyelinations of the central nervous system
*Myelin-associated glycoprotein
*Myelin incisure
*The Myelin Project, project to regenerate myelin
*Myelin Repair Foundation, a nonprofit medical research foundation for multiple sclerosis drug discovery.
*Myelinoid, an &quot;in vitro&quot; model for studying human myelination and white matter diseases

== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Fields, R. Douglas, &quot;The Brain Learns in Unexpected Ways: Neuroscientists have discovered a set of unfamiliar cellular mechanisms for making fresh memories&quot;, &quot;Scientific American&quot;, vol. 322, no. 3 (March 2020), pp. 74–79. &quot;Myelin, long considered inert insulation on axons, is now seen as making a contribution to learning by controlling the speed at which signals travel along neural wiring.&quot; (p. 79.)
* 
== External links ==
* The MS Information Sourcebook, Myelin
* H &amp; E Histology
* Luxol Fast Blue: Modified Kluver&#x27;s Method to stain for Myelin Sheath</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="0" end="6" title="Myelin" label="Myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="16" end="21" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="51" end="61" title="nerve cell" label="nerve cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="62" end="67" title="axons" label="axons"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="71" end="79" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="insulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="144" end="160" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q924483" start="572" end="588" title="node of Ranvier" label="nodes of Ranvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="667" end="677" title="micrometre" label="micrometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q792595" start="720" end="728" title="axolemma" label="axolemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424745" start="932" end="952" title="saltatory conduction" label="saltatory conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056132" start="1603" end="1621" title="internodal segment" label="internodal segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423067" start="1781" end="1794" title="axon terminal" label="axon terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="1863" end="1879" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="1892" end="1899" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187783" start="1915" end="1923" title="neurotransmitter receptor" label="receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q428914" start="1973" end="1980" title="myocyte" label="myocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q84230" start="1984" end="1998" title="secretory cell" label="secretory cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="2020" end="2031" title="glial cells" label="glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="2075" end="2084" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="2091" end="2102" title="homeostatic" label="homeostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="2197" end="2201" title="soma (biology)" label="soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="2252" end="2274" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="2276" end="2281" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="2283" end="2294" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="2299" end="2310" title="optic nerve" label="optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q916698" start="2370" end="2385" title="oligodendrocyte" label="oligodendrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="2513" end="2538" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q465621" start="2560" end="2572" title="Schwann cell" label="Schwann cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996165" start="2792" end="2806" title="motor function" label="motor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="2840" end="2856" title="sense" label="sensory function"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="2863" end="2868" title="sight" label="sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="2870" end="2877" title="hearing" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="2879" end="2884" title="olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="2901" end="2906" title="touch" label="touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="2910" end="2914" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="2920" end="2929" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="3080" end="3096" title="leukodystrophies" label="leukodystrophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186703" start="3124" end="3146" title="demyelinating disorder" label="demyelinating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="3148" end="3166" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="3203" end="3226" title="peripheral neuropathies" label="peripheral neuropathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947296" start="3484" end="3498" title="myelinogenesis" label="myelinogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086819" start="3512" end="3544" title="oligodendrocyte progenitor cells" label="oligodendrocyte progenitor cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="3552" end="3565" title="Cellular differentiation" label="differentiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575382" start="3973" end="3991" title="speech acquisition" label="speech acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="4152" end="4163" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="4184" end="4199" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q180284" start="4320" end="4323" title="jaw" label="jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="4326" end="4336" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="4339" end="4351" title="gnathostomes" label="gnathostomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="4662" end="4676" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5048" end="5061" title="Group C nerve fiber#Remak bundles" label="Remak bundles"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="5316" end="5326" title="glial cell" label="glial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q502961" start="5331" end="5340" title="astrocyte" label="astrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q193006" start="5459" end="5470" title="oligochaete" label="oligochaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q683918" start="5509" end="5516" title="penaeid" label="penaeid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404181" start="5519" end="5529" title="palaemonid" label="palaemonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q478553" start="5536" end="5544" title="calanoid" label="calanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295077" start="6056" end="6069" title="Marsupenaeus" label="Kuruma shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048501" start="6120" end="6123" title="cf." label="cf."/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="6424" end="6436" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="6494" end="6505" title="optic nerve" label="optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q19915308" start="6507" end="6526" title="corticospinal tract" label="corticospinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="6531" end="6546" title="corpus callosum" label="corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q307869" start="6573" end="6586" title="sciatic nerve" label="sciatic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519137" start="6595" end="6609" title="auditory nerve" label="auditory nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q502961" start="6867" end="6877" title="astrocytes" label="astrocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622829" start="6882" end="6891" title="microglia" label="microglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="6907" end="6918" title="macrophages" label="macrophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="7041" end="7046" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7071" end="7078" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q410974" start="7105" end="7125" title="myelin basic protein" label="myelin basic protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947292" start="7240" end="7275" title="myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein" label="myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912011" start="7317" end="7336" title="proteolipid protein" label="proteolipid protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912888" start="7448" end="7467" title="myelin protein zero" label="myelin protein zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q422882" start="7690" end="7700" title="glycolipid" label="glycolipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756638" start="7708" end="7726" title="galactocerebroside" label="galactocerebroside"/>
<link wikidata="Q423143" start="7767" end="7780" title="sphingomyelin" label="sphingomyelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="7811" end="7822" title="Cholesterol" label="Cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="8010" end="8026" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424745" start="8201" end="8221" title="saltatory conduction" label="saltatory conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="8331" end="8342" title="capacitance" label="capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="8357" end="8378" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q792595" start="8411" end="8419" title="axolemma" label="axolemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q424960" start="8568" end="8597" title="voltage-gated sodium channels" label="voltage-gated sodium channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q924483" start="8657" end="8673" title="nodes of Ranvier" label="nodes of Ranvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="8752" end="8755" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83183" start="8825" end="8839" title="depolarisation" label="depolarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q383566" start="8894" end="8920" title="resting membrane potential" label="resting membrane potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q423778" start="9012" end="9030" title="potassium channels" label="potassium channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="9114" end="9123" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="9191" end="9197" title="distal" label="distal"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="9378" end="9387" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389844" start="9608" end="9626" title="membrane potential" label="membrane potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="10208" end="10223" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q962115" start="10227" end="10241" title="neurofilaments" label="neurofilaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q154626" start="10459" end="10471" title="cytoskeletal" label="cytoskeletal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="10487" end="10497" title="organelles" label="organelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="10506" end="10518" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="11194" end="11219" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="11594" end="11611" title="neurodegenerative" label="neurodegenerative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="11612" end="11622" title="autoimmune" label="autoimmune"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="11643" end="11661" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424242" start="11663" end="11699" title="acute disseminated encephalomyelitis" label="acute disseminated encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q611458" start="11701" end="11721" title="neuromyelitis optica" label="neuromyelitis optica"/>
<link wikidata="Q202217" start="11723" end="11742" title="transverse myelitis" label="transverse myelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088030" start="11744" end="11793" title="chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy" label="chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="11795" end="11818" title="Guillain–Barré syndrome" label="Guillain–Barré syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q190370" start="11820" end="11846" title="central pontine myelinosis" label="central pontine myelinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="11889" end="11903" title="leukodystrophy" label="leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="11909" end="11936" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346016" start="11950" end="11968" title="pernicious anaemia" label="pernicious anaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424137" start="12042" end="12087" title="Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord" label="Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="12242" end="12251" title="cognitive" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349546" start="12436" end="12451" title="Canavan disease" label="Canavan disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="12458" end="12471" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="12602" end="12610" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="12632" end="12653" title="Tumor necrosis factor-alpha" label="tumor necrosis factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188269" start="12657" end="12667" title="interferon" label="interferon"/>
<link wikidata="Q423345" start="12708" end="12711" title="Docosahexaenoic acid" label="DHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186703" start="12801" end="12814" title="Demyelinating disease" label="Demyelination"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="13342" end="13352" title="neuropathy" label="neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086819" start="13808" end="13838" title="oligodendrocyte precursor cell" label="oligodendrocyte precursor cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312279" start="13883" end="13896" title="Remyelination" label="myelin repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="13910" end="13920" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="13971" end="13980" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765699" start="14092" end="14114" title="Parasympathomimetic drug" label="Cholinergic treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592323" start="14124" end="14154" title="acetylcholinesterase inhibitor" label="acetylcholinesterase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q916698" start="14458" end="14473" title="oligodendrocyte" label="oligodendrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592323" start="14499" end="14505" title="Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor" label="AChEIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="14549" end="14557" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18258585" start="14645" end="14672" title="GSK3B" label="Glycogen synthase kinase 3β"/>
<link wikidata="Q422930" start="14692" end="14708" title="lithium chloride" label="lithium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="14854" end="14865" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="15020" end="15026" title="lesion" label="lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066381" start="15143" end="15157" title="shiverer mouse" label="shiverer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="15269" end="15285" title="leukodystrophy" label="leukodystrophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876206" start="15287" end="15315" title="Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease" label="Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349546" start="15317" end="15332" title="Canavan disease" label="Canavan disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q194041" start="15334" end="15349" title="phenylketonuria" label="phenylketonuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="15355" end="15368" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242624" start="15387" end="15440" title="Lesional demyelinations of the central nervous system" label="Lesional demyelinations of the central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906304" start="15442" end="15472" title="Myelin-associated glycoprotein" label="Myelin-associated glycoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640852" start="15474" end="15489" title="Myelin incisure" label="Myelin incisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922703" start="15491" end="15509" title="The Myelin Project" label="The Myelin Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947290" start="15541" end="15565" title="Myelin Repair Foundation" label="Myelin Repair Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="15611" end="15629" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418791" start="15630" end="15644" title="drug discovery" label="drug discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q117196316" start="15647" end="15656" title="Myelinoid" label="Myelinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="15962" end="15981" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="16080" end="16084" title="axon" label="axon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19320" wikidata="Q161957" url="?curid=19320" title="Mebyon Kernow">
<text>Mebyon Kernow – The Party for Cornwall (, MK; Cornish for &quot;Sons of Cornwall&quot;) is a Cornish nationalist, centre-left political party in Cornwall, in southwestern Britain. It currently has five elected councillors on Cornwall Council, and several town and parish councillors across Cornwall.

Influenced by the growth of Cornish nationalism in the first half of the twentieth century, Mebyon Kernow formed as a pressure group in 1951. Helena Charles was its first chair, while the novelist Daphne du Maurier was another early member. In 1953 Charles won a seat on a local council, but lost it in 1955. Support for MK grew in the 1960s in opposition to growing migration into Cornwall from parts of England. In the 1970s, MK became a fully-fledged political party, and since then it has fielded candidates in elections to the House of Commons and the European Parliament, as well as local government in Cornwall. Infighting during the 1980s decimated the party but it revived in the 1990s.

Ideologically positioned on the centre-left of British politics, the central tenet of Mebyon Kernow&#x27;s platform is Cornish nationalism. It emphasises a distinct Cornish identity, including the Cornish language and elements of Cornish culture. It campaigns for devolution to Cornwall in the form of a Cornish Assembly. Economically, it is social democratic, calling for continued public ownership of education and healthcare and the renationalisation of railways. It also calls for greater environmental protection and continued UK membership of the European Union.

The party is a member of the European Free Alliance and has close links with Plaid Cymru, the Scottish National Party and the Breton Democratic Union.
Several former Cornish MPs have been supporters of MK, including Andrew George (Liberal Democrat), Peter Bessell (Liberal Party), John Pardoe (Liberal Party), David Mudd (Conservative), and David Penhaligon (Liberal Party). George was himself a member of MK in his youth.

==History==

=== Founding (1950s) ===
In the half-century preceding its foundation, Cornish identity had been strengthened by the Celtic Revival, especially by the revival of the Cornish language. Cornish politics was dominated by the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party, with the Labour Party a distant third in the Duchy, in part because of Cornwall&#x27;s declining tin-mining industry. Both the Liberal Party and the Labour Party had courted Cornish nationalism in their local campaigns, with both parties portraying &quot;a distinctly Cornish image&quot;; in turn, this meant that Cornish nationalism was from its inception associated with centre-left politics. Many of MK&#x27;s initial supporters came from the Liberal Party, which had endorsed Home Rule for Ireland. Early members of MK cited their absence from Cornwall during their university years and the war as instrumental in the formation of their Cornish identity. A catalyst for the party&#x27;s foundation was the Celtic Congress of 1950, held at the Royal Institution of Cornwall in Truro, which facilitated the exchange of ideas between Cornish nationalists and other Celtic groups.

MK was founded as a pressure group on 6 January 1951. At the party&#x27;s inaugural meeting, held at the Oates Temperance Hotel in Redruth, thirteen people were present and a further seven sent their apologies. Helena Charles was elected as the organisation&#x27;s first chair. MK adopted the following objectives:

#To study local conditions and attempt to remedy any that may be prejudicial to the best interests of Cornwall by the creation of public opinion or other means.
#To foster the Cornish language and Cornish literature.
#To encourage the study of Cornish history from a Cornish point of view.
#By self-knowledge to further the acceptance of the idea of the Celtic character of Cornwall, one of the six Celtic nations.
#To publish pamphlets, broadsheets, articles and letters in the Press whenever possible, putting forward the foregoing aims.
#To arrange concerts and entertainments with a Cornish-Celtic flavour through which these aims can be further advanced.
#To co-operate with all societies concerned with preserving the character of Cornwall.

By September 1951 they had officially come to a stance of supporting self-government for Cornwall, when the fourth objective was replaced with: &quot;To further the acceptance of the Celtic character of Cornwall and its right to self-government in domestic affairs in a Federated United Kingdom.&quot;

In its early years, MK engaged in cultural activities, such as producing Cornish calendars and sending a birthday prayer in Cornish to the Duke of Cornwall. It highlighted the high proportion of executives in local government which were not Cornish and campaigned against inward migration to Cornwall from the rest of the United Kingdom. From 1952, the party was supported by &quot;New Cornwall&quot;, a magazine which was edited by Charles until 1956. MK&#x27;s agenda received support from the Liberal Party, whose candidates endorsed Home Rule for Cornwall. MK won its first seat in local government in 1953, when Charles won a seat on Redruth-Camborne Urban District Council, under the slogan of &#x27;A Square Deal for the Cornish&#x27;. Charles lost her seat in 1955.

Following infighting between senior members who were frustrated at her radical separatism, in contrast to the passive culturalism of the broader Cultural nationalist movement, and following frustration at the party&#x27;s dispersed and unenthusiastic membership, Charles resigned as Chairman of MK in 1956. Charles was replaced by Major Cecil Beer, a former civil servant who sought to reunify the Cornish nationalist movement. Beer&#x27;s three years as chairman of MK provided &quot;a period of quiet but steady growth&quot;, in which MK increased its membership and focussed on cultural rather than political issues. Party meetings largely focussed on &quot;calendars, Christmas cards, serviettes, Cornish language classes and proposals for things like the Cornish kilt.&quot;

Daphne du Maurier, the well-known novelist, was an early member of MK. From its founding until the 1980s, the party was divided between proponents of ethnic nationalism and proponents of civic nationalism.
=== Growth (1960s–1970s) ===
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, MK was in essence a small political pressure group rather than a true political party, with members being able to join other political parties as well. In February 1960, Beer was succeeded by Robert Dunstone as Chairman of MK. By March 1962, the party had seventy members, of which thirty were attending the party&#x27;s infrequent meetings.

Under Dunstone, the party followed a policy of &quot;patient, persistent, and polite lobbying&quot;, the standard for which was set by its reaction to proposed railway closures in 1962, which included public meetings, letters of protest and the formation of a transport sub-committee of the party. MK campaigned for the establishment of a Cornish University, a Cornish Industrial Board, and the repatriation of Heligoland Frisians whose land was used by the British government as a bombing range in the mid-1950s. It published numerous policy papers to support its positions.

MK gained popularity in the 1960s, when it campaigned against &#x27;overspill&#x27; housing developments in Cornwall to accommodate incomers from Greater London. MK&#x27;s opposition prompted opponents to label the party as racialist; the party denied the allegations and responded with &quot;What Cornishmen Can Do&quot;, a pamphlet published in September 1968 which proposed more investment in natural resources, food processing and technological industries, as well as a Cornish University, tidal barrages and more support for small farmers. Partly due to its opposition to overspill, by 1965, the party numbered 700 members, rising to 1,000 by early 1968. In April 1967, Colin Murley was elected for MK onto Cornwall County Council for the seat of St Day &amp; Lanner; he had stood on an anti-overspill platform. MK members also sat as independent councillors on the district council. The party grew to become the leading champion for Cornish nationalism.

On St. Piran&#x27;s Day in 1968, the first edition of &quot;Cornish Nation&quot; was published; this is the party&#x27;s magazine. In the same year, Leonard Truran succeeded Dunstone as Chairman of MK; Dunstone then became the party&#x27;s first Honorary President.

By the 1970s the group developed into a more coherent and unified organisation. At the annual conference in October 1967, party members voted for a resolution to contest elections to the House of Commons, marking a turning point in MK&#x27;s transition from a pressure group into a political party. The decision meant that councillors, prospective parliamentary candidates and MPs who held dual party membership began to disassociate themselves from MK. Despite the decision, a faction in MK remained frustrated at the continuing possibility of dual party membership, the wide range of views on Cornish nationalism in the party and MK&#x27;s slow transition into a political party; this dissident faction formed the Cornish National Party in July 1969. The CNP&#x27;s members were expelled from MK, but the CNP had disappointing election results in the 1970 county council elections, leading most CNP members to rejoin MK by the mid-1970s.

In the 1970 election, Richard Jenkin, who would succeed Truran as Chairman of MK in 1973, won 2% of the vote in the Falmouth &amp; Camborne constituency. James Whetter stood for MK in the Truro constituency in the general elections of February and October 1974, achieving 1.5% and 0.7% of the vote respectively. The party contested the constituencies of St Ives and Falmouth &amp; Camborne in both the 1979 and 1983 elections. MK also contested the 1979 European Parliament election, winning 5.9% of the vote in the constituency of Cornwall &amp; West Plymouth.

Following Dunstone&#x27;s death in 1973, E.G. Retallack Hooper was elected the party&#x27;s Honorary President; Hooper was a former Grand Bard of the Gorseth Kernow who had been a founding member of MK and was a prolific Cornish language writer and journalist.

The CNP&#x27;s formation highlighted deep fissures in MK between its constitutionalist and separatist wings; these were exacerbated by continuing inward migration to Cornwall, leading to a 26% increase in its population in the two decades to 1981. The &quot;Cornish Nation&quot; gave increasingly sympathetic coverage of Irish republicanism; MK warned of civil unrest in Cornwall and the extermination of the Cornish national identity if overspill continued; and its members talked openly of plans to install a shadow government &quot;in the name of the Cornish people in the event of civil breakdown&quot;. A motion to restrict party membership to those who were Cornish by &quot;family trees going back through several centuries&quot; was defeated in 1973; and a September 1974 issue of the &quot;Cornish Nation&quot; describing Michael Gaughan, an IRA hunger striker, as a &quot;Celtic hero&quot; was widely criticised in the press and rebuked by the party. MK&#x27;s divisions came to a head in May 1975, when a motion to depose the party&#x27;s leadership and integrate the party with the Revived Stannary Parliament, which had newly reopened in 1974, was narrowly defeated. On 28 May 1975, Whetter, who had led the defeated motion, resigned his membership of MK to form a second Cornish Nationalist Party, which campaigned for full Cornish independence on a pro-European platform. This second CNP also had disappointing electoral results and has not contested elections since 1985.

During the 1970s, MK held rallies in support of Cornwall&#x27;s fishing industry and against regional unemployment and nuclear waste; in the 1980s, these rallies were aggravated by the policies of the incumbent Thatcher government. Following the 1975 split, the party was re-energised by an influx of new, younger members, which also pushed MK more firmly away from its separatist wing. Citing concerns about its effect on Cornwall&#x27;s fishing industry, the party opposed the Common Market; MK only began to endorse the UK&#x27;s membership of the EEC in the 1980s.

=== Decline (1980s) ===
The party declined in the 1980s and was close to collapse by 1990. In 1980, renewed infighting over the party&#x27;s structure led to a spate of resignations which received media attention; this included the resignation of Truran, who had served as party secretary after Jenkin had replaced him as Chairman of MK in 1973. Leading the infighting was a new, youthful leftist faction of MK, which sought to define the party&#x27;s policies on defence, the monarchy and public ownership, bringing the party away from its traditional nationalist focus. While the infighting consolidated MK&#x27;s economic stance as left-of-centre, the party&#x27;s everchanging positions confused voters and presided over the decline of its magazines, including the &quot;Cornish Nation&quot;. In 1983, Jenkin was replaced by Julyan Drew as the party leader; Drew was succeeded by Pedyr Prior in 1985 and Loveday Carlyon in 1986.

At the 1983 general election, MK achieved 1.2% of the vote in both Falmouth &amp; Camborne and St Ives, reduced from 3% and 4% respectively in the previous election. It contested neither the 1984 European Parliament election nor the 1987 general election; it received 1.9% of the vote in Cornwall &amp; West Plymouth in the 1989 European Parliament election. During this period, the party focussed on its opposition to the creation of a South West England region and the construction of a nuclear station at Luxulyan; this latter campaign culminated in the formation of the Cornish Anti-Nuclear Alliance, which drew over 2,000 attendees to its first rallies in Truro in July 1980. MK&#x27;s vociferous response to the planned building of 40,000 new homes in Cornwall, manifested in the formation in 1987 of the Cornish Alternatives to the Structure Plan, gained high-profile notability in Cornwall. MK also campaigned against tourism-centred economic development and the poll tax. Nevertheless, public support for action was far lower than the previous decade and MK regressed into a pressure group.

In 1988, MK established the Campaign for a Cornish Constituency, which won the support of Cornwall County Council, all the district authorities, several Cornish organisations and three of Cornwall&#x27;s five MPs. The campaign was well-publicised, attained national attention, and collected over 3,000 signatures in three months. The campaign called for an exclusively-Cornish European Parliament constituency and was founded on MK&#x27;s long-standing opposition to amalgamating public boards and companies in Cornwall and Devon, a process which had steadily increased during the decade.

=== Relaunch (1990s) ===
In 1989, Carlyon resigned as MK&#x27;s leader, leading to a review of the party&#x27;s long-term strategy. Being close to collapse, in April 1990, the party&#x27;s London branch convened a general meeting of all party members to consider whether the party should disband; it was agreed that the party would continue. Loveday Jenkin, daughter of Richard Jenkin, was promptly elected MK&#x27;s leader. At this time, Truran, who had become a leading light in the Social Democratic Party in Falmouth &amp; Camborne since he had left the party in 1980, rejoined MK, re-energising the party. Nevertheless, MK did not contest the 1992 general election, focusing its efforts on lobbying for an exclusively-Cornish European Parliament constituency, a Cornish unitary authority, and the recognition of Cornwall as a European region.

Despite a promising local election result in 1993, obtaining an average of 17.5% per candidate in local government elections, MK&#x27;s vote share declined further to 1.5% of the vote in the 1994 European Parliament election, in the new constituency of Cornwall &amp; West Plymouth. Jenkin, who stood as the party&#x27;s candidate, campaigned on a platform opposing out-of-town developments and a second Tamar crossing, and calling for greater Cornish representation in Europe.

In 1996, MK published &#x27;Cornwall 2000 – The Way Ahead&#x27;, its most detailed manifesto to date. The party fought the 1997 general election on its 18,000 words and delivered over 300,000 leaflets during the campaign; however, it polled merely 1,906 votes across four constituencies. MK activists were heavily involved in the 500th-anniversary commemorations of the Cornish Rebellion of 1497; these included a march from St. Keverne to Blackheath retracing the steps of the rebels, following which the participants demanded a Cornish Development Agency, an exclusively-Cornish seat in the European Parliament, a university campus in Cornwall and a Cornish curriculum for Cornish schools. The renewed interest in Cornish nationalism from this march led a group in MK to leave the party and form the An Gof National Party, another short-lived splinter group.

On 4 October 1997, at the Mebyon Kernow National Conference, Jenkin was replaced by Dick Cole as the leader of MK. One of Cole&#x27;s earliest actions as leader was to launch the Cornish Millennium Convention on 8 March 1998, coinciding with protests at the closure of South Crofty, Cornwall&#x27;s last working tin mine. However, the Convention&#x27;s launch was eclipsed by the formation of Cornish Solidarity, a pressure group involved in direct action which grew from the South Crofty protests and had similar aims as MK. At the party&#x27;s annual conference in 1998, Richard Jenkin was elected to succeed the late Hooper as Honorary President of MK.

In 1999, over 95% of members voted in favour of relaunching MK as Mebyon Kernow – the Party for Cornwall in order to distance itself from the ethnic nationalist &#x27;Sons of Cornwall&#x27; label; the name change was adopted. Mebyon Kernow stood 25 candidates in the 1999 local elections in Cornwall, its highest number ever. The party did not contest the 1999 European Parliament election, given the size of the new South West England constituency and the large prerequisite £5,000 deposit. It contested the 2001 general election, winning 3,199 votes across three constituencies.

==== Cornish Assembly Campaign ====

On 5 March 2000, MK launched a petition for a Cornish Assembly. This was modelled from the &quot;Declaration for a Cornish Assembly&quot;, which stated that:

Three months later the Cornish Constitutional Convention was held with the objective of establishing a devolved Assembly. Within fifteen months, Mebyon Kernow&#x27;s petition attracted the signatures of over 50,000 people calling for a referendum on a Cornish Assembly, which was a little over 10% of the total Cornish electorate. A delegation including Cole, Andrew George, then the Liberal Democrat MP for St Ives, and representatives of the Convention presented the Declaration to 10 Downing Street on 12 December 2001.

=== Early 21st century (2001–2009) ===
Ahead of the 2004 European Parliament election, MK reached an electoral partnership with the Green Party of England and Wales. MK agreed not to stand its own candidates in the European election; in return, the Green Party would back MK candidates at the 2005 general election. In this latter election, MK did not contest George&#x27;s seat of St Ives; in return, the Greens did not contest other seats in Cornwall. The electoral partnership was not renewed for the 2009 European Parliament election.

In August 2008 MK deputy leader, Conan Jenkin, expressed Mebyon Kernow&#x27;s support for a proposed legal challenge by Cornwall 2000 over the UK Government&#x27;s exclusion of the Cornish from the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Cornwall 2000 need to show that they have exhausted all domestic legal avenues by having the case summarily dismissed by the High Court, the Appeal Court and the House of Lords, before the case can be put to the European Court of Human Rights. MK requested the support of all of its members for this legal action. However the fund failed to meet the required target of £100,000 by the end of December 2008, having received just over £33,000 in pledges, and the plan was abandoned.

=== Unitary authority (2009–present) ===
In 2009, the former Cornwall County Council was replaced by the unitary authority of Cornwall Council. In the first election to the new body, three MK candidates were elected: Andrew Long (Callington), Stuart Cullimore (Camborne South) and Dick Cole (St Enoder). In August 2010, an independent councillor, Neil Plummer (Stithians), joined the MK group, citing his increasing disillusionment with the independent group. In November 2011, former chair of the party Loveday Jenkin was elected in a by-election in Wendron. In September 2012, Tamsin Williams (Penzance Central) defected to MK from the Liberal Democrats, increasing MK&#x27;s number of councillors on Cornwall Council to six.

Mebyon Kernow contested every seat in Cornwall in the 2010 general election.

In 2011, the party gained some prominence owing to the Devonwall affair; this was the proposal of a parliamentary constituency which would have been partly in Cornwall and partly in Devon. The Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Bill sought to equalise the size of constituencies in the United Kingdom. An amendment to the bill by Lord Teverson would have ensured that &quot;all parts of Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly must be included in constituencies that are wholly in Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly&quot;; this amendment was defeated by 250 to 221 votes in the House of Lords with 95% of Conservative and Liberal Democrat peers rejecting it. MK &quot;accused the coalition government of treating Cornwall with &quot;absolute contempt&quot; as a result of this, stating that Prime Minister David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg had &quot;devised the bill to breach the territorial integrity of Cornwall&quot;, and that it broke election promises from their parties to protect Cornish interests. Cameron replied to concerns by stating that &quot;it&#x27;s the Tamar, not the Amazon, for Heaven&#x27;s sake&quot;; his controversial remark was widely ridiculed in Cornwall. MK welcomed the later rejection of the parliamentary constituency boundary review, which in turn prevented the introduction of a cross-border Devonwall constituency for the 2015 and 2017 general elections.

In the 2013 Cornwall Council election, the party was reduced to three seats. Williams did not seek re-election and MK lost her seat; MK did not win any of the newly-redrawn seats in Camborne; and Plummer unsuccessfully contested Lanner &amp; Stithians as an independent. Only Cole and Jenkin held their seats; the party also gained a seat in Penwithick &amp; Boscoppa. It held these seats and gained no further seats at the 2017 Cornwall Council election.

MK decided not to stand candidates in the 2014 European elections, claiming the system is skewed against them winning seats. MK contested all six Cornish constituencies in the 2015 general election. It complained against not being granted a party election broadcast: under current guidelines, it would need to stand in eighty-three constituencies outside of Cornwall in order to qualify for a broadcast.

Ahead of the 2016 referendum on the issue, MK endorsed the United Kingdom&#x27;s continued membership of the European Union. On 23 June 2016, Cornwall voted to leave the European Union by 56.5%. Following the vote, MK reiterated its promise to campaign for a devolved Cornish Assembly.

MK declined to stand candidates in the snap 2017 general election, citing a lack of financing and resources. It also did not stand candidates in the 2019 European Parliament election, but its leadership endorsed the Green Party because of their historic cooperation, support for a Cornish Assembly and other similar policies.

At a Policy Forum on 22 June 2018, Mebyon Kernow launched an updated version of its campaign publication titled &quot;Towards a National Assembly of Cornwall.&quot;

Mebyon Kernow chose not to field any candidates in the 2024 general election. After the election, the party called on Cornwall&#x27;s new MPs to &quot;unite and take this opportunity ... to demand meaningful devolution&quot;.

==Ideology and policies==
MK is an advocate of Cornish nationalism, seeing Cornwall as a separate nation rather than an English county. It emphasises Cornwall&#x27;s distinct Celtic culture and language, as well as its border along the River Tamar, which has largely remained unchanged since 936 AD. The party&#x27;s leaders identify as both Cornish and British but Cornish first. It rejects that Cornwall is a region of the United Kingdom or a county of England, preferring the label of &#x27;duchy&#x27;. It advocates a National Curriculum for Cornwall, increased investment in the Cornish language, and a full inquiry into Cornwall&#x27;s constitutional relationship with the United Kingdom.

The party advocates the establishment of a &quot;fully devolved, democratically elected&quot; Cornish National Assembly, established by &quot;a dedicated, stand-alone, bespoke Act of Parliament.&quot; This would be complemented by a Cornish Civil Service. It accuses the civil service and government of &quot;deep-seated prejudice&quot; against Cornwall. as part of their devolution commitments, MK seek devolved powers over health services establishing a “Cornish NHS”.

On economic policy, MK is left-of-centre. It rejects &quot;austerity politics, deregulation and support for trade treaties such as TTIP.&quot; It is committed against poverty and social deprivation; it advocates free and equal access to education, health and welfare services. It advocates tackling tax avoidance. It opposes the privatisation of the NHS and would renationalise railways and utilities. The party regularly highlights problems with the Cornish economy: Cornwall has lower wages and higher unemployment than the rest of the United Kingdom.

The party is environmentalist, advocating strong environmental safeguards and a &quot;Green New Deal for Cornwall&quot; aimed at creating jobs in the environmental sectors. It is pushing for a zero-waste strategy, which they believe will lead to &quot;radical reduction of waste&quot;. It supports increasing planning restrictions to reverse the building of second homes in Cornwall, As well as a commitment to lower &quot;more sustainable&quot; housing building targets. It would scrap the Trident nuclear programme. It supports debt forgiveness for third world countries and supports the UN target of committing 0.7% of the UK&#x27;s GDP as foreign aid.

The party would introduce proportional representation to UK elections through the Single Transferable Vote and would abolish the House of Lords.

MK supported the UK&#x27;s membership of the European Union. It endorsed a referendum on the final Brexit deal.

Cornwall is part of the South West Regional Assembly and the South West Regional Development Agency (SWRDA) administrates economic development, housing and strategic planning. MK claims that the area covered is an artificially imposed large region and not natural. Mebyon Kernow wants to break up the SWRDA into small county areas and implement a Cornish Regional Development Agency.

The party supports making Saint Piran&#x27;s day, the day of Cornwall&#x27;s patron saint, which falls on 5 March, a public holiday. It also advocates the establishment of a Cornish University.

The party has resisted proposals to reduce the number of councillors in Cornwall.

Mebyon Kernow is a member of the European Free Alliance. The party has close links with Plaid Cymru, with Plaid&#x27;s Blaenau Gwent branch being &#x27;twinned&#x27; with Mebyon Kernow&#x27;s Falmouth and Camborne branch.

==Organisation==
MK is run on a day-to-day basis by a 20-member National Executive, which includes the leadership team, policy spokespersons, and local party representatives. Dick Cole is the current leader. The party&#x27;s youth wing for under-30s is known as Kernow X.

===Party leaders===

* Helena Charles (1951–1957)
* Cecil Beer (1957–1960)
* Robert Dunstone (1960–1968)
* Leonard Truran (1968–1973)
* Richard Jenkin (1973–1983)
* Julyan Drew (1983–1985)
* Pedyr Prior (1985–1986)
* Loveday Carlyon (1986–1989)
* Loveday Jenkin (1990–1997)
* Dick Cole (1997–present)

===Honorary presidents===
* Robert Dunstone (1968–1973)
* E. G. Retallack Hooper (1973–1998)
* Richard Jenkin (1998–2002)
* Ann Trevenen Jenkin (2011–2024)

==Electoral performance==

MK has never won a parliamentary election to the House of Commons, nor has it ever won a seat in the European Parliament.

===Cornwall Council===
MK has been represented on Cornwall Council since its inception in 2009.

====2009 election====
In April 2009 MK leader Dick Cole announced his resignation from his job as an archaeologist with the new Cornwall Council to become the full-time leader of Mebyon Kernow and to stand for election to the Council. He had previously worked for Cornwall County Council for 14 years, but it is not permitted for employees of Councils to stand for election to a council they work for.

On 12 May 2009, Dick Cole announced that thirty-three candidates would be standing for the party at the Cornwall Council elections on 4 June 2009. This was the largest number of candidates that the party had ever fielded in a round of elections to a principal council or councils. Under the new arrangements, 123 members were to be elected to the new unitary Cornwall Council, in the place of the 82 councillors on the outgoing Cornwall County Council and another 249 on the six district councils within its area, all abolished.

Having contested thirty-three of the 123 seats on the authority, Mebyon Kernow won three, or 2.4 per cent of the total. Andrew Long was elected to represent Callington with 54% of the votes. Stuart Cullimore was elected to represent Camborne South with 28% of the votes and Dick Cole was elected to represent St Enoder with 78% of the votes

====2021 election====
In the 2021 election, Mebyon Kernow fielded 19 candidates. They gained a seat despite the number of seats on the council being reduced to 87, polling 5% overall.

===Town and parish councils===
Mebyon Kernow is also represented in numerous town and parish councils across Cornwall. In 2022, Zoe Fox, a Mebyon Kernow councillor, became Mayor of Camborne. In 2024, their Parish representation stood at 24 councillors, their highest number to date.

===UK general elections===
In the 2010 general election, Mebyon Kernow fielded candidates in each of the six constituencies in Cornwall. Their best result was in the St Austell &amp; Newquay seat, where they came fourth, with 4.2% of the votes, up 4% from the previous election. The other main parties spent more on their election campaigns. MK also blamed bad results on a tactical voting campaign whereby Labour voters in Cornwall were urged to vote Liberal Democrat to stop the Conservatives from getting in. Overall they gained 1.9% of votes cast. All Mebyon Kernow candidates lost their deposits.

===European Parliament elections===
In 1979, in the first elections to the European Parliament, Mebyon Kernow&#x27;s candidate Richard Jenkin was able to attract more than five per cent of the vote in the Cornwall seat.

In April 2009 Mebyon Kernow announced that its list of candidates for the &#x27;South West Region&#x27; seat in the European Parliament would comprise their six prospective parliamentary candidates for Westminster. The candidates were: Dick Cole (St Austell &amp; Newquay), Conan Jenkin (Truro &amp; Falmouth), Loveday Jenkin (Camborne &amp; Redruth), Simon Reed (St Ives), Glenn Renshaw (South East Cornwall), Joanie Willett (North Cornwall). Mebyon Kernow had also committed itself to continue the fight for a &quot;Cornwall only&quot; Euro-constituency, to promote Cornwall in Europe.

Mebyon Kernow polled 14,922 votes in the 2009 European elections (11,534 votes in Cornwall, no seats, 7 per cent of the vote in Cornwall) putting them ahead of the Labour Party in Cornwall.

Since 2009, MK has not stood candidates in European Parliament elections, given the difficulties of winning a seat in a constituency encompassing electorates outside Cornwall.

==See also==

*Cornish nationalism
*List of topics related to Cornwall
*Cornish Nationalist Party, an early splinter of MK (1975), often conflated with it.
*Plaid Cymru
*Scottish National Party
*Unvaniezh Demokratel Breizh

==References==
*


==Further reading==

==External links==
* Mebyon Kernow website 
* Kernow X website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="0" end="38" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="Mebyon Kernow – The Party for Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="42" end="44" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="MK"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="46" end="53" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="93" end="112" title="Cornish nationalism" label="Cornish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="114" end="125" title="Left-wing politics" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="145" end="153" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="225" end="241" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="419" end="433" title="Advocacy group" label="pressure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703552" start="443" end="457" title="Helena Sanders" label="Helena Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="498" end="515" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="833" end="849" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="858" end="877" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="890" end="918" title="Cornwall Council" label="local government in Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="1030" end="1041" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="1195" end="1211" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193543" start="1228" end="1243" title="Cornish culture" label="Cornish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="1262" end="1272" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171802" start="1302" end="1318" title="Cornish Assembly" label="Cornish Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1340" end="1357" title="social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="1381" end="1397" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="1491" end="1515" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1551" end="1565" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q639383" start="1597" end="1619" title="European Free Alliance" label="European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="1645" end="1656" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="1662" end="1685" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145020" start="1694" end="1717" title="Breton Democratic Union" label="Breton Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q391275" start="1784" end="1797" title="Andrew George (politician)" label="Andrew George"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="1799" end="1815" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172808" start="1818" end="1831" title="Peter Bessell" label="Peter Bessell"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="1833" end="1846" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070130" start="1849" end="1860" title="John Pardoe" label="John Pardoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237784" start="1878" end="1888" title="David Mudd" label="David Mudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1890" end="1902" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238497" start="1909" end="1925" title="David Penhaligon" label="David Penhaligon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="2122" end="2136" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171857" start="2156" end="2187" title="Cornish language revival" label="revival of the Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225232" start="2189" end="2205" title="Politics of Cornwall" label="Cornish politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="2227" end="2240" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2249" end="2267" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2278" end="2290" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="2642" end="2662" title="centre-left politics" label="centre-left politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="2749" end="2770" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="Home Rule for Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993063" start="2979" end="2994" title="Celtic Congress" label="Celtic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251327" start="3016" end="3045" title="Royal Institution of Cornwall" label="Royal Institution of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q180803" start="3049" end="3054" title="Truro" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="3171" end="3185" title="Advocacy group" label="pressure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010210" start="3282" end="3289" title="Redruth" label="Redruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703552" start="3362" end="3376" title="Helena Charles" label="Helena Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="3643" end="3659" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q900642" start="3664" end="3682" title="Cornish literature" label="Cornish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404745" start="3711" end="3726" title="History of Cornwall" label="Cornish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="3734" end="3741" title="Cornish people" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3821" end="3825" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="3841" end="3849" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="3866" end="3880" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494846" start="4657" end="4673" title="Duke of Cornwall" label="Duke of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q110168676" start="5630" end="5640" title="Cecil Beer" label="Cecil Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="6061" end="6065" title="kilt" label="kilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="6074" end="6091" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="6224" end="6242" title="ethnic nationalism" label="ethnic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="6261" end="6278" title="civic nationalism" label="civic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038" start="7095" end="7105" title="Heligoland" label="Heligoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="7106" end="7114" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="7485" end="7494" title="racialist" label="racialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="7973" end="7996" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625154" start="8013" end="8019" title="St Day" label="St Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487245" start="8026" end="8032" title="Lanner, Cornwall" label="Lanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="8200" end="8219" title="Cornish nationalism" label="Cornish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540588" start="8225" end="8245" title="St. Piran&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Piran&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="8676" end="8692" title="House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="9437" end="9450" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326850" start="9452" end="9466" title="Richard Jenkin" label="Richard Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116294" start="9546" end="9569" title="Falmouth and Camborne (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Falmouth &amp;amp; Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145385" start="9584" end="9597" title="James Whetter" label="James Whetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258460" start="9618" end="9623" title="Truro (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="9665" end="9673" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="9678" end="9685" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October"/>
<link wikidata="Q988435" start="9784" end="9791" title="St Ives (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="9832" end="9836" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="9841" end="9845" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451109" start="9879" end="9912" title="1979 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1979 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172020" start="9962" end="9990" title="Cornwall and West Plymouth (European Parliament constituency)" label="Cornwall &amp;amp; West Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321873" start="10034" end="10055" title="E.G. Retallack Hooper" label="E.G. Retallack Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q494107" start="10143" end="10157" title="Gorseth Kernow" label="Gorseth Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584173" start="11086" end="11101" title="Michael Gaughan (Irish republican)" label="Michael Gaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="11106" end="11109" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318547" start="11349" end="11376" title="Revived Cornish Stannary Parliament" label="Revived Stannary Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105878" start="11540" end="11565" title="Cornish Nationalist Party" label="Cornish Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="11593" end="11613" title="Cornish self-government movement" label="Cornish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q27790442" start="11955" end="11974" title="Thatcher ministry (disambiguation)" label="Thatcher government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734738" start="13198" end="13209" title="Pedyr Prior" label="Pedyr Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730256" start="13222" end="13237" title="Loveday Carlyon" label="Loveday Carlyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="13255" end="13276" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052512" start="13439" end="13472" title="1984 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1984 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="13481" end="13502" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q522000" start="13572" end="13605" title="1989 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1989 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="13685" end="13703" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913013" start="13756" end="13764" title="Luxulyan" label="Luxulyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395309" start="14219" end="14227" title="Poll tax (Great Britain)" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692072" start="15281" end="15295" title="Loveday Jenkin" label="Loveday Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="15424" end="15447" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="15587" end="15608" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052503" start="15979" end="16012" title="1994 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1994 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172020" start="16041" end="16069" title="Cornwall and West Plymouth (European Parliament constituency)" label="Cornwall &amp;amp; West Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="16390" end="16411" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q500395" start="16637" end="16662" title="Cornish Rebellion of 1497" label="Cornish Rebellion of 1497"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248904" start="16692" end="16703" title="St. Keverne" label="St. Keverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="16707" end="16717" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q521537" start="17213" end="17222" title="Dick Cole (politician)" label="Dick Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304399" start="17398" end="17410" title="South Crofty" label="South Crofty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171839" start="17522" end="17540" title="Cornish Solidarity" label="Cornish Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888154" start="18053" end="18073" title="1999 UK local elections" label="1999 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052486" start="18142" end="18175" title="1999 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1999 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973373" start="18203" end="18234" title="South West England (European Parliament constituency)" label="South West England constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="18295" end="18316" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171802" start="18451" end="18467" title="Cornish Assembly" label="Cornish Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171806" start="18587" end="18620" title="Cornish Constitutional Convention" label="Cornish Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q391275" start="18924" end="18937" title="Andrew George (politician)" label="Andrew George"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="18948" end="18964" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="18965" end="18967" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q988435" start="18972" end="18979" title="St Ives (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="19048" end="19065" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704885" start="19140" end="19173" title="2004 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2004 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="19220" end="19252" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="19381" end="19402" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q988435" start="19470" end="19477" title="St Ives (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q528608" start="19592" end="19625" title="2009 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2009 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219091" start="19748" end="19761" title="Cornwall 2000" label="Cornwall 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="19771" end="19784" title="UK Government" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="19809" end="19816" title="Cornish people" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q506020" start="19826" end="19888" title="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities" label="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="20015" end="20025" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="20031" end="20043" title="Court of Appeal of England and Wales" label="Appeal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="20052" end="20066" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="20102" end="20132" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="20498" end="20514" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045500" start="20602" end="20612" title="Callington, Cornwall" label="Callington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="20633" end="20647" title="Camborne" label="Camborne South"/>
<link wikidata="Q521537" start="20653" end="20662" title="Dick Cole (politician)" label="Dick Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593036" start="20664" end="20673" title="St Enoder" label="St Enoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617662" start="20733" end="20742" title="Stithians" label="Stithians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692072" start="20876" end="20890" title="Loveday Jenkin" label="Loveday Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867092" start="20923" end="20930" title="Crowan &amp;amp; Wendron (electoral division)" label="Wendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q208209" start="20968" end="20984" title="Penzance" label="Penzance Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="21155" end="21176" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267890" start="21234" end="21243" title="Devonwall (possible UK Parliament constituency)" label="Devonwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139046" start="21372" end="21423" title="Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Bill" label="Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q336427" start="21521" end="21534" title="Robin Teverson, Baron Teverson" label="Lord Teverson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="21595" end="21610" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="21760" end="21774" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="21862" end="21882" title="Conservative/Liberal Democrat Coalition" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="21988" end="22001" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q189947" start="22028" end="22038" title="Nick Clegg" label="Nick Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="22270" end="22275" title="River Tamar" label="Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="22285" end="22291" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="22555" end="22559" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="22564" end="22568" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951770" start="22596" end="22626" title="2013 Cornwall Council election" label="2013 Cornwall Council election"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958048" start="23013" end="23043" title="2017 Cornwall Council election" label="2017 Cornwall Council election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="23222" end="23243" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="23464" end="23479" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="23560" end="23574" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="23782" end="23803" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001091" start="23887" end="23920" title="2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2019 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="23954" end="23965" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="24286" end="24307" title="2024 UK general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="24505" end="24524" title="Cornish nationalism" label="Cornish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="24586" end="24592" title="Counties of England" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="24633" end="24639" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="24652" end="24660" title="Cornish language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="24694" end="24705" title="River Tamar" label="River Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171802" start="25248" end="25273" title="Cornish Assembly" label="Cornish National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="25652" end="25666" title="Centre-left politics" label="left-of-centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550618" start="25757" end="25761" title="Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership" label="TTIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333660" start="26077" end="26092" title="Economy of Cornwall" label="Cornish economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864964" start="26672" end="26679" title="Trident (UK nuclear programme)" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="26920" end="26944" title="Single transferable vote" label="Single Transferable Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="26967" end="26981" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074877" start="27059" end="27069" title="People&amp;#x27;s Vote" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29077263" start="27077" end="27094" title="Brexit negotiations" label="final Brexit deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309196" start="27121" end="27149" title="Regional Assemblies in England" label="South West Regional Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568905" start="27158" end="27196" title="South West of England Regional Development Agency" label="South West Regional Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472762" start="27508" end="27519" title="Saint Piran" label="Saint Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q639383" start="27793" end="27815" title="European Free Alliance" label="European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="27848" end="27859" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q596885" start="27879" end="27892" title="Blaenau Gwent" label="Blaenau Gwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116294" start="27952" end="27973" title="Falmouth and Camborne (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Falmouth and Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q521537" start="28158" end="28167" title="Dick Cole (politician)" label="Dick Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703552" start="28279" end="28293" title="Helena Charles" label="Helena Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q110168676" start="28308" end="28318" title="Cecil Beer" label="Cecil Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326850" start="28392" end="28406" title="Richard Jenkin" label="Richard Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734738" start="28447" end="28458" title="Pedyr Prior" label="Pedyr Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730256" start="28473" end="28488" title="Loveday Carlyon" label="Loveday Carlyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692072" start="28503" end="28517" title="Loveday Jenkin" label="Loveday Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q521537" start="28532" end="28541" title="Dick Cole (politician)" label="Dick Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321873" start="28616" end="28638" title="E. G. Retallack Hooper" label="E. G. Retallack Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326850" start="28653" end="28667" title="Richard Jenkin" label="Richard Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10970845" start="28682" end="28701" title="Ann Trevenen Jenkin" label="Ann Trevenen Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="28791" end="28807" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="28843" end="28862" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="28915" end="28931" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="29063" end="29076" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="29090" end="29106" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="29226" end="29249" title="Cornwall County Council" label="Cornwall County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171965" start="29469" end="29495" title="2009 Cornwall Council election" label="Cornwall Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816691" start="29615" end="29632" title="principal council" label="principal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="29716" end="29723" title="unitary authority" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045500" start="30052" end="30062" title="Callington, Cornwall" label="Callington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="30128" end="30136" title="Camborne" label="Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593036" start="30204" end="30213" title="St Enoder" label="St Enoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370934" start="30266" end="30279" title="2021 Cornwall Council election" label="2021 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="30603" end="30611" title="Camborne" label="Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451109" start="31348" end="31376" title="1979 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1979, in the first elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="31384" end="31403" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326850" start="31436" end="31450" title="Richard Jenkin" label="Richard Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172019" start="31514" end="31527" title="Cornwall and Plymouth (European Parliament constituency)" label="Cornwall seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973373" start="31604" end="31633" title="South West England (European Parliament constituency)" label="&amp;#x27;South West Region&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q521537" start="31766" end="31775" title="Dick Cole (politician)" label="Dick Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="32502" end="32521" title="Cornish nationalism" label="Cornish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979640" start="32523" end="32557" title="List of topics related to Cornwall" label="List of topics related to Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105878" start="32559" end="32584" title="Cornish Nationalist Party" label="Cornish Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="32644" end="32655" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="32657" end="32680" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145020" start="32682" end="32709" title="Unvaniezh Demokratel Breizh" label="Unvaniezh Demokratel Breizh"/>
</links>
</doc>
