<doc id="15978" wikidata="Q11815" url="?curid=15978" title="James Monroe">
<text>James Monroe ( ; April 28, 1758July 4, 1831) was an American Founding Father who served as the fifth president of the United States from 1817 to 1825. He was the last Founding Father to serve as president as well as the last president of the Virginia dynasty. He was a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, and his presidency coincided with the Era of Good Feelings, concluding the First Party System era of American politics. He issued the Monroe Doctrine, a policy of limiting European colonialism in the Americas. Monroe previously served as Governor of Virginia, a member of the United States Senate, U.S. ambassador to France and Britain, the seventh secretary of state, and the eighth secretary of war.

During the American Revolutionary War, he served in the Continental Army. Monroe studied law under Thomas Jefferson from 1780 to 1783 and subsequently served as a delegate to the Continental Congress as well as a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention. He opposed the ratification of the United States Constitution. In 1790, Monroe won election to the Senate where he became a leader of the Democratic-Republican Party. He left the Senate in 1794 to serve as President George Washington&#x27;s ambassador to France but was recalled by Washington in 1796. Monroe won the election as Governor of Virginia in 1799 and strongly supported Jefferson&#x27;s candidacy in the 1800 presidential election.

As President Jefferson&#x27;s special envoy, Monroe helped negotiate the Louisiana Purchase, through which the United States nearly doubled in size. Monroe fell out with his longtime friend James Madison after Madison rejected the Monroe–Pinkney Treaty that Monroe negotiated with Britain. He unsuccessfully challenged Madison for the Democratic-Republican nomination in the 1808 presidential election, but he joined Madison&#x27;s administration as Secretary of State in 1811. During the later stages of the War of 1812, Monroe simultaneously served as Madison&#x27;s Secretary of State and Secretary of War. Monroe&#x27;s wartime leadership established him as Madison&#x27;s heir apparent, and he easily defeated Federalist candidate Rufus King in the 1816 presidential election.

During Monroe&#x27;s tenure as president, the Federalist Party collapsed as a national political force and Monroe was re-elected, virtually unopposed, in 1820. As president, he signed the Missouri Compromise, which admitted Missouri as a slave state and banned slavery from territories north of the 36°30′ parallel. In foreign affairs, Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams favored a policy of conciliation with Britain and a policy of expansionism against the Spanish Empire. In the 1819 Adams–Onís Treaty with Spain, the United States secured Florida and established its western border with New Spain. In 1823, Monroe announced the United States&#x27; opposition to any European intervention in the recently independent countries of the Americas with the Monroe Doctrine, which became a landmark in American foreign policy. Monroe was a member of the American Colonization Society which supported the colonization of Africa by freed slaves, and Liberia&#x27;s capital of Monrovia is named in his honor.

Following his retirement in 1825, Monroe was plagued by financial difficulties and died on July 4, 1831, in New York City—sharing a distinction with presidents John Adams and Thomas Jefferson of dying on the anniversary of U.S. independence. Historians have generally ranked him as an above-average president.

==Early life and education==
James Monroe was born on April 28, 1758, in his parents&#x27; house in a wooded area of Westmoreland County in the Colony of Virginia, to (Andrew) Spence Monroe and Elizabeth Jones. The marked site is one mile (1.6 km) from the unincorporated community known today as Monroe Hall, Virginia. The James Monroe Family Home Site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979. He had one sister, Elizabeth and three younger brothers, Spence, Andrew and Joseph Jones. Monroe&#x27;s father worked as a craftsman and was a patriot who was involved in protests against the Stamp Act. His mother was the daughter of a Welsh immigrant whose family was one of the wealthiest in King George County.

His paternal great-great-grandfather Patrick Andrew Monroe emigrated to America from Scotland in the mid-17th century as a Royalist after the defeat of Charles I in the English Civil War, and was part of an ancient Scottish clan known as Clan Munro. In 1650, he patented a large tract of land in Washington Parish, Westmoreland County, Virginia. Also among James Monroe&#x27;s ancestors were French Huguenot immigrants, who came to Virginia in 1700.

At age 11, Monroe was enrolled in Campbelltown Academy, the only school in the county. This school was considered the best in the colony of Virginia, which is why Monroe was later able to immediately take advanced courses in Latin and mathematics at the College of William &amp; Mary. He attended this school only 11 weeks a year, as his labor was needed on the farm. During this time, Monroe formed a lifelong friendship with an older classmate, future Chief Justice of the Supreme Court John Marshall. In 1772, Monroe&#x27;s mother died after giving birth to her youngest child and his father died soon after, leaving him as the eldest son in charge of the family. Though he inherited property, including slaves, from both of his parents, the 16-year-old Monroe was forced to withdraw from school to support his younger brothers. His childless maternal uncle, Joseph Jones, became a surrogate father to Monroe and his siblings and paid off his brother-in-law&#x27;s debts. A member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, Jones took Monroe to the capital of Williamsburg, Virginia, and enrolled him in the College of William and Mary in June 1774. Jones also introduced Monroe to important Virginians such as Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, and George Washington.

During this phase of the American Revolution, opposition to the British government grew in the Thirteen Colonies in reaction to the &quot;Intolerable Acts&quot;, a series of harsh laws against the Colonies in response to the Boston Tea Party. In Williamsburg, British Governor John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, dissolved the Assembly after protests by the delegates, who then decided to send a delegation to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia. Dunmore wanted to take advantage of the absence of the Burgesses, who had convened to Richmond, and had soldiers of the Royal Navy confiscate the weapons of the Virginian militia, which alarmed militiamen and students of the College of William &amp; Mary, including Monroe. They marched to the Governor&#x27;s Palace and demanded that Dunmore return the confiscated gunpowder. When more militiamen arrived in Williamsburg under the leadership of Patrick Henry, Dunmore agreed to pay compensation for the confiscated goods. Monroe and his fellow students were so incensed by the governor&#x27;s actions that they conducted daily military drills on campus afterward. On June 24, 1775, Monroe and 24 militiamen stormed the Governor&#x27;s Palace, capturing several hundred muskets and swords.

==Revolutionary War service==

In early 1776, about a year and a half after his enrollment, Monroe dropped out of college and joined the 3rd Virginia Regiment in the Continental Army, despite mourning the death of his brother Spence, who had died shortly before. As the fledgling army valued literacy in its officers, Monroe was commissioned with the rank of lieutenant, serving under Colonel George Weedon and later Captain William Washington. After months of training, Monroe and 700 Virginia infantrymen were called north to serve in the New York and New Jersey campaign. Monroe&#x27;s regiment played a central role in the Continental Army&#x27;s retreat across the Delaware River on December 7 in response to the loss of Fort Washington. In late December, Monroe took part in a surprise attack on a Hessian encampment at the Battle of Trenton. Though the attack was successful, Monroe suffered a severed artery in the battle and nearly died. In the aftermath, Washington cited Monroe and William Washington for their bravery, and promoted Monroe to captain.

After recovering for two months, Monroe returned to Virginia to recruit his own company of soldiers. Lacking the wealth to induce soldiers to join his company, Monroe instead asked his uncle to return him to the front. Monroe was assigned to the staff of General William Alexander, Lord Stirling as an auxiliary officer. At the Battle of Brandywine, he formed a close friendship with the Marquis de Lafayette, a French volunteer who encouraged him to view the war as part of a wider struggle against religious and political tyranny. Monroe served in the Philadelphia campaign and spent the winter of 1777–78 at the encampment of Valley Forge, sharing a log hut with Marshall. By late 1777, he was promoted to major and served as Lord Stirling&#x27;s aide-de-camp. After serving in the Battle of Monmouth, the destitute Monroe resigned his commission in December 1778 and joined his uncle in Philadelphia. After the British captured Savannah, the Virginia legislature decided to raise four regiments, and Monroe returned to his native state, hoping to receive his own command. With letters of recommendation from Washington, Stirling, and Alexander Hamilton, Monroe received a commission as a lieutenant colonel and was expected to lead one of the regiments, but recruitment again proved to be a problem. On Jones&#x27;s advice, Monroe returned to Williamsburg to study law at the College of William and Mary, becoming a protégé of Virginia Governor Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson, with whom Monroe soon formed a close and lifelong friendship, advised his protégé to pursue a political career and made his library available to him, where the works of Epictetus in particular had a great influence on Monroe

With the British increasingly focusing their operations in the Southern colonies, the Virginians moved the capital to the more defensible city of Richmond, and Monroe accompanied Jefferson to the new capital. Jefferson appointed Monroe as a military commissioner with the task of maintaining contact with the Southern Continental Army, under the command of General Johann von Kalb, and the Virginia Militia. At the end of 1780, the British invaded Virginia and Monroe, who had become a colonel in the meantime, was given command of a regiment for the first time, but he was still unable to raise an army due to a lack of interested recruits, Monroe returned to his home in King George County, and was not present for the British raid on Richmond. As both the Continental Army and the Virginia militia had an abundance of officers, Monroe did not serve during the Yorktown campaign, and, much to his frustration, did not take part in the Siege of Yorktown. Although Andrew Jackson served as a courier in a militia unit at age 13, Monroe is regarded as the last U.S. president who was a Revolutionary War veteran, since he served as an officer of the Continental Army and took part in combat. As a result of his service, Monroe became a member of the Society of the Cincinnati.
==Early political career==

=== Member of Continental Congress ===
Monroe resumed studying law under Jefferson and continued until 1783. He was not particularly interested in legal theory or practice, but chose to take it up because he thought it offered &quot;the most immediate rewards&quot; and could ease his path to wealth, social standing, and political influence. In 1782, Monroe was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates. After serving on Virginia&#x27;s Executive Council, he was elected to the Fourth Congress of the Confederation in November 1783 and served in Annapolis until Congress convened in Trenton, New Jersey in June 1784. He had served a total of three years when he finally retired from that office by the rule of rotation. By that time, the government was meeting in the temporary capital of New York City. In 1784, Monroe undertook an extensive trip through Western New York and Pennsylvania to inspect the conditions in the Northwest. The tour convinced him that the United States had to pressure Britain to abandon its posts in the region and assert control of the Northwest. While serving in Congress, Monroe became an advocate for western expansion, and played a key role in the writing and passage of the Northwest Ordinance. The ordinance created the Northwest Territory, providing for federal administration of the territories west of Pennsylvania and north of the Ohio River. Another of Monroe&#x27;s goals in the Confederate Congress was to negotiate American rights to free navigation on the Mississippi River. During this period, Jefferson continued to serve as a mentor to Monroe, and, at Jefferson&#x27;s prompting, he befriended another prominent Virginian, James Madison.

=== Marriage and law practice ===
On February 16, 1786, Monroe married Elizabeth Kortright (1768–1830), who came from New York City&#x27;s high society, at Trinity Church in Manhattan. The marriage produced three children, Eliza in 1786, James in 1799 and Maria in 1802. Although Monroe was raised in the Anglican faith, the children were educated according to the teachings of the Episcopal Church. After a brief honeymoon on Long Island, New York, the Monroes returned to New York City to live with her father until Congress adjourned:

In the fall of 1786, Monroe resigned from Congress and moved to his uncle Jones&#x27; house in Fredericksburg, Virginia, where he successfully passed the bar exam and became an attorney for the state. In 1787, Monroe won election to another term in the Virginia House of Delegates. Though he had become outspoken in his desire to reform the Articles, he was unable to attend the Philadelphia Convention due to his work obligations. In 1788, Monroe became a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention, which voted on the adoption of the United States Constitution. In Virginia, the struggle over the ratification of the proposed Constitution involved more than a simple clash between federalists and anti-federalists. Virginians held a full spectrum of opinions about the merits of the proposed change in national government, and those who held the middle ground in the ideological struggle became the central figures. Led by Monroe and Edmund Pendleton, these &quot;federalists who are for amendments&quot; criticized the absence of a bill of rights and worried about surrendering taxation powers to the central government. Monroe called for the Constitution to include guarantees regarding free navigation on the Mississippi River and to give the federal government direct control over the militia in case of defense. In doing so, he wanted to prevent the creation of a standing army, which proved to be a critical point of contention between the federalists and the anti-federalists. Monroe also opposed the Electoral College, which he viewed as too corruptible and susceptible to state interests, and favored direct election of the president. After Madison reversed his decision and promised to pass a bill of rights, the Virginia Convention ratified the Constitution by a narrow vote, though Monroe himself voted against it.

===Senator===

In the 1789 election to the 1st United States Congress, anti-federalist Henry Monroe persuaded Monroe to run against Madison, and he had the Virginia legislature draw a congressional district designed to elect Monroe. During the campaign, Madison and Monroe often traveled together, and the election did nothing to diminish their friendship. In the election for Virginia&#x27;s Fifth District, Madison prevailed over Monroe, taking 1,308 votes compared to Monroe&#x27;s 972 votes. After this defeat, Monroe moved his family from Fredericksburg to Albemarle County, first to Charlottesville and later to the immediate neighborhood of Monticello, where he bought an estate and named it Highland. After the death of Senator William Grayson in 1790, Virginia legislators elected Monroe to serve the remainder of Grayson&#x27;s term. Since the Senate, unlike the House of Representatives, met behind closed doors, the public paid little attention to it and focused on the House of Representatives. Monroe therefore requested in February 1791 that Senate sessions be held in public, but this was initially rejected and not implemented until February 1794.

During the presidency of George Washington, U.S. politics became increasingly polarized between the Anti-Administration Party, led by Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and the Federalists, led by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Monroe stood firmly with Jefferson in opposing Hamilton&#x27;s strong central government and strong executive. The Democratic-Republican Party coalesced around Jefferson and Madison, and Monroe became one of the fledgling party&#x27;s leaders in the Senate. He also helped organize opposition to John Adams in the 1792 election, though Adams defeated George Clinton to win re-election as vice president. When Monroe took part in congressional investigations into Hamilton&#x27;s illegal transactions with James Reynolds in November 1792, this led to the uncovering of the first political sex scandal in the United States: The payments had been hush money to keep Hamilton&#x27;s affair with Reynolds&#x27; wife secret. Hamilton never forgave Monroe for this public humiliation, which almost led to a duel between the two. Throughout 1792 and 1793, Monroe and Madison responded to Hamilton&#x27;s pamphlets accusing Jefferson of undermining Washington&#x27;s authority with a series of six essays. These sharply worded replies were largely penned by Monroe. As leader of the Republicans in the Senate, Monroe soon became involved in matters of foreign relations. In 1794, he emerged as an opponent of Hamilton&#x27;s appointment as ambassador to the United Kingdom and a supporter of the First French Republic. Since 1791 he had taken sides with the French Revolution in several essays under the pseudonym Aratus.

===Minister to France===
As the 1790s progressed, the French Revolutionary Wars came to dominate U.S. foreign policy, with the British and French navies both interfering with U.S. trade with Europe. Like most other Jeffersonians, Monroe supported the French Revolution, but Hamilton&#x27;s followers tended to sympathize more with Britain. In 1794, hoping to find a way to avoid war with both countries, Washington appointed Monroe as his minister (ambassador) to France, after Madison and Robert R. Livingston had declined the offer. At the same time, he appointed the Anglophile Federalist John Jay as his minister to Britain. Monroe took this position at a difficult time: America&#x27;s negotiating position was made considerably more difficult by its lack of military strength. In addition, the conflict between Paris and London in America intensified the confrontation between the Anglophile Federalists and the Francophile Republicans. While the Federalists were basically only aiming for independence from Great Britain, the Republicans wanted a revolutionary new form of government, which is why they strongly sympathized with the First French Republic.

After arriving in France, Monroe addressed the National Convention, receiving a standing ovation for his speech celebrating republicanism. Monroe&#x27;s passionate and friendly message of greeting at the inaugural ceremony before the National Convention was later criticized by Jay for its sentimentality, and Washington viewed the speech as &quot;not well devised&quot; in terms of venue and in light of American neutrality in the First Coalition War. Monroe experienced several early diplomatic successes, including the protection of U.S. trade from French attacks. In February 1795, Monroe used his influence to secure the release of all American citizens imprisoned since the French Revolution and Adrienne de La Fayette, the wife of the Marquis de Lafayette. He had already secured the release of Thomas Paine in July 1794 and took him in, but when Paine worked on a diatribe against Washington despite Monroe&#x27;s objections, they parted ways in the spring of 1796.

Months after Monroe arrived in France, the U.S. and Great Britain concluded the Jay Treaty, outraging both the French and Monroe—not fully informed about the treaty prior to its publication. Despite the undesirable effects of the Jay Treaty on Franco-American relations, Monroe won French support for U.S. navigational rights on the Mississippi River—the mouth of which was controlled by Spain—and in 1795 the U.S. and Spain signed Pinckney&#x27;s Treaty. The treaty granted the U.S. limited rights to use the port of New Orleans.

Immediately after Timothy Pickering succeeded Secretary of State Edmund Randolph, who had been the only Francophile member of Washington&#x27;s cabinet, in December 1795, he worked to dismiss Monroe. In 1796, Monroe sent a dispatch summarizing his response to French complaints of the Jay Treaty, but it was incomplete and did not include the French note or Monroe&#x27;s written response. Pickering saw this as a sign of Monroe&#x27;s unsuitability and, together with Hamilton, persuaded Washington to replace Monroe as ambassador. Washington decided Monroe was inefficient, disruptive, and failed to safeguard the national interest. He recalled Monroe in November 1796, the letter of dismissal being deliberately delayed in order to prevent his return before the presidential election. Returning to his home in Charlottesville, he resumed his dual careers as a farmer and lawyer. Jefferson and Madison urged Monroe to run for Congress, but Monroe chose to focus on state politics instead.

In 1797, Monroe published &quot;A View of the Conduct of the Executive, in the Foreign Affairs of the United States: Connected with the Mission to the French Republic, During the Years 1794, 5, and 6,&quot; which sharply attacked Washington&#x27;s government and accused it of acting against America&#x27;s interests. He followed the advice of his friend Robert Livingston who cautioned him to &quot;repress every harsh and acrimonious&quot; comment about Washington. However, he did complain that too often the U.S. government had been too close to Britain, especially regarding the Jay Treaty. Washington made notes on this copy, writing, &quot;The truth is, Mr. Monroe was cajoled, flattered, and made to believe strange things. In return he did, or was disposed to do, whatever was pleasing to that nation, reluctantly urging the rights of his own.&quot;

==Governor of Virginia and diplomat (1799–1802, 1811)==

===Governor of Virginia===
On a party-line vote, the Virginia legislature elected Monroe as Governor of Virginia in 1799. He would serve as governor until 1802. The constitution of Virginia endowed the governor with very few powers aside from commanding the militia when the Assembly called it into action, but Monroe used his stature to convince legislators to enhance state involvement in transportation and education and to increase training for the militia. Monroe also began to give State of the Commonwealth addresses to the legislature, in which he highlighted areas in which he believed the legislature should act. Monroe also led an effort to create the state&#x27;s first penitentiary, and imprisonment replaced other, often harsher, punishments. In 1800, Monroe called out the state militia to suppress Gabriel&#x27;s Rebellion, a slave rebellion originating on a plantation six miles from the capital of Richmond. Gabriel and 27 other enslaved people who participated were all hanged for treason. The executions sparked compassionate feelings among the people of Virginia, and Monroe worked with the legislature to secure a location where free and enslaved African Americans suspected of &quot;conspiracy, insurgency, Treason, and rebellion&quot; would be permanently banished outside the United States.

Monroe thought that foreign and Federalist elements had created the Quasi War of 1798–1800, and he strongly supported Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s candidacy for president in 1800. Federalists were likewise suspicious of Monroe, some viewing him at best as a French dupe and at worst a traitor. With the power to appoint election officials in Virginia, Monroe exercised his influence to help Jefferson win Virginia&#x27;s presidential electors. He also considered using the Virginia militia to force the outcome in favor of Jefferson. Jefferson won the 1800 election, and he appointed Madison as his Secretary of State. As a member of Jefferson&#x27;s party and the leader of the largest state in the country, Monroe emerged as one of Jefferson&#x27;s two most likely successors, alongside Madison.

===Louisiana Purchase and Minister to Great Britain===
Shortly after the end of Monroe&#x27;s gubernatorial tenure, President Jefferson sent Monroe back to France to assist Ambassador Robert Livingston in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase. In the 1800 Treaty of San Ildefonso, France had acquired the territory of Louisiana from Spain; at the time, many in the U.S. believed that France had also acquired West Florida in the same treaty. The American delegation originally sought to acquire West Florida and the city of New Orleans, which controlled the trade of the Mississippi River. Determined to acquire New Orleans even if it meant war with France, Jefferson also authorized Monroe to form an alliance with the British if the French refused to sell the city.

Meeting with François Barbé-Marbois, the French foreign minister, Monroe and Livingston agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana for $15 million; the purchase became known as the Louisiana Purchase. In agreeing to the purchase, Monroe violated his instructions, which had only allowed $9 million for the purchase of New Orleans and West Florida. The French did not acknowledge that West Florida remained in Spanish possession, and the United States would claim that France had sold West Florida to the United States for several years to come. Though he had not ordered the purchase of the entire territory, Jefferson strongly supported Monroe&#x27;s actions, which ensured that the United States would continue to expand to the West. Overcoming doubts about whether the Constitution authorized the purchase of foreign territory, Jefferson won congressional approval for the Louisiana Purchase, and the acquisition doubled the size of the United States. Monroe would travel to Spain in 1805 to try to win the cession of West Florida, but found that the American ambassador to Spain, Charles Pinckney, had alienated the Spanish government with crude threats of violence. In the negotiations on the outstanding territorial issues concerning New Orleans, West Florida and the Rio Grande, Monroe made no progress and was treated condescendingly, and with the support of France, Spain refused to consider relinquishing the territory.

After the resignation of Rufus King, Monroe was appointed as the ambassador to Great Britain in 1803. The greatest issue of contention between the United States and Britain was that of the impressment of U.S. sailors. Many U.S. merchant ships employed British seamen who had deserted or dodged conscription, and the British frequently impressed sailors on U.S. ships in hopes of quelling their manpower issues. Many of the sailors they impressed had never been British subjects, and Monroe was tasked with persuading the British to stop their practice of impressment. Monroe found little success in this endeavor, partly due to Jefferson&#x27;s alienation of the British minister to the United States, Anthony Merry. Rejecting Jefferson&#x27;s offer to serve as the first governor of Louisiana Territory, Monroe continued to serve as ambassador to Britain until 1807.

In 1806 he negotiated the Monroe–Pinkney Treaty with Great Britain. It would have extended the Jay Treaty of 1794 which had expired after ten years. Jefferson had fought the Jay Treaty intensely in 1794–95 because he felt it would allow the British to subvert American republicanism. The treaty had produced ten years of peace and highly lucrative trade for American merchants, but Jefferson was still opposed. When Monroe and the British signed the new treaty in December 1806, Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification. Although the treaty called for ten more years of trade between the United States and the British Empire and gave American merchants guarantees that would have been good for business, Jefferson was unhappy that it did not end the hated British practice of impressment and refused to give up the potential weapon of commercial warfare against Britain. The president made no attempt to obtain another treaty, and as a result, the two nations drifted from peace toward the War of 1812. Monroe was severely pained by the administration&#x27;s repudiation of the treaty, and he fell out with Secretary of State James Madison.

===1808 election and the Quids===
On his return to Virginia in 1807, Monroe received a warm reception, and many urged him to run in the 1808 presidential election. After Jefferson refused to submit the Monroe-Pinkney Treaty, Monroe had come to believe that Jefferson had snubbed the treaty out of the desire to avoid elevating Monroe above Madison in 1808. Out of deference to Jefferson, Monroe agreed to avoid actively campaigning for the presidency, but he did not rule out accepting a draft effort. The Democratic-Republican Party was increasingly factionalized, with &quot;Old Republicans&quot; or &quot;Quids&quot; denouncing the Jefferson administration for abandoning what they considered to be true republican principles. The Quids, led by John Randolph of Roanoke, tried to enlist Monroe in their cause. The plan was to run Monroe for president in the 1808 election in cooperation with the Federalist Party, which had a strong base in New England. Monroe decided to run against Madison in the 1808 presidential election in order to demonstrate the strength of his political position in Virginia. The regular Democratic-Republicans overcame the Quids in the nominating caucus, kept control of the party in Virginia, and protected Madison&#x27;s base. Monroe did not publicly criticize Jefferson or Madison during Madison&#x27;s campaign against Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, but he refused to support Madison. Madison defeated Pinckney by a large margin, carrying all but one state outside of New England. Monroe won 3,400 votes in Virginia, but received little support elsewhere.

Monroe, who had fallen out of favor with the majority of Republicans because of his candidacy, withdrew into private life for the next few years. The plan to sell his second house in Loudon County, Oak Hill, in order to renovate and expand Highland with the proceeds, failed due to the low real estate prices. After the election Monroe quickly reconciled with Jefferson, but their friendship endured further strains when Jefferson did not promote Monroe&#x27;s candidacy to Congress in 1809. Monroe did not speak with Madison until 1810. Monroe devoted his attentions to farming at his Charlottesville estate, experimenting with new horticultural techniques in order to switch from tobacco, whose value was steadily declining, to wheat.

==Secretary of State and Secretary of War (1811–1817)==

=== Madison administration ===


In 1810, Monroe returned to the Virginia House of Delegates and was elected to another term as governor in 1811, but served only four months, as less than two months into his term, Monroe was asked on Madison&#x27;s behalf if he would be willing to succeed Robert Smith as Secretary of State. In April 1811, Madison appointed Monroe to his cabinet as Secretary of State in hopes of shoring up the support of the more radical factions of the Democratic-Republicans. Madison also hoped that Monroe, an experienced diplomat with whom he had once been close friends, would improve upon Smith&#x27;s performance. Madison assured Monroe that their differences regarding the Monroe-Pinkney Treaty had been a misunderstanding, and the two resumed their friendship. The Senate voted unanimously (30–0) to confirm him. On taking office, Monroe hoped to negotiate treaties with the British and French to end the attacks on American merchant ships. While the French agreed to reduce the attacks and release seized American ships, the British were less receptive to Monroe&#x27;s demands. Monroe had long worked for peace with the British, but he came to favor war with Britain, joining with &quot;war hawks&quot; such as Speaker of the House Henry Clay. With the support of Monroe and Clay, Madison asked Congress to declare war upon the British, and Congress complied on June 18, 1812, thus beginning the War of 1812.

The war went very badly, and the Madison administration quickly sought peace, but were rejected by the British. The U.S. Navy did experience several successes after Monroe convinced Madison to allow the Navy&#x27;s ships to set sail rather than remaining in port for the duration of the war. After the resignation of Secretary of War William Eustis, Madison asked Monroe to serve in dual roles as Secretary of State and Secretary of War, but opposition from the Senate limited Monroe to serving as acting Secretary of War until Brigadier General John Armstrong won Senate confirmation. Monroe and Armstrong clashed over war policy, and Armstrong blocked Monroe&#x27;s hopes of being appointed to lead an invasion of Canada. When British warships appeared in the Potomac River estuary in the summer of the same year, Monroe urged that defensive measures be taken for Washington, D.C., and that a military intelligence service should be established to Chesapeake Bay, which Armstrong dismissed as unnecessary. Since there was no functioning reconnaissance, Monroe formed his own small cavalry unit and began scouting the bay until the British withdrew from it. As the war dragged on, the British offered to begin negotiations in Ghent, and the United States sent a delegation led by John Quincy Adams to conduct negotiations. Monroe allowed Adams leeway in setting terms, so long as he ended the hostilities and preserved American neutrality.

When a British fleet of 50 warships and 5,000 soldiers massed in the mouth of the Potomac, Monroe scouted the Chesapeake Bay with a troop and on August 21 sent the President a warning of the impending invasion so that Madison and his wife could flee in time and the state&#x27;s assets and inhabitants could be evacuated. The British burned the U.S. Capitol and the White House on August 24, 1814, Madison removed Armstrong as Secretary of War and turned to Monroe for help, appointing him Secretary of War on September 27. Monroe resigned as Secretary of State on October 1, 1814, but no successor was ever appointed and thus from October 1814 to February 28, 1815, Monroe effectively held both Cabinet posts. Now in command of the war effort, Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to defend against a likely attack on New Orleans by the British, and he asked the governors of nearby states to send their militias to reinforce Jackson. He also called on Congress to draft an army of 100,000 men, increase compensation to soldiers, and establish a new national bank, the Second Bank of the United States, to ensure adequate funding for the war effort. Months after Monroe took office as Secretary of War, the war ended with the signing of the Treaty of Ghent. The treaty resulted in a return to the status quo ante bellum, and many outstanding issues between the United States and Britain remained. Americans celebrated the end of the war as a great victory, partly due to the news of the treaty reaching the United States shortly after Jackson&#x27;s victory in the Battle of New Orleans. With the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, the British also ended the practice of impressment. After the war, Congress authorized the creation of the Second Bank of the United States. Monroe resigned as Secretary of War in March 1815 and took over the leadership of the State Department again, emerging from the war politically strengthened and a promising presidential candidate.

===Election of 1816===
Monroe decided to seek the presidency in the 1816 election, and his war-time leadership had established him as Madison&#x27;s heir apparent. Monroe had strong support from many in the party, but his candidacy was challenged at the 1816 Democratic-Republican congressional nominating caucus. Since there was no longer a serious opposition party due to the decline of the Federalists, who were perceived as disloyal because of their pro-British stance and opposition to the War of 1812, the Democratic-Republican caucus in Congress was crucial to Monroe&#x27;s victory. Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford had the support of numerous Southern and Western Congressmen, while Governor Daniel D. Tompkins was backed by several Congressmen from New York. Crawford appealed especially to many Democratic-Republicans who were wary of Madison and Monroe&#x27;s support for the establishment of the Second Bank of the United States. Despite his substantial backing, Crawford decided to defer to Monroe on the belief that he could eventually run as Monroe&#x27;s successor, and Monroe won his party&#x27;s nomination. Tompkins won the party&#x27;s vice presidential nomination. The moribund Federalists nominated Rufus King as their presidential nominee, but the party offered little opposition following the conclusion of a popular war that they had opposed. Monroe received 183 of the 217 electoral votes, winning every state but Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Delaware.

Since he previously served as an officer of the Continental Army during the Revolutionary War and as a delegate to the Continental Congress, he became the last president who was a Founding Father. Born in 1758, he was also the last president who belonged to the Republican generation.

==Presidency (1817–1825)==
=== Inauguration and cabinet ===
Monroe&#x27;s inauguration took place on March 4, 1817. As Monroe was the first president to take office during a period of peace and economic stability, the term &quot;Era of Good Feelings&quot; was soon coined. This period was characterized by the unchallenged dominance of the Republicans, who by the end of Madison&#x27;s term had adopted some Federalist policies, such as the establishment of a central bank and protective tariffs. Monroe largely ignored old party lines in making federal appointments, which reduced political tensions and augmented the sense of &quot;oneness&quot; that pervaded the United States. He made two long national tours to build national trust, which included ceremonies of welcome and expressions of good-will. Monroe appointed a geographically balanced cabinet, through which he led the executive branch. At Monroe&#x27;s request, Crawford continued to serve as Treasury Secretary. Monroe also chose to retain Benjamin Crowninshield of Massachusetts as Secretary of the Navy and Richard Rush of Pennsylvania as Attorney General. Recognizing Northern discontent at the continuation of the Virginia dynasty, Monroe chose John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts as Secretary of State, making Adams the early favorite to eventually succeed Monroe. An experienced diplomat, Adams had abandoned the Federalist Party in 1807 in support of Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s foreign policy, and Monroe hoped that the appointment would encourage the defection of more Federalists. After General Andrew Jackson declined appointment as Secretary of War, Monroe turned to South Carolina Congressman John C. Calhoun, leaving the Cabinet without a prominent Westerner. In late 1817 Rush became the ambassador to Britain, and William Wirt succeeded him as Attorney General. With the exception of Crowninshield, the rest of Monroe&#x27;s initial cabinet appointees remained in place for the remainder of his presidency.

=== Foreign policy ===
According to historian William Earl Weeks, &quot;Monroe evolved a comprehensive strategy aimed at expanding the Union externally while solidifying it internally&quot;. He expanded trade and pacified relations with Great Britain while expanding the United States at the expense of the Spanish Empire, from which he obtained Florida and the recognition of a border across the continent. Faced with the breakdown of the expansionist consensus over the question of slavery, the president tried to provide both North and South with guarantees that future expansion would not tip the balance of power between slave and free states, a system that, Weeks remarks, did indeed allow the continuation of American expansion for the best of four decades.

====Treaties with Britain and Russia====

Upon taking office, Monroe pursued warmer relations with Britain in the aftermath of the War of 1812. In 1817, the United States and Britain signed the Rush–Bagot Treaty, which regulated naval armaments on the Great Lakes and Lake Champlain and demilitarized the border between the U.S. and British North America. The Treaty of 1818, also with Great Britain, was concluded October 20, 1818, and fixed the present Canada–United States border from Minnesota to the Rocky Mountains at the 49th parallel. The accords also established a joint U.S.–British occupation of Oregon Country for the next ten years. Though they did not solve every outstanding issue between the U.S. and Britain, the treaties allowed for greater trade between the United States and the British Empire and helped avoid an expensive naval arms race in the Great Lakes. In the Pacific Northwest, American territorial claims clashed with those of Tsarist Russia, which had trading posts as far south as San Francisco Bay, and those of Great Britain. The situation intensified in the fall of 1821 when Saint Petersburg closed America&#x27;s Pacific coastal sea north of 51° latitude to foreign ships within a 100-mile zone, thus shifting its territorial claim four degrees of latitude to the south. Late in Monroe&#x27;s second term, the U.S. concluded the Russo-American Treaty of 1824 with the Russian Empire, setting the southern limit of Russian sovereignty on the Pacific coast of North America at the 54°40′ parallel (the present southern tip of the Alaska Panhandle).

====Acquisition of Florida====


In October 1817, the United States cabinet held several lengthy meetings to address the declarations of independence by former Spanish colonies in South America and the increasing piracy, particularly from Amelia Island. Piracy on the southern border with the Floridas was intensified by smugglers, slave traders, and privateers who had fled from the Spanish colonies over which the mother country had lost control. Spain had long rejected repeated American attempts to purchase Florida. However, by 1818, Spain&#x27;s troubling colonial situation made the cession of Florida make sense. Spain had been exhausted by the Peninsular War in Europe and needed to rebuild its credibility and presence in its colonies. Revolutionaries in Central America and South America were beginning to demand independence. Spain was unwilling to invest further in Florida, encroached on by American settlers, and it worried about the border between New Spain and the United States. With only a minor military presence in Florida, Spain was not able to restrain the Seminole warriors who routinely crossed the border and raided American villages and farms, as well as protected southern slave refugees from slave owners and traders of the southern United States. The Seminole people were also providing sanctuary for runaway slaves, those of which the United States wanted back.

In response to Seminole attacks and their provision of aid to escaped slaves, Monroe ordered a military expedition to cross into Spanish Florida and attack the Seminoles. In this expedition, led by Andrew Jackson, the US Army displaced numerous Seminole people from their houses along with burning their towns. Jackson also seized the Spanish territorial capital of Pensacola. With the capture of Pensacola, Jackson established de facto American control of the entire territory. While Monroe supported Jackson&#x27;s actions, many in Congress harshly criticized what they saw as an undeclared war. With the support of Secretary of State Adams, Monroe defended Jackson against domestic and international criticism, and the United States began negotiations with Spain. Monroe later fixed the government&#x27;s official position in a letter from Adams to Spanish Ambassador Luis de Onís, which he edited accordingly by removing all justifications for Jackson&#x27;s actions. He also emphasized that although Jackson had exceeded his orders, he had come to a new assessment of the situation on the basis of previously unknown information at the scene of the war.

Spain faced revolt in all of its American colonies and could neither govern nor defend Florida. On February 22, 1819, Spain and the United States signed the Adams–Onís Treaty, which ceded the Floridas in return for the assumption by the United States of claims of American citizens against Spain to an amount not exceeding $5,000,000 (~$ in ). The treaty also contained a definition of the boundary between Spanish and American possessions on the North American continent. Beginning at the mouth of the Sabine River the line ran along that river to the 32nd parallel, then due north to the Red River, which it followed to the 100th meridian, due north to the Arkansas River, and along that river to its source, then north to the 42nd parallel, which it followed to the Pacific Ocean. The United States renounced all claims to the west and south of this boundary (Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California, Colorado, Utah, Nevada), so Spain surrendered any title she had to the Northwest (Oregon Country).

==== South American Wars of Independence ====
In 1810, South America&#x27;s wars of independence began, inspired by the American and French Revolutionary Wars, but the Madison administration, as well as Monroe himself during his first term in office, treated the conflicts as civil wars and kept the United States neutral. Monroe was deeply sympathetic to the revolutionary movements against Spain, and was determined that the United States should never repeat the policies of the Washington administration during the French Revolution, when the nation had failed to demonstrate its sympathy for the aspirations of peoples seeking to establish republican governments. He did not envisage military involvement in Latin American affairs, but only the provision of moral support, as he believed that a direct American intervention would provoke other European powers into assisting Spain. Monroe initially refused to recognize the Latin American governments due to ongoing negotiations with Spain over Florida.

Following their respective declarations of independence, the South American republics quickly sent emissaries to Washington to ask for diplomatic recognition and economic and trade relations. In 1818, Monroe assured a representative of the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata that his attitude was &quot;impartial neutrality,&quot; Although not diplomatically recognized, the young republics enjoyed the advantages of a sovereign nation in economic, trade, and diplomatic relations with the United States. After Spain and America had fully ratified the Adams–Onís Treaty in February 1821 and a liberal government had come to power in Madrid, Monroe officially recognized the countries of Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico, all of which had won independence from Spain. Secretary of State Adams, under Monroe&#x27;s supervision, wrote the instructions for the ministers to these new countries. They declared that the policy of the United States was to uphold republican institutions and to seek treaties of commerce on a most-favored-nation basis. The United States would support inter-American congresses dedicated to the development of economic and political institutions fundamentally differing from those prevailing in Europe. Monroe took pride as the United States was the first nation to extend recognition and to set an example to the rest of the world for its support of the &quot;cause of liberty and humanity&quot;.

====Monroe Doctrine====
In January 1821, Adams first expressed the idea that the American double continent should be closed to further colonization by foreign powers. The idea, which was later adopted by Monroe, was influenced by the Adams–Onís Treaty and the negotiations on border disputes in the Oregon Country. Adams emphasized that the further colonization of America, except for Canada, should be in the hands of the Americans themselves. This later became a principle in Monroe&#x27;s administration. After the Spanish Revolution of 1820 was ended by France, Secretary of War Calhoun and British Foreign Secretary George Canning warned Monroe that European powers might intend to intervene in South America, increasing the pressure on him to speak out on the future of the Western Hemisphere.

For their part, the British also had a strong interest in ensuring the demise of Spanish colonialism, with all the trade restrictions mercantilism imposed. In October 1823, Richard Rush, the American minister in London, corresponded with Canning to work out a common position on a potential French intervention in South America. When Monroe was presented with this correspondence, which had yielded no tangible results, in mid-October 1823, his first reaction was to accept the British offer. Adams vigorously opposed cooperation with Great Britain, contending that a statement of bilateral nature could limit United States expansion in the future. He also argued that the British were not committed to recognizing the Latin American republics and must have had imperial motivations themselves.

Two months later, the bilateral statement proposed by the British became a unilateral declaration by the United States. While Monroe thought that Spain was unlikely to re-establish its colonial empire on its own, he feared that France or the Holy Alliance might seek to establish control over the former Spanish possessions. On December 2, 1823, in his annual message to Congress, Monroe articulated what became known as the Monroe Doctrine. He first reiterated the traditional U.S. policy of neutrality with regard to European wars and conflicts. He then declared that the United States would not accept the recolonization of any country by its former European master, though he also avowed non-interference with existing European colonies in the Americas. Finally, he stated that European countries should no longer consider the Western Hemisphere open to new colonization, a jab aimed primarily at Russia, which was attempting to expand its colony on the northern Pacific Coast.

=== Domestic policy ===
====Missouri Compromise====

In the period between 1817 and 1819, Mississippi, Illinois, and Alabama were recognized as new states. This rapid expansion resulted in a growing economic divide between the regions and a change of power in Congress to the detriment of the southern states, which viewed their plantation economy, which was dependent on slavery, as increasingly threatened. In February 1819, a bill to enable the people of the Missouri Territory to draft a constitution and form a government preliminary to admission into the Union came before the House of Representatives. During these proceedings, Congressman James Tallmadge, Jr. of New York &quot;tossed a bombshell into the Era of Good Feelings&quot; by offering the Tallmadge Amendment, which prohibited the further introduction of slaves into Missouri and required that all future children of slave parents therein should be free at the age of twenty-five years. After three days of rancorous and sometimes bitter debate, the bill, with Tallmadge&#x27;s amendments, passed. The measure then went to the Senate, which rejected both amendments. A House–Senate conference committee proved unable to resolve the disagreements on the bill, and so the entire measure failed. The ensuing debates pitted the northern &quot;restrictionists&quot; (antislavery legislators who wished to bar slavery from the Louisiana territories and prohibit slavery&#x27;s further expansion) against southern &quot;anti-restrictionists&quot; (proslavery legislators who rejected any interference by Congress inhibiting slavery expansion).

During the following session, the House passed a similar bill with an amendment, introduced on January 26, 1820, by John W. Taylor of New York, allowing Missouri into the union as a slave state. Initially, Monroe opposed any compromise that involved restrictions on slavery&#x27;s expansion in federal territories. The question had been complicated by the admission in December of Alabama, a slave state, making the number of slave and free states equal. In addition, there was a bill in passage through the House (January 3, 1820) to admit Maine as a free state. Southern congressmen sought to force northerners to accept slavery in Missouri by connecting Maine and Missouri statehood. In this plan, endorsed by Monroe, Maine statehood would be held hostage to slavery in Missouri. In February 1820 the Senate passed a bill for the admission of Maine with an amendment enabling the people of Missouri to form a state constitution. Before the bill was returned to the House, a second amendment was adopted on the motion of Jesse B. Thomas of Illinois, excluding slavery from the Louisiana Territory north of the parallel 36°30′ north (the southern boundary of Missouri), except within the limits of the proposed state of Missouri. The House then approved the bill as amended by the Senate. Though Monroe remained firmly opposed to any compromise that restricted slavery anywhere, he reluctantly signed the Compromise into law (March 6, 1820) only because he believed it was the least bad alternative for southern slaveholders. The legislation passed, and became known as &quot;the Missouri Compromise&quot;, which temporarily settled the issue of slavery in the territories. Monroe&#x27;s presidential leadership role in drafting the Missouri Compromise is disputed. He viewed the issue of admission conditions more from a political perspective and did not convene a cabinet meeting on this matter.

====Internal improvements====
As the United States continued to grow, many Americans advocated a system of internal improvements to help the country develop. Federal assistance for such projects evolved slowly and haphazardly—the product of contentious congressional factions and an executive branch generally concerned with avoiding unconstitutional federal intrusions into state affairs. Monroe believed that the young nation needed an improved infrastructure, including a transportation network to grow and thrive economically, but did not think that the Constitution authorized Congress to build, maintain, and operate a national transportation system, Monroe repeatedly urged Congress to pass an amendment allowing Congress the power to finance internal improvements, but Congress never acted on his proposal, in part because many congressmen believed that the Constitution did in fact authorize the federal financing of internal improvements. In 1822, Congress passed a bill authorizing the collection of tolls on the Cumberland Road, with the tolls being used to finance repairs on the road. Adhering to stated position regarding internal improvements, Monroe vetoed the bill. In an elaborate essay, Monroe set forth his constitutional views on the subject. Congress might appropriate money, he admitted, but it might not undertake the actual construction of national works nor assume jurisdiction over them.

In 1824, the Supreme Court ruled in &quot;Gibbons v. Ogden&quot; that the Constitution&#x27;s Commerce Clause gave the federal government the authority to regulate interstate commerce. Shortly thereafter, Congress passed two important laws that, together, marked the beginning of the federal government&#x27;s continuous involvement in civil works. The General Survey Act authorized the president to have surveys made of routes for roads and canals &quot;of national importance, in a commercial or military point of view, or necessary for the transportation of public mail&quot;. The president assigned responsibility for the surveys to the Army Corps of Engineers. The second act, passed a month later, appropriated $75,000 to improve navigation on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers by removing sandbars, snags, and other obstacles. Subsequently, the act was amended to include other rivers such as the Missouri. This work, too, was given to the Corps of Engineers—the only formally trained body of engineers in the new republic and, as part of the nation&#x27;s small army, available to serve the wishes of Congress and the executive branch.

====Panic of 1819====

At the end of his first term of office, Monroe faced an economic crisis known as the Panic of 1819, the first major depression to hit the country since the ratification of the Constitution in 1788. The panic stemmed from declining imports and exports, and sagging agricultural prices as global markets readjusted to peacetime production and commerce in the aftermath of the War of 1812 and the Napoleonic Wars. The severity of the economic downturn in the U.S. was compounded by excessive speculation in public lands, fueled by the unrestrained issue of paper money from banks and business concerns. Monroe lacked the power to intervene directly in the economy, as banks were largely regulated by the states, and he could do little to stem the economic crisis. As a result, cuts had to be made to the state budget in the following years, primarily affecting the defense budget, whose growth to over 35% of the total budget in 1818 had already shocked the conservative republicans. Monroe&#x27;s fortification program survived the cutbacks unscathed for the time being, while the target size of the standing army was reduced from 12,656 to 6,000 in May 1819. The next year, the budget for reinforcing and expanding the forts was reduced by over 70%. By 1821, the defense budget had shrunk to $5 million, about half of what it had been in 1818.

Before the onset of the Panic of 1819, some business leaders had called on Congress to increase tariff rates to address the negative balance of trade and help struggling industries. As the panic spread, Monroe declined to call a special session of Congress to address the economy. When Congress finally reconvened in December 1819, Monroe requested an increase in the tariff but declined to recommend specific rates. Congress would not raise tariff rates until the passage of the Tariff of 1824. The panic resulted in high unemployment and an increase in bankruptcies and foreclosures, and provoked popular resentment against banking and business enterprises.

=== Native American policy ===
Monroe was the first president to visit the American West and entrusted Secretary of War Calhoun with departmental responsibility for this region. In order to prevent the relentless attacks on Native American settlements that accompanied the steadily advancing westward expansion, he advocated dividing up the areas between the federal territories and the Rocky Mountains and assigning them to different tribes for settlement. The districts were each to be given a civil government and a school system. In a speech to Congress on March 30, 1824, Monroe advocated the resettlement of Native Americans living within the territory of the United States to lands beyond the western frontier where they could continue their ancestral way of life. Nonetheless, he shared Jackson and Calhoun&#x27;s concerns about sovereign Indian nations, believing they were an obstacle to the West&#x27;s future development. Like Washington and Jefferson, he wished to present the Natives with the benefits of American culture and Western civilization for their own good, as well as to save them from extinction.

===Election of 1820===

Monroe announced his candidacy for a second term early on. At the Republican Caucus on April 8, 1820, the 40 members unanimously decided not to nominate an opposing candidate to Monroe. The collapse of the Federalists left Monroe with no organized opposition at the end of his first term, and he ran for reelection unopposed, the only president other than Washington to do so. A single elector from New Hampshire, William Plumer, cast a vote for John Quincy Adams, preventing a unanimous vote in the Electoral College. He did so because he thought Monroe was incompetent. Later in the century, the story arose that he had cast his dissenting vote so that only George Washington would have the honor of unanimous election. Plumer never mentioned Washington in his speech explaining his vote to the other New Hampshire electors. Despite this broad support in the presidential election, Monroe had few loyal supporters and correspondingly little influence in the parallel elected 17th United States Congress.

==Post-presidency (1825–1831)==

When his presidency ended on March 4, 1825, James Monroe resided at Monroe Hill, what is now included in the grounds of the University of Virginia. Monroe spent the first five years of his retirement at his Oak Hill residence in Aldie, Virginia. In August 1825, the Monroes had received the Marquis de Lafayette and President John Quincy Adams as guests there. He devoted himself to reading, with his private library containing over 3,000 books, most of which he had acquired during his stays in Europe. Monroe began work on a book of political theory &quot;The People the Sovereigns, Being a Comparison of the Government of the United States with those of the Republics Which Have Existed Before, with the Causes of their Decadence and Fall&quot;. The work was designed to highlight the difference between governments and people of the United States and other countries, ancient and modern, to show that certain issues that produced disastrous effects in them were not present in America. In 1829, Monroe abandoned work on &quot;The People the Sovereigns&quot; after hearing George Hay&#x27;s unfavorable reaction to the manuscript. Hay suggested that Monroe write an autobiography, which would be more interesting and valuable to posterity. Monroe, delighted with the idea, began working on an autobiography, but died before it could be completed.

In retirement, he was plagued by pressing financial worries. As Minister to France during the 1790s, he had had to take out substantial private loans to fulfill representative duties and diplomatic protocol due to his moderate pay. As early as 1797, he had asked Congress for an expense allowance and had been waiting in vain for a payment ever since. In the last days before handing over to Adams, Monroe wrote to Jefferson and Madison asking them to support him in his claims against Congress if necessary. He sold off his Highland Plantation to the Second Bank of the United States out of financial necessity. It is now owned by his &quot;alma mater&quot;, the College of William and Mary, which has opened it to the public as a historic site. Throughout his life, he was financially insolvent, which was exacerbated by his wife&#x27;s poor health.

Monroe served on the Board of Visitors for the University of Virginia under Jefferson and the second rector, James Madison, both former presidents, nearly until his death. Monroe had previously been a member of the original board of Central College (the predecessor to the University of Virginia) however the demands of the Presidency prevented him from continuing as a board member. At the annual examinations in July, he presided over the Board of Examiners. When there was considerable indiscipline among the students, Monroe suggested in a report in 1830 that military drill be added to the curriculum, but Madison refused.

=== Virginia Constitutional Convention Delegate ===
Although already clearly marked by age and severely impaired by a horse accident in 1828, Monroe was elected as a delegate to the Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1829–1830. He was one of four delegates elected from the senatorial district made up of his home district of Loudoun and Fairfax County. In October 1829, he was elected by the convention to serve as the presiding officer, until his failing health required him to withdraw on December 8, after which Philip P. Barbour of Orange County was elected presiding officer.

=== Death ===
Shortly before his death, Monroe was dealt a severe blow when his son-in-law and close advisor George Hay died on September 21, 1830, and his wife Elizabeth died just two days later. Upon Elizabeth&#x27;s death in 1830, Monroe moved to 63 Prince Street at Lafayette Place in New York City to live with his daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur, who had married Samuel L. Gouverneur, son of Nicholas Gouverneur. On July 4, 1831, Monroe died at age 73 from heart failure and tuberculosis, thus becoming the third president to have died on Independence Day. His death came 55 years after the United States Declaration of Independence was proclaimed and five years after the deaths of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. Monroe was originally buried in New York at the Gouverneur family&#x27;s vault in the New York City Marble Cemetery. 27 years later, in 1858, his body was re-interred at the President&#x27;s Circle in Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia. The James Monroe Tomb is a U.S. National Historic Landmark.

==Philosophy and views==

=== Freemasonry ===
Monroe was initiated as a Freemason on November 9, 1775, in Williamsburg Lodge No. 6, Williamsburg, Virginia at the age of 17 while he studied at the College of William &amp; Mary. He was active as a Freemason until at least 1786.

===Religious beliefs===
&quot;When it comes to Monroe&#x27;s thoughts on religion,&quot; historian Bliss Isely notes, &quot;less is known than that of any other President.&quot; No letters survive in which he discussed his religious beliefs. Nor did his friends, family or associates comment on his beliefs. Letters that do survive, such as ones written after the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion.

Monroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia before the Revolution. As an adult, he attended Episcopal churches. Some historians see &quot;deistic tendencies&quot; in his few references to an impersonal God. Unlike Jefferson, Monroe was rarely attacked as an atheist or infidel. In 1832, James Renwick Willson, a Reformed Presbyterian minister in Albany, New York, criticized Monroe for having &quot;lived and died like a second-rate Athenian philosopher&quot;.

===Slavery===
Monroe owned dozens of slaves. He took several slaves with him to Washington to serve at the White House from 1817 to 1825. This was typical of other slaveholding presidents. Monroe sold his small Virginia plantation in 1783 to enter law and politics. Although he owned multiple properties over the course of his lifetime, his plantations were never profitable. Although he owned much more land and many more slaves, and speculated in property, he was rarely on site to oversee the operations. Overseers treated the slaves harshly to force production, but the plantations barely broke even. Monroe incurred debts by his lavish and expensive lifestyle and often sold property (including slaves) to pay them off. The labor of Monroe&#x27;s many slaves were also used to support his daughter and son-in-law, along with a ne&#x27;er-do-well brother, Andrew, and his son, James.

When Monroe was Governor of Virginia in 1800, hundreds of slaves from Virginia planned to kidnap him, take Richmond, and negotiate for their freedom. Gabriel&#x27;s slave conspiracy was discovered. Monroe called out the militia; the slave patrols soon captured some slaves accused of involvement. Sidbury says some trials had a few measures to prevent abuses, such as an appointed attorney, but they were &quot;hardly &#x27;fair&#x27;&quot;. Slave codes prevented slaves from being treated like whites, and they were given quick trials without a jury. Monroe influenced the Executive Council to pardon and sell some slaves instead of hanging them. Historians say the Virginia courts executed between 26 and 35 slaves. None of the executed slaves had killed any whites because the uprising had been foiled before it began. An additional 50 slaves charged for their role in the planned rebellion would be spared, as a result of pardons, acquittals, and commutations. One reason for this was influence of a letter Monroe received from Thomas Jefferson urging mercy, telling him &quot;The other states &amp; the world at large will for ever condemn us if we indulge a principle of revenge, or go one step beyond absolute necessity. They cannot lose sight of the rights of the two parties, &amp; the object of the unsuccessful one.&quot; Only seven of the executions carried out against the rebels occurred after Monroe received Jefferson&#x27;s letter.

During the course of his presidency, Monroe remained convinced that slavery was wrong and supported private manumission, but at the same time he insisted that any attempt to promote emancipation would cause more problems. Monroe believed that slavery had become a permanent part of southern life, and that it could only be removed on providential terms. Like so many other Upper South slaveholders, Monroe believed that a central purpose of government was to ensure &quot;domestic tranquility&quot; for all. Like so many other Upper South planters, he also believed that the central purpose of government was to empower planters like himself. He feared for public safety in the United States during the era of violent revolution on two fronts. First, from potential class warfare of the French Revolution in which those of the propertied classes were summarily purged in mob violence and then preemptive trials, and second, from possible racial warfare similar to that of the Haitian Revolution in which blacks, whites, then mixed-race inhabitants were indiscriminately slaughtered as events there unfolded.

As president of Virginia&#x27;s constitutional convention in the fall of 1829, Monroe reiterated his belief that slavery was a blight which, even as a British colony, Virginia had attempted to eradicate. &quot;What was the origin of our slave population?&quot; he rhetorically asked. &quot;The evil commenced when we were in our Colonial state, but acts were passed by our Colonial Legislature, prohibiting the importation, of more slaves, into the Colony. These were rejected by the Crown.&quot; To the dismay of states&#x27; rights proponents, he was willing to accept the federal government&#x27;s financial assistance to emancipate and transport freed slaves to other countries. At the convention, Monroe made his final public statement on slavery, proposing that Virginia emancipate and deport its bondsmen with &quot;the aid of the Union&quot;.

Monroe was active in the American Colonization Society, which supported the establishment of colonies outside of the United States for free African Americans. The society helped send several thousand freed slaves to the new colony of Liberia in Africa from 1820 to 1840. Slave owners like Monroe and Andrew Jackson wanted to prevent free blacks from encouraging slaves in the South to rebel. Liberia&#x27;s capital, Monrovia, was named after President Monroe.

==Legacy==
===Historical reputation===
Polls of historians and political scientists tend to rank Monroe as an above average president. Monroe presided over a period in which the United States began to turn away from European affairs and towards domestic issues. His presidency saw the United States settle many of its longstanding boundary issues through an accommodation with Britain and the acquisition of Florida. Monroe also helped resolve sectional tensions through his support of the Missouri Compromise and by seeking support from all regions of the country. Political scientist Fred Greenstein argues that Monroe was a more effective executive than some of his better-known predecessors, including Madison and John Adams.

===Memorials===
The capital of Liberia is named Monrovia after Monroe; it is the only national capital other than Washington, D.C., named after a U.S. president. Monroe is the namesake of seventeen Monroe counties. Monroe, Maine, Monroe, Michigan, Monroe, Georgia, Monroe, Connecticut, both Monroe Townships in New Jersey, and Fort Monroe are all named for him. Monroe has been depicted on U.S. currency and stamps, including a 1954 United States Postal Service 5¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp. 

Monroe was the last U.S. president to wear a powdered wig tied in a queue, a tricorne hat and knee-breeches according to the style of the late 18th century. That earned him the nickname &quot;The Last Cocked Hat&quot;. He was also the last president who was not photographed. His participation in George Washington&#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River and the Battle of Trenton was memorialized in Emanuel Leutze&#x27;s 1851 painting &quot;Washington Crossing the Delaware&quot; as well as John Trumbull&#x27;s painting &quot;The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Secondary sources===

* 706 pp. standard scholarly biography
* Ammon, Harry. &quot;James Monroe&quot; in Henry F. Graff ed., &quot;The Presidents: A Reference History&quot; (3rd ed. 2002) online
* Cresson, William P. &quot;James Monroe&quot; (1946). 577 pp. good scholarly biography
* . 246 pp. standard scholarly survey
* 
* superficial, short, popular biography
* Haworth, Peter Daniel. &quot;James Madison and James Monroe Historiography: A Tale of Two Divergent Bodies of Scholarship.&quot; in &quot;A Companion to James Madison and James Monroe&quot; (2013): 521–539.
* Pulitzer Prize; a sweeping interpretation of the era
* Holmes, David L. &quot;The Faiths of the Founding Fathers&quot;, May 2006, online version 
* Leibiger, Stuart, ed. &quot;A Companion to James Madison and James Monroe&quot; (2012) excerpt; emphasis on historiography
* May, Ernest R. &quot;The Making of the Monroe Doctrine&quot; (1975).
* Perkins, Dexter. &quot;The Monroe Doctrine, 1823–1826&quot; (1927).
* Poston, Brook. &quot;James Monroe: A Republican Champion.&quot; Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2019.
* Renehan Edward J., Jr. &quot;The Monroe Doctrine: The Cornerstone of American Foreign Policy&quot; (2007)
* Scherr, Arthur. &quot;James Monroe and John Adams: An Unlikely &#x27;Friendship&#x27;&quot;. &quot;The Historian&quot; 67#3 (2005) pp 405+. online edition 
* Scherr, Arthur. &quot;James Monroe on the Presidency and &#x27;Foreign Influence: from the Virginia Ratifying Convention (1788) to Jefferson&#x27;s Election (1801).&quot; &quot;Mid-America&quot; 2002 84(1–3): 145–206. .
* Scherr, Arthur. &quot;Governor James Monroe and the Southampton Slave Resistance of 1799.&quot; &quot;Historian&quot; 1999 61(3): 557–578. Fulltext online in SwetsWise and Ebsco.
* , scholarly biography.
* 
* Wood, Gordon S. &quot;Empire of Liberty: A history of the Early Republic, 1789–1815&quot; (2009)
===Primary sources===
* Preston, Daniel, ed. &quot;The Papers of James Monroe: Selected Correspondence and Papers&quot; (6 vol, 2006 to 2017), the major scholarly edition; in progress, with coverage to 1814.
* &quot;Writings of James Monroe,&quot; edited by Stanislaus Murray Hamilton, ed., 7 vols. (1898–1903) online edition at Internet Archive

==External links==
* James Monroe: A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress
* American President: James Monroe (1758–1831) at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia
* A Guide to the Papers of James Monroe 1778–1831 at the University of Virginia Library
* Monroe Doctrine; December 2, 1823 at the Avalon Project
* Elections for candidate James Monroe from &quot;A New Nation Votes&quot; at Tufts University
* Ash Lawn-Highland, home of President James Monroe
* The James Monroe Memorial Foundation
** The James Monroe Birthplace
* James Monroe Museum and Memorial Library
* &quot;Life Portrait of James Monroe&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, April 12, 1999
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="0" end="12" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="61" end="76" title="Founding Father of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="101" end="131" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934683" start="242" end="258" title="Virginia dynasty" label="Virginia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="283" end="310" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824567" start="316" end="330" title="Presidency of James Monroe" label="his presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384794" start="350" end="370" title="Era of Good Feelings" label="Era of Good Feelings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="387" end="405" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="446" end="461" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="562" end="570" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="588" end="608" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="726" end="752" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="771" end="787" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="814" end="830" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537250" start="878" end="886" title="List of delegates to the Continental Congress" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="894" end="914" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="944" end="973" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="Virginia Ratifying Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1010" end="1036" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="1074" end="1080" title="1st United States Congress" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1191" end="1208" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="1216" end="1236" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to France" label="ambassador to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="1304" end="1324" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698106" start="1390" end="1416" title="1800 United States presidential election" label="1800 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="1492" end="1510" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="1609" end="1622" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997882" start="1650" end="1671" title="Monroe–Pinkney Treaty" label="Monroe–Pinkney Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q698185" start="1794" end="1820" title="1808 United States presidential election" label="1808 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1928" end="1939" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="2134" end="2144" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q456794" start="2155" end="2165" title="Rufus King" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q564395" start="2173" end="2199" title="1816 United States presidential election" label="1816 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="2248" end="2264" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q575757" start="2356" end="2360" title="1820 United States presidential election" label="1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="2390" end="2409" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="2568" end="2585" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="2701" end="2718" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="2805" end="2814" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="2913" end="2943" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="recently independent countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="3065" end="3094" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="3159" end="3166" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="3185" end="3193" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="3378" end="3388" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="3426" end="3458" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="anniversary of U.S. independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="3476" end="3492" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="generally ranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="3646" end="3665" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="3673" end="3691" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712874" start="3826" end="3847" title="Monroe Hall, Virginia" label="Monroe Hall, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229265" start="3853" end="3882" title="James Monroe Family Home Site" label="James Monroe Family Home Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3901" end="3937" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="4139" end="4148" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613700" start="4241" end="4259" title="King George County, Virginia" label="King George County"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="4347" end="4355" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="4385" end="4393" title="Royalist" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4414" end="4423" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4431" end="4448" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172680" start="4500" end="4510" title="Clan Munro" label="Clan Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="4577" end="4606" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="4654" end="4669" title="French Huguenot" label="French Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="4967" end="4996" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="5167" end="5201" title="Chief Justice of the Supreme Court" label="Chief Justice of the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="5202" end="5215" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707352" start="5575" end="5587" title="Joseph Jones (Virginia)" label="Joseph Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="5704" end="5731" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="5769" end="5791" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="5817" end="5844" title="College of William and Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="5920" end="5936" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="5938" end="5951" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5957" end="5974" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="6002" end="6021" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="6072" end="6089" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="6115" end="6131" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="6202" end="6218" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="6254" end="6286" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112521" start="6302" end="6310" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="6389" end="6415" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="6553" end="6563" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q378819" start="6727" end="6749" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636998" start="7361" end="7382" title="3rd Virginia Regiment" label="3rd Virginia Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="7390" end="7406" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546121" start="7617" end="7630" title="George Weedon" label="George Weedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581011" start="7649" end="7667" title="William Washington" label="William Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630469" start="7765" end="7797" title="New York and New Jersey campaign" label="New York and New Jersey campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="7851" end="7908" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="Continental Army&amp;#x27;s retreat across the Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="8028" end="8046" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessian encampment"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="8054" end="8071" title="Battle of Trenton" label="Battle of Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019918" start="8551" end="8583" title="William Alexander, Lord Stirling" label="William Alexander, Lord Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q301487" start="8616" end="8636" title="Battle of Brandywine" label="Battle of Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="8676" end="8696" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444930" start="8842" end="8863" title="Philadelphia campaign" label="Philadelphia campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="8917" end="8929" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638488" start="9073" end="9091" title="Battle of Monmouth" label="Battle of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037058" start="9211" end="9228" title="Capture of Savannah" label="captured Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="9426" end="9444" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q183144" start="9935" end="9944" title="Epictetus" label="Epictetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="10055" end="10072" title="Southern United States" label="Southern colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="10138" end="10146" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q75363" start="10357" end="10372" title="Johann de Kalb" label="Johann von Kalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931434" start="10424" end="10448" title="Raid on Richmond" label="British invaded Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055814" start="10855" end="10872" title="Yorktown campaign" label="Yorktown campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="10929" end="10946" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Siege of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="10957" end="10971" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="11077" end="11094" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632484" start="11241" end="11266" title="Society of the Cincinnati" label="Society of the Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="11674" end="11701" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="11784" end="11813" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12088" end="12101" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="12507" end="12526" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="12554" end="12573" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="12669" end="12679" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="12799" end="12816" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="12969" end="12982" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q233628" start="13056" end="13075" title="Elizabeth Monroe" label="Elizabeth Kortright"/>
<link wikidata="Q866896" start="13141" end="13155" title="Trinity Church (Manhattan)" label="Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q21009915" start="13208" end="13213" title="Eliza Monroe Hay" label="Eliza"/>
<link wikidata="Q21009917" start="13241" end="13246" title="Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="13367" end="13383" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="13412" end="13433" title="Long Island, New York" label="Long Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="13619" end="13643" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="13903" end="13926" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Philadelphia Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="13997" end="14026" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="Virginia Ratifying Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="14226" end="14242" title="anti-federalists" label="anti-federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048125" start="14463" end="14479" title="Edmund Pendleton" label="Edmund Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="14562" end="14576" title="bill of rights" label="bill of rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="15037" end="15054" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="15400" end="15426" title="1st United States Congress" label="1st United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838875" start="15534" end="15538" title="gerrymandering in the United States" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q505410" start="15541" end="15563" title="congressional district" label="congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q102449690" start="15717" end="15764" title="1789 Virginia&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district election" label="the election for Virginia&amp;#x27;s Fifth District"/>
<link wikidata="Q488653" start="15919" end="15935" title="Albemarle County, Virginia" label="Albemarle County"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="15946" end="15961" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q199618" start="16005" end="16015" title="Monticello" label="Monticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804414" start="16056" end="16064" title="Highland (James Monroe house)" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="16085" end="16092" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q471060" start="16093" end="16108" title="William Grayson" label="William Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="16534" end="16565" title="presidency of George Washington" label="presidency of George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q574557" start="16623" end="16648" title="Anti-Administration party" label="Anti-Administration Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="16701" end="16712" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="16882" end="16909" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="17063" end="17073" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q698073" start="17081" end="17085" title="1792 United States presidential election" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="17118" end="17132" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994734" start="17272" end="17286" title="Hamilton–Reynolds affair" label="James Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="18054" end="18075" title="French First Republic" label="First French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="18235" end="18260" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="18432" end="18449" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="18620" end="18651" title="United States Ambassador to France" label="minister (ambassador) to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="18671" end="18691" title="Robert R. Livingston" label="Robert R. Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="18773" end="18781" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="18789" end="18808" title="United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom" label="minister to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="19392" end="19411" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="19469" end="19482" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825325" start="20047" end="20069" title="Adrienne de La Fayette" label="Adrienne de La Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="20147" end="20159" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="20400" end="20410" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="20653" end="20670" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="20708" end="20713" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095499" start="20752" end="20774" title="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty" label="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="20838" end="20849" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q435168" start="20870" end="20887" title="Timothy Pickering" label="Timothy Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="20917" end="20932" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="22853" end="22873" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030216" start="23249" end="23284" title="State of the State address" label="State of the Commonwealth addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="23443" end="23455" title="penitentiary" label="penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393002" start="23575" end="23599" title="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="23603" end="23618" title="slave rebellion" label="slave rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="23873" end="23884" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="24146" end="24155" title="Quasi War" label="Quasi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="24196" end="24212" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q698106" start="24247" end="24251" title="1800 United States presidential election" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="24494" end="24515" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="presidential electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="25093" end="25111" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="25125" end="25148" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="Treaty of San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="25187" end="25196" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425202" start="25278" end="25290" title="West Florida" label="West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="25393" end="25404" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="25440" end="25457" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q708732" start="25651" end="25673" title="François Barbé-Marbois" label="François Barbé-Marbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="25829" end="25847" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q662054" start="26732" end="26748" title="Charles Pinckney (governor)" label="Charles Pinckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q456794" start="27104" end="27114" title="Rufus King" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="27144" end="27171" title="United States Ambassador to Great Britain" label="ambassador to Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="27268" end="27279" title="impressment" label="impressment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773087" start="27781" end="27794" title="Anthony Merry" label="Anthony Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="27863" end="27882" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997882" start="27974" end="27995" title="Monroe–Pinkney Treaty" label="Monroe–Pinkney Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="28208" end="28230" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="American republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="28959" end="28970" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q698185" start="29247" end="29273" title="1808 United States presidential election" label="1808 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705277" start="29688" end="29703" title="Old Republicans" label="Old Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341317" start="29859" end="29883" title="John Randolph of Roanoke" label="John Randolph of Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="30010" end="30026" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q405463" start="30475" end="30502" title="Charles Cotesworth Pinckney" label="Charles Cotesworth Pinckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073558" start="30894" end="30917" title="Oak Hill (James Monroe house)" label="Loudon County, Oak Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q549532" start="31796" end="31808" title="Robert Smith (Cabinet member)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="31879" end="31886" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="32769" end="32779" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="32933" end="32944" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q661668" start="33281" end="33295" title="William Eustis" label="William Eustis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381657" start="33493" end="33507" title="John Armstrong Jr." label="John Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="33663" end="33669" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283729" start="33709" end="33730" title="Raid on Alexandria (Virginia)" label="Potomac River estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="33897" end="33911" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="34174" end="34179" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="34228" end="34245" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="34734" end="34746" title="United States Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="34755" end="34766" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="35157" end="35171" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="35209" end="35220" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="35460" end="35492" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="35632" end="35647" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="35688" end="35710" title="status quo ante bellum" label="status quo ante bellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="35956" end="35977" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="35999" end="36014" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160969" start="36644" end="36675" title="congressional nominating caucus" label="congressional nominating caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q175877" start="36980" end="36999" title="William H. Crawford" label="William H. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q223545" start="37077" end="37095" title="Daniel D. Tompkins" label="Daniel D. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="37776" end="37791" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="37908" end="37924" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="37936" end="37953" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537250" start="37963" end="37971" title="List of delegates to the Continental Congress" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="37979" end="37999" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="38040" end="38055" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38122" end="38143" title="Strauss–Howe generational theory#Republican Generation" label="Republican generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384794" start="38375" end="38395" title="Era of Good Feelings" label="Era of Good Feelings"/>
<link wikidata="Q817746" start="39151" end="39173" title="Benjamin Williams Crowninshield" label="Benjamin Crowninshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q942844" start="39220" end="39232" title="Richard Rush" label="Richard Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="39812" end="39827" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244572" start="39936" end="39948" title="William Wirt (Attorney General)" label="William Wirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q725571" start="41090" end="41107" title="Rush–Bagot Treaty" label="Rush–Bagot Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="41148" end="41159" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="41164" end="41178" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="41229" end="41250" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="41256" end="41270" title="Treaty of 1818" label="Treaty of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="41351" end="41378" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="41384" end="41393" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="41401" end="41416" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="41424" end="41437" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="41503" end="41517" title="Oregon Country" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="41852" end="41866" title="Tsarist Russian Empire" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="41908" end="41925" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="42006" end="42022" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400933" start="42261" end="42290" title="Russo-American Treaty of 1824" label="Russo-American Treaty of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="42390" end="42403" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="42411" end="42426" title="parallel 54°40′ north" label="54°40′ parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="42460" end="42476" title="Alaska Panhandle" label="Alaska Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q461578" start="42719" end="42732" title="Amelia Island" label="Amelia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="43133" end="43147" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="43245" end="43260" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="43265" end="43278" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="43444" end="43453" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="43462" end="43475" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="43560" end="43568" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="44072" end="44086" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="44240" end="44249" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381946" start="44745" end="44757" title="Luis de Onís" label="Luis de Onís"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="45191" end="45208" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827684" start="45222" end="45234" title="the Floridas" label="the Floridas"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="45537" end="45549" title="Sabine River (Texas-Louisiana)" label="Sabine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135260" start="45587" end="45600" title="32nd parallel north" label="32nd parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="45624" end="45633" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420440" start="45660" end="45674" title="100th meridian west" label="100th meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="45693" end="45707" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="45737" end="45743" title="headwaters" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="45763" end="45776" title="42nd parallel north" label="42nd parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="45803" end="45816" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="45897" end="45959" title="Spanish Texas" label="Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California, Colorado, Utah, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="46019" end="46033" title="Oregon Country" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="46092" end="46133" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="South America&amp;#x27;s wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q738144" start="47286" end="47325" title="United Provinces of the Río de la Plata" label="United Provinces of the Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="47684" end="47690" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="47738" end="47747" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="47749" end="47753" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="47755" end="47763" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="47765" end="47770" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="47776" end="47782" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="47805" end="47817" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q238809" start="49005" end="49031" title="Spanish Revolution of 1820" label="Spanish Revolution of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q219731" start="49108" end="49122" title="George Canning" label="George Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="49422" end="49434" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154640" start="50326" end="50339" title="Holy Alliance" label="Holy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="51529" end="51547" title="Missouri Territory" label="Missouri Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="51650" end="51674" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171061" start="51714" end="51734" title="James Tallmadge, Jr." label="James Tallmadge, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7680155" start="51824" end="51843" title="Tallmadge Amendment" label="Tallmadge Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="52217" end="52237" title="conference committee" label="conference committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q343870" start="52789" end="52803" title="John W. Taylor (politician)" label="John W. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="52807" end="52815" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="52855" end="52866" title="slave state" label="slave state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="53054" end="53061" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="53214" end="53219" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="53225" end="53235" title="free state (United States)" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q443081" start="53696" end="53711" title="Jesse B. Thomas" label="Jesse B. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="53715" end="53723" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="53752" end="53771" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952511" start="53785" end="53806" title="parallel 36°30′ north" label="parallel 36°30′ north"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="54254" end="54273" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047872" start="54680" end="54701" title="internal improvements" label="internal improvements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072546" start="55597" end="55612" title="Cumberland Road" label="Cumberland Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308289" start="56032" end="56048" title="Gibbons v. Ogden" label="Gibbons v. Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="56084" end="56099" title="Commerce Clause" label="Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532224" start="56343" end="56361" title="General Survey Act" label="General Survey Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="56631" end="56654" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="56744" end="56748" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="56753" end="56764" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="56892" end="56900" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131100" start="57241" end="57254" title="Panic of 1819" label="Panic of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="57332" end="57344" title="United States Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="57550" end="57565" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="57645" end="57656" title="speculation" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686033" start="58980" end="58994" title="Tariff of 1824" label="Tariff of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="59236" end="59249" title="American West" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="59548" end="59563" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943071" start="60374" end="60391" title="Republican Caucus" label="Republican Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="60664" end="60674" title="George Washington" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q132185" start="60722" end="60736" title="William Plumer" label="William Plumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="60754" end="60771" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553695" start="61285" end="61312" title="17th United States Congress" label="17th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976097" start="61416" end="61427" title="Brown College at Monroe Hill" label="Monroe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="61472" end="61494" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073558" start="61555" end="61563" title="Oak Hill (James Monroe house)" label="Oak Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655294" start="61577" end="61592" title="Aldie, Virginia" label="Aldie, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="61639" end="61659" title="Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="61674" end="61691" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540334" start="62424" end="62441" title="George Hay (Virginia judge)" label="George Hay&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804414" start="63224" end="63243" title="Highland (James Monroe house)" label="Highland Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="63251" end="63283" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="63363" end="63390" title="College of William and Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758333" start="63573" end="63590" title="Board of Visitors" label="Board of Visitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="63661" end="63674" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230819" start="64363" end="64410" title="Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1829–1830" label="Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1829–1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q726427" start="64700" end="64717" title="Philip P. Barbour" label="Philip P. Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592949" start="65037" end="65052" title="Lafayette Place, New York" label="Lafayette Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="65056" end="65069" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411943" start="65144" end="65164" title="Samuel L. Gouverneur" label="Samuel L. Gouverneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q96083609" start="65173" end="65192" title="Nicholas Gouverneur" label="Nicholas Gouverneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="65238" end="65251" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="65256" end="65268" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="65320" end="65336" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="65372" end="65413" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013238" start="65583" end="65612" title="New York City Marble Cemetery" label="New York City Marble Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882648" start="65698" end="65716" title="Hollywood Cemetery (Richmond, Virginia)" label="Hollywood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="65720" end="65738" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139920" start="65744" end="65761" title="James Monroe Tomb" label="James Monroe Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="65772" end="65798" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="65873" end="65882" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="65933" end="65955" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="66548" end="66565" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="66655" end="66664" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570731" start="66875" end="66896" title="Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America" label="Reformed Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="67062" end="67068" title="Slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="68021" end="68029" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393002" start="68064" end="68095" title="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s slave conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682195" start="68356" end="68367" title="Slave codes" label="Slave codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="68946" end="68962" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="70151" end="70168" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="70340" end="70358" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="71250" end="71260" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="emancipate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="71350" end="71379" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="71559" end="71566" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="71741" end="71749" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="71878" end="71882" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="72548" end="72555" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="72565" end="72573" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35094" start="72603" end="72619" title="List of national capitals" label="national capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="72631" end="72647" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1945225" start="72715" end="72730" title="Monroe County (disambiguation)" label="Monroe counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447373" start="72732" end="72745" title="Monroe, Maine" label="Monroe, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q995533" start="72747" end="72763" title="Monroe, Michigan" label="Monroe, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150751" start="72765" end="72780" title="Monroe, Georgia" label="Monroe, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446258" start="72782" end="72801" title="Monroe, Connecticut" label="Monroe, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015487" start="72808" end="72838" title="Monroe Township, New Jersey (disambiguation)" label="Monroe Townships in New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="72844" end="72855" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="72950" end="72978" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541839" start="72982" end="72995" title="Liberty Issue" label="Liberty Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="72996" end="73009" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73058" end="73070" title="wig#19th and 20th centuries" label="powdered wig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73081" end="73086" title="Queue (hairstyle)#Other queues" label="queue"/>
<link wikidata="Q763457" start="73090" end="73102" title="tricorne" label="tricorne hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133790" start="73107" end="73120" title="Culottes" label="knee-breeches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73138" end="73168" title="1775–1795 in Western fashion#Men&amp;#x27;s fashion" label="style of the late 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630669" start="73186" end="73198" title="List of nicknames of presidents of the United States" label="the nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="73310" end="73365" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="73374" end="73391" title="Battle of Trenton" label="Battle of Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q452321" start="73412" end="73426" title="Emanuel Leutze" label="Emanuel Leutze"/>
<link wikidata="Q509806" start="73454" end="73486" title="Washington Crossing the Delaware (1851 painting)" label="Washington Crossing the Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q369263" start="73504" end="73517" title="John Trumbull" label="John Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q28092758" start="73540" end="73597" title="The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776" label="The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="75958" end="75977" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="76032" end="76063" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="76145" end="76175" title="University of Virginia Library" label="University of Virginia Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827597" start="76219" end="76233" title="Avalon Project" label="Avalon Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="76312" end="76328" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="76544" end="76550" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76564" end="76599" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15980" wikidata="Q11891" url="?curid=15980" title="James K. Polk">
<text>James Knox Polk (; November 2, 1795 – June 15, 1849) was the 11th president of the United States, serving from 1845 to 1849. A protégé of Andrew Jackson and a member of the Democratic Party, he was an advocate of Jacksonian democracy and extending the territory of the United States. Polk led the U.S. into the Mexican–American War, and after winning the war he annexed the Republic of Texas, the Oregon Territory, and the Mexican Cession.

After building a successful law practice in Tennessee, Polk was elected to its state legislature in 1823 and then to the United States House of Representatives in 1825, becoming a strong supporter of Jackson. After serving as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, he became Speaker of the House in 1835, the only person to serve both as Speaker and U.S. president. Polk left Congress to run for governor of Tennessee, winning in 1839 but losing in 1841 and 1843. He was a dark-horse candidate in the 1844 presidential election as the Democratic Party nominee; he entered his party&#x27;s convention as a potential nominee for vice president but emerged as a compromise to head the ticket when no presidential candidate could gain the necessary two-thirds majority. In the general election, Polk narrowly defeated Henry Clay of the Whig Party and pledged to serve only one term.

After a negotiation fraught with the risk of war, Polk reached a settlement with Great Britain over the disputed Oregon Country, with the territory for the most part divided along the 49th parallel. He oversaw victory in the Mexican–American War, resulting in Mexico&#x27;s cession of the entire American Southwest. He secured a substantial reduction of tariff rates with the Walker tariff of 1846. The same year, he achieved his other major goal, reestablishment of the Independent Treasury system. True to his campaign pledge to serve one term (one of the few U.S. presidents to make and keep such a pledge), Polk left office in 1849 and returned to Tennessee, where he died of cholera soon afterward.

Though he has become relatively obscure, scholars have ranked Polk in the upper tier of U.S. presidents, mostly for his ability to promote and achieve the major items on his presidential agenda. At the same time, he has been criticized for leading the country into a war with Mexico that exacerbated sectional divides. A property owner who used slave labor, he kept a plantation in Mississippi and increased his slave ownership during his presidency. Polk&#x27;s policy of territorial expansion saw the nation reach the Pacific coast and almost all its contiguous borders. He helped make the U.S. a nation poised to become a world power, but with divisions between free and slave states gravely exacerbated, setting the stage for the Civil War.

== Early life ==
James Knox Polk was born on November 2, 1795, in a log cabin in Pineville, North Carolina. He was the first of 10 children born into a family of farmers. His mother Jane named him after her father, James Knox. His father Samuel Polk was a farmer, slaveholder, and surveyor of Scots-Irish descent. The Polks had immigrated to America in the late 17th century, settling initially on the Eastern Shore of Maryland but later moving to south-central Pennsylvania and then to the Carolina hill country.

The Knox and Polk families were Presbyterian. While Polk&#x27;s mother remained a devout Presbyterian, his father, whose own father Ezekiel Polk was a deist, rejected dogmatic Presbyterianism. He refused to declare his belief in Christianity at his son&#x27;s baptism, and the minister refused to baptize young James. Nevertheless, James&#x27; mother &quot;stamped her rigid orthodoxy on James, instilling lifelong Calvinistic traits of self-discipline, hard work, piety, individualism, and a belief in the imperfection of human nature&quot;, according to James A. Rawley&#x27;s &quot;American National Biography&quot; article.

In 1803, Ezekiel Polk led four of his adult children and their families to the Duck River area in what is now Maury County, Tennessee; Samuel Polk and his family followed in 1806. The Polk clan dominated politics in Maury County and in the new town of Columbia. Samuel became a county judge, and the guests at his home included Andrew Jackson, who had already served as a judge and in Congress. James learned from the political talk around the dinner table; both Samuel and Ezekiel were strong supporters of President Thomas Jefferson and opponents of the Federalist Party.

Polk suffered from frail health as a child, a particular disadvantage in a frontier society. His father took him to see prominent Philadelphia physician Dr. Philip Syng Physick for urinary stones. The journey was broken off by James&#x27;s severe pain, and Dr. Ephraim McDowell of Danville, Kentucky, operated to remove them. No anesthetic was available except brandy. The operation was successful, but it may have left James impotent or sterile, as he had no children. He recovered quickly and became more robust. His father offered to bring him into one of his businesses, but he wanted an education and enrolled at a Presbyterian academy in 1813. He became a member of the Zion Church near his home in 1813 and enrolled in the Zion Church Academy. He then entered Bradley Academy in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, where he proved a promising student.

In January 1816, Polk was admitted into the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill as a second-semester sophomore. The Polk family had connections with the university, then a small school of about 80 students; Samuel was its land agent in Tennessee and his cousin William Polk was a trustee. Polk&#x27;s roommate was William Dunn Moseley, who became the first Governor of Florida. Polk joined the Dialectic Society where he took part in debates, became its president, and learned the art of oratory. In one address, he warned that some American leaders were flirting with monarchical ideals, singling out Alexander Hamilton, a foe of Jefferson. Polk graduated with honors in May 1818.

After graduation, Polk returned to Nashville, Tennessee to study law under renowned trial attorney Felix Grundy, who became his first mentor. On September 20, 1819, he was elected clerk of the Tennessee State Senate, which then sat in Murfreesboro and to which Grundy had been elected. He was re-elected clerk in 1821 without opposition, and continued to serve until 1822. In June 1820, he was admitted to the Tennessee bar, and his first case was to defend his father against a public fighting charge; he secured his release for a one-dollar fine. He opened an office in Maury County and was successful as a lawyer, due largely to the many cases arising from the Panic of 1819, a severe depression. His law practice subsidized his political career.

== Early political career ==

=== Tennessee state legislator ===
By the time the legislature adjourned its session in September 1822, Polk was determined to be a candidate for the Tennessee House of Representatives. The election was in August 1823, almost a year away, allowing him ample time for campaigning. Already involved locally as a member of the Masons, he was commissioned in the Tennessee militia as a captain in the cavalry regiment of the 5th Brigade. He was later appointed a colonel on the staff of Governor William Carroll, and was afterwards often referred to as &quot;Colonel&quot;. Although many of the voters were members of the Polk clan, the young politician campaigned energetically. People liked Polk&#x27;s oratory, which earned him the nickname &quot;Napoleon of the Stump&quot;. At the polls, where Polk provided alcoholic refreshments for his voters, he defeated incumbent William Yancey.

Beginning in early 1822, Polk courted Sarah Childress—they were engaged the following year and married on January 1, 1824, in Murfreesboro. Educated far better than most women of her time, especially in frontier Tennessee, Sarah Polk was from one of the state&#x27;s most prominent families. During James&#x27;s political career Sarah assisted her husband with his speeches, gave him advice on policy matters, and played an active role in his campaigns. Rawley noted that Sarah Polk&#x27;s grace, intelligence and charming conversation helped compensate for her husband&#x27;s often austere manner.

Polk&#x27;s first mentor was Grundy, but in the legislature, Polk came increasingly to oppose him on such matters as land reform, and came to support the policies of Andrew Jackson, by then a military hero for his victory at the Battle of New Orleans (1815). Jackson was a family friend to both the Polks and the Childresses—there is evidence Sarah Polk and her siblings called him &quot;Uncle Andrew&quot;—and James Polk quickly came to support his presidential ambitions for 1824. When the Tennessee Legislature deadlocked on whom to elect as U.S. senator in 1823 (until 1913, legislators, not the people, elected senators), Jackson&#x27;s name was placed in nomination. Polk broke from his usual allies, casting his vote for Jackson, who won. The Senate seat boosted Jackson&#x27;s presidential chances by giving him current political experience to match his military accomplishments. This began an alliance that would continue until Jackson&#x27;s death early in Polk&#x27;s presidency. Polk, through much of his political career, was known as &quot;Young Hickory&quot;, based on the nickname for Jackson, &quot;Old Hickory&quot;. Polk&#x27;s political career was as dependent on Jackson as his nickname implied.

In the 1824 United States presidential election, Jackson got the most electoral votes (he also led in the popular vote) but as he did not receive a majority in the Electoral College, the election was thrown into the U.S. House of Representatives, which chose Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, who had received the second-most of each. Polk, like other Jackson supporters, believed that Speaker of the House Henry Clay had traded his support as fourth-place finisher (the House may only choose from among the top three) to Adams in a Corrupt Bargain in exchange for being the new Secretary of State. Polk had in August 1824 declared his candidacy for the following year&#x27;s election to the House of Representatives from Tennessee&#x27;s 6th congressional district. The district stretched from Maury County south to the Alabama line, and extensive electioneering was expected of the five candidates. Polk campaigned so vigorously that Sarah began to worry about his health. During the campaign, Polk&#x27;s opponents said that at the age of 29 Polk was too young for the responsibility of a seat in the House, but he won the election with 3,669 votes out of 10,440 and took his seat in Congress later that year.

=== Jackson disciple ===
When Polk arrived in Washington, D.C. for Congress&#x27;s regular session in December 1825, he roomed in Benjamin Burch&#x27;s boarding house with other Tennessee representatives, including Sam Houston. Polk made his first major speech on March 13, 1826, in which he said that the Electoral College should be abolished and that the president should be elected by popular vote. Remaining bitter at the alleged Corrupt Bargain between Adams and Clay, Polk became a vocal critic of the Adams administration, frequently voting against its policies. Sarah Polk remained at home in Columbia during her husband&#x27;s first year in Congress, but accompanied him to Washington beginning in December 1826; she assisted him with his correspondence and came to hear James&#x27;s speeches.

Polk won re-election in 1827 and continued to oppose the Adams administration. He remained in close touch with Jackson, and when Jackson ran for president in 1828, Polk was an advisor on his campaign. Following Jackson&#x27;s victory over Adams, Polk became one of the new President&#x27;s most prominent and loyal supporters. Working on Jackson&#x27;s behalf, Polk successfully opposed federally-funded &quot;internal improvements&quot; such as a proposed Buffalo-to-New Orleans road, and he was pleased by Jackson&#x27;s Maysville Road veto in May 1830, when Jackson blocked a bill to finance a road extension entirely within one state, Kentucky, deeming it unconstitutional. Jackson opponents alleged that the veto message, which strongly complained about Congress&#x27; penchant for passing pork barrel projects, was written by Polk, but he denied this, stating that the message was entirely the President&#x27;s.

Polk served as Jackson&#x27;s most prominent House ally in the &quot;Bank War&quot; that developed over Jackson&#x27;s opposition to the re-authorization of the Second Bank of the United States. The Second Bank, headed by Nicholas Biddle of Philadelphia, not only held federal dollars but controlled much of the credit in the United States, as it could present currency issued by local banks for redemption in gold or silver. Some Westerners, including Jackson, opposed the Second Bank, deeming it a monopoly acting in the interest of Easterners. Polk, as a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, conducted investigations of the Second Bank, and though the committee voted for a bill to renew the bank&#x27;s charter (scheduled to expire in 1836), Polk issued a strong minority report condemning the bank. The bill passed Congress in 1832; however, Jackson vetoed it and Congress failed to override the veto. Jackson&#x27;s action was highly controversial in Washington but had considerable public support, and he won easy re-election in 1832.

Like most Southerners, Polk favored low tariffs on imported goods, and initially sympathized with John C. Calhoun&#x27;s opposition to the Tariff of Abominations during the Nullification Crisis of 1832–1833, but came over to Jackson&#x27;s side as Calhoun moved towards advocating secession. Thereafter, Polk remained loyal to Jackson as the President sought to assert federal authority. Polk condemned secession and supported the Force Bill against South Carolina, which had claimed the authority to nullify federal tariffs. The matter was settled by Congress passing a compromise tariff.

=== Ways and Means Chair and Speaker of the House ===

In December 1833, after being elected to a fifth consecutive term, Polk, with Jackson&#x27;s backing, became the chairman of Ways and Means, a powerful position in the House. In that position, Polk supported Jackson&#x27;s withdrawal of federal funds from the Second Bank. Polk&#x27;s committee issued a report questioning the Second Bank&#x27;s finances and another supporting Jackson&#x27;s actions against it. In April 1834, the Ways and Means Committee reported a bill to regulate state deposit banks, which, when passed, enabled Jackson to deposit funds in pet banks, and Polk got legislation passed to allow the sale of the government&#x27;s stock in the Second Bank.

In June 1834, Speaker of the House Andrew Stevenson resigned from Congress to become Minister to the United Kingdom. With Jackson&#x27;s support, Polk ran for speaker against fellow Tennessean John Bell, Calhoun disciple Richard Henry Wilde, and Joel Barlow Sutherland of Pennsylvania. After ten ballots, Bell, who had the support of many opponents of the administration, defeated Polk. Jackson called in political debts to try to get Polk elected Speaker of the House at the start of the next Congress in December 1835, assuring Polk in a letter he meant him to burn that New England would support him for speaker. They were successful; Polk defeated Bell to take the speakership.

According to Thomas M. Leonard, &quot;by 1836, while serving as Speaker of the House of Representatives, Polk approached the zenith of his congressional career. He was at the center of Jacksonian Democracy on the House floor, and, with the help of his wife, he ingratiated himself into Washington&#x27;s social circles.&quot; The prestige of the speakership caused them to move from a boarding house to their own residence on Pennsylvania Avenue. In the 1836 presidential election, Vice President Martin Van Buren, Jackson&#x27;s chosen successor, defeated multiple Whig candidates, including Tennessee Senator Hugh Lawson White. Greater Whig strength in Tennessee helped White carry his state, though Polk&#x27;s home district went for Van Buren. Ninety percent of Tennessee voters had supported Jackson in 1832, but many in the state disliked the destruction of the Second Bank, or were unwilling to support Van Buren.

As Speaker of the House, Polk worked for the policies of Jackson and later Van Buren. Polk appointed committees with Democratic chairs and majorities, including the New York radical C. C. Cambreleng as the new Ways and Means chair, although he tried to maintain the speaker&#x27;s traditional nonpartisan appearance. The two major issues during Polk&#x27;s speakership were slavery and, after the Panic of 1837, the economy. Polk firmly enforced the &quot;gag rule&quot;, by which the House of Representatives would not accept or debate citizen petitions regarding slavery. This ignited fierce protests from John Quincy Adams, who was by then a congressman from Massachusetts and an abolitionist. Instead of finding a way to silence Adams, Polk frequently engaged in useless shouting matches, leading Jackson to conclude that Polk should have shown better leadership. Van Buren and Polk faced pressure to rescind the Specie Circular, Jackson&#x27;s 1836 order that payment for government lands be in gold and silver. Some believed this had led to the crash by causing a lack of confidence in paper currency issued by banks. Despite such arguments, with support from Polk and his cabinet, Van Buren chose to back the Specie Circular. Polk and Van Buren attempted to establish an Independent Treasury system that would allow the government to oversee its own deposits (rather than using pet banks), but the bill was defeated in the House. It eventually passed in 1840.

Using his thorough grasp of the House&#x27;s rules, Polk attempted to bring greater order to its proceedings. Unlike many of his peers, he never challenged anyone to a duel no matter how much they insulted his honor. The economic downturn cost the Democrats seats, so that when he faced re-election as Speaker of the House in December 1837, he won by only 13 votes, and he foresaw defeat in 1839. Polk by then had presidential ambitions but was well aware that no Speaker of the House had ever become president (Polk is still the only one to have held both offices). After seven terms in the House, two as speaker, he announced that he would not seek re-election, choosing instead to run for Governor of Tennessee in the 1839 election.

=== Governor of Tennessee ===

In 1835, the Democrats had lost the governorship of Tennessee for the first time in their history, and Polk decided to return home to help the party. Tennessee was afire for White and Whiggism; the state had reversed its political loyalties since the days of Jacksonian domination. As head of the state Democratic Party, Polk undertook his first statewide campaign, He opposed Whig incumbent Newton Cannon, who sought a third two-year term as governor. The fact that Polk was the one called upon to &quot;redeem&quot; Tennessee from the Whigs tacitly acknowledged him as head of the state Democratic Party.

Polk campaigned on national issues, whereas Cannon stressed state issues. After being bested by Polk in the early debates, the governor retreated to Nashville, the state capital, alleging important official business. Polk made speeches across the state, seeking to become known more widely than just in his native Middle Tennessee. When Cannon came back on the campaign trail in the final days, Polk pursued him, hastening the length of the state to be able to debate the governor again. On Election Day, August 1, 1839, Polk defeated Cannon, 54,102 to 51,396, as the Democrats recaptured the state legislature and won back three congressional seats.

Tennessee&#x27;s governor had limited power—there was no gubernatorial veto, and the small size of the state government limited any political patronage. But Polk saw the office as a springboard for his national ambitions, seeking to be nominated as Van Buren&#x27;s vice presidential running mate at the 1840 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore in May. Polk hoped to be the replacement if Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson was dumped from the ticket; Johnson was disliked by many Southern whites for fathering two daughters by a biracial mistress and attempting to introduce them into white society. Johnson was from Kentucky, so Polk&#x27;s Tennessee residence would keep the New Yorker Van Buren&#x27;s ticket balanced. The convention chose to endorse no one for vice president, stating that a choice would be made once the popular vote was cast. Three weeks after the convention, recognizing that Johnson was too popular in the party to be ousted, Polk withdrew his name. The Whig presidential candidate, General William Henry Harrison, conducted a rollicking campaign with the motto &quot;Tippecanoe and Tyler Too&quot;, easily winning both the national vote and that in Tennessee. Polk campaigned in vain for Van Buren and was embarrassed by the outcome; Jackson, who had returned to his home, the Hermitage, near Nashville, was horrified at the prospect of a Whig administration. In the 1840 election, Polk received one vote from a faithless elector in the Electoral College&#x27;s vote for vice president. Harrison&#x27;s death after a month in office in 1841 left the presidency to Vice President John Tyler, who soon broke with the Whigs.

Polk&#x27;s three major programs during his governorship; regulating state banks, implementing state internal improvements, and improving education all failed to win the approval of the legislature. His only major success as governor was his politicking to secure the replacement of Tennessee&#x27;s two Whig U.S. senators with Democrats. Polk&#x27;s tenure was hindered by the continuing nationwide economic crisis that had followed the Panic of 1837 and which had caused Van Buren to lose the 1840 election.

Encouraged by the success of Harrison&#x27;s campaign, the Whigs ran a freshman legislator from frontier Wilson County, James C. Jones against Polk in 1841. &quot;Lean Jimmy&quot; had proven one of their most effective gadflies against Polk, and his lighthearted tone at campaign debates was very effective against the serious Polk. The two debated the length of Tennessee, and Jones&#x27;s support of distribution to the states of surplus federal revenues, and of a national bank, struck a chord with Tennessee voters. On election day in August 1841, Polk was defeated by 3,000 votes, the first time he had been beaten at the polls. Polk returned to Columbia and the practice of law and prepared for a rematch against Jones in 1843, but though the new governor took less of a joking tone, it made little difference to the outcome, as Polk was beaten again, this time by 3,833 votes. In the wake of his second statewide defeat in three years, Polk faced an uncertain political future.

== Election of 1844 ==
=== Democratic nomination ===
Despite his loss, Polk was determined to become the next vice president of the United States, seeing it as a path to the presidency. Van Buren was the frontrunner for the 1844 Democratic nomination, and Polk engaged in a careful campaign to become his running mate. The former president faced opposition from Southerners who feared his views on slavery, while his handling of the Panic of 1837—he had refused to rescind the Specie Circular—aroused opposition from some in the West (modern Midwestern United States) who believed his hard money policies had hurt their section of the country. Many Southerners backed Calhoun&#x27;s candidacy, Westerners rallied around Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, and former Vice President Johnson also maintained a strong following among Democrats. Jackson assured Van Buren by letter that Polk in his campaigns for governor had &quot;fought the battle well and fought it alone&quot;. Polk hoped to gain Van Buren&#x27;s support, hinting in a letter that a Van Buren/Polk ticket could carry Tennessee, but found him unconvinced.

The biggest political issue in the United States at that time was territorial expansion. The Republic of Texas had successfully revolted against Mexico in 1836. With the republic largely populated by American emigres, those on both sides of the Sabine River border between the U.S. and Texas deemed it inevitable that Texas would join the United States, but this would anger Mexico, which considered Texas a breakaway province, and threatened war if the United States annexed it. Jackson, as president, had recognized Texas independence, but the initial momentum toward annexation had stalled. Britain was seeking to expand her influence in Texas: Britain had abolished slavery, and if Texas did the same, it would provide a western haven for runaways to match one in the North. A Texas not in the United States would also stand in the way of what was deemed America&#x27;s Manifest Destiny to overspread the continent.

Clay was nominated for president by acclamation at the April 1844 Whig National Convention, with New Jersey&#x27;s Theodore Frelinghuysen his running mate. A Kentucky slaveholder at a time when opponents of Texas annexation argued that it would give slavery more room to spread, Clay sought a nuanced position on the issue. Jackson, who strongly supported a Van Buren/Polk ticket, was delighted when Clay issued a letter for publication in the newspapers opposing Texas annexation, only to be devastated when he learned Van Buren had done the same thing. Van Buren did this because he feared losing his base of support in the Northeast, but his supporters in the old Southwest were stunned at his action. Polk, on the other hand, had written a pro-annexation letter that had been published four days before Van Buren&#x27;s. Jackson wrote sadly to Van Buren that no candidate who opposed annexation could be elected, and decided Polk was the best person to head the ticket. Jackson met with Polk at the Hermitage on May 13, 1844, and explained to his visitor that only an expansionist from the South or Southwest could be elected—and, in his view, Polk had the best chance. Polk was at first startled, calling the plan &quot;utterly abortive&quot;, but he agreed to accept it. Polk immediately wrote to instruct his lieutenants at the convention to work for his nomination as president.

Despite Jackson&#x27;s quiet efforts on his behalf, Polk was skeptical that he could win. Nevertheless, because of the opposition to Van Buren by expansionists in the West and South, Polk&#x27;s key lieutenant at the 1844 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore, Gideon Johnson Pillow, believed Polk could emerge as a compromise candidate. Publicly, Polk, who remained in Columbia during the convention, professed full support for Van Buren&#x27;s candidacy and was believed to be seeking the vice presidency. Polk was one of the few major Democrats to have declared for the annexation of Texas.

The convention opened on May 27, 1844. A crucial question was whether the nominee needed two-thirds of the delegate vote, as had been the case at previous Democratic conventions, or merely a majority. A vote for two-thirds would doom Van Buren&#x27;s candidacy due to opposition from southern delegates. With the support of the Southern states, the two-thirds rule was passed. Van Buren won a majority on the first presidential ballot but failed to win the necessary two-thirds, and his support slowly faded. Cass, Johnson, Calhoun and James Buchanan also received votes on the first ballot, and Cass took the lead on the fifth. After seven ballots, the convention remained deadlocked: Cass could not reach two-thirds, and Van Buren&#x27;s supporters became discouraged about his chances. Delegates were ready to consider a new candidate who might break the stalemate.

When the convention adjourned after the seventh ballot, Pillow, who had been waiting for an opportunity to press Polk&#x27;s name, conferred with George Bancroft of Massachusetts, a politician and historian and longtime Polk correspondent, who had planned to nominate Polk for vice president. Bancroft had supported Van Buren&#x27;s candidacy and was willing to see New York Senator Silas Wright head the ticket, but as a Van Buren loyalist, Wright would not consent. Pillow and Bancroft decided if Polk were nominated for president, Wright might accept the second spot. Before the eighth ballot, former Attorney General Benjamin F. Butler, head of the New York delegation, read a pre-written letter from Van Buren to be used if he could not be nominated, withdrawing in Wright&#x27;s favor. But Wright (who was in Washington) had also entrusted a pre-written letter to a supporter, in which he refused to be considered as a presidential candidate, and stated in the letter that he agreed with Van Buren&#x27;s position on Texas. Had Wright&#x27;s letter not been read he most likely would have been nominated, but without him, Butler began to rally Van Buren supporters for Polk as the best possible candidate, and Bancroft placed Polk&#x27;s name before the convention. On the eighth ballot, Polk received only 44 votes to Cass&#x27;s 114 and Van Buren&#x27;s 104, but the deadlock showed signs of breaking. Butler formally withdrew Van Buren&#x27;s name, many delegations declared for the Tennessean, and on the ninth ballot, Polk received 233 ballots to Cass&#x27;s 29, making him the Democratic nominee for president. The nomination was then made unanimous.

The convention then considered the vice-presidential nomination. Butler advocated for Wright, and the convention agreed, with only four Georgia delegates dissenting. Word of Wright&#x27;s nomination was sent to him in Washington via telegraph. Having declined by proxy an almost certain presidential nomination, Wright also refused the vice-presidential nomination. Senator Robert J. Walker of Mississippi, a close Polk ally, then suggested former senator George M. Dallas of Pennsylvania. Dallas was acceptable enough to all factions and gained the nomination on the third ballot. The delegates passed a platform and adjourned on May 30.

Many contemporary politicians, including Pillow and Bancroft, later claimed credit for getting Polk the nomination, but Walter R. Borneman felt that most of the credit was due to Jackson and Polk, &quot;the two who had done the most were back in Tennessee, one an aging icon ensconced at the Hermitage and the other a shrewd lifelong politician waiting expectantly in Columbia&quot;. Whigs mocked Polk with the chant &quot;Who is James K. Polk?&quot;, affecting never to have heard of him. Though he had experience as Speaker of the House and Governor of Tennessee, all previous presidents had served as vice president, Secretary of State, or as a high-ranking general. Polk has been described as the first &quot;dark horse&quot; presidential nominee, although his nomination was less of a surprise than that of future nominees such as Franklin Pierce or Warren G. Harding. Despite his party&#x27;s gibes, Clay recognized that Polk could unite the Democrats.

=== General election ===
Rumors of Polk&#x27;s nomination reached Nashville on June 4, much to Jackson&#x27;s delight; they were substantiated later that day. The dispatches were sent on to Columbia, arriving the same day, and letters and newspapers describing what had happened at Baltimore were in Polk&#x27;s hands by June 6. He accepted his nomination by letter dated June 12, alleging that he had never sought the office, and stating his intent to serve only one term. Wright was embittered by what he called the &quot;foul plot&quot; against Van Buren, and demanded assurances that Polk had played no part; it was only after Polk professed that he had remained loyal to Van Buren that Wright supported his campaign. Following the custom of the time that presidential candidates avoid electioneering or appearing to seek the office, Polk remained in Columbia and made no speeches. He engaged in extensive correspondence with Democratic Party officials as he managed his campaign. Polk made his views known in his acceptance letter and through responses to questions sent by citizens that were printed in newspapers, often by arrangement.

A potential pitfall for Polk&#x27;s campaign was the issue of whether the tariff should be for revenue only, or with the intent to protect American industry. Polk finessed the tariff issue in a published letter. Recalling that he had long stated that tariffs should only be sufficient to finance government operations, he maintained that stance but wrote that within that limitation, government could and should offer &quot;fair and just protection&quot; to American interests, including manufacturers. He refused to expand on this stance, acceptable to most Democrats, despite the Whigs pointing out that he had committed himself to nothing. In September, a delegation of Whigs from nearby Giles County came to Columbia, armed with specific questions on Polk&#x27;s views regarding the current tariff, the Whig-passed Tariff of 1842, and with the stated intent of remaining in Columbia until they got answers. Polk took several days to respond and chose to stand by his earlier statement, provoking an outcry in the Whig papers.

Another concern was the third-party candidacy of President Tyler, which might split the Democratic vote. Tyler had been nominated by a group of loyal officeholders. Under no illusions he could win, he believed he could rally states&#x27; rights supporters and populists to hold the balance of power in the election. Only Jackson had the stature to resolve the situation, which he did with two letters to friends in the Cabinet, that he knew would be shown to Tyler, stating that the President&#x27;s supporters would be welcomed back into the Democratic fold. Jackson wrote that once Tyler withdrew, many Democrats would embrace him for his pro-annexation stance. The former president also used his influence to stop Francis Preston Blair and his &quot;Globe&quot; newspaper, the semi-official organ of the Democratic Party, from attacking Tyler. These proved enough; Tyler withdrew from the race in August.

Party troubles were a third concern. Polk and Calhoun made peace when a former South Carolina congressman, Francis Pickens visited Tennessee and came to Columbia for two days and to the Hermitage for sessions with the increasingly ill Jackson. Calhoun wanted the &quot;Globe&quot; dissolved, and that Polk would act against the 1842 tariff and promote Texas annexation. Reassured on these points, Calhoun became a strong supporter.

Polk was aided regarding Texas when Clay, realizing his anti-annexation letter had cost him support, attempted in two subsequent letters to clarify his position. These angered both sides, which attacked Clay as insincere. Texas also threatened to divide the Democrats sectionally, but Polk managed to appease most Southern party leaders without antagonizing Northern ones. As the election drew closer, it became clear that most of the country favored the annexation of Texas, and some Southern Whig leaders supported Polk&#x27;s campaign due to Clay&#x27;s anti-annexation stance.

The campaign was vitriolic; both major party candidates were accused of various acts of malfeasance; Polk was accused of being both a duelist and a coward. The most damaging smear was the Roorback forgery; in late August an item appeared in an abolitionist newspaper, part of a book detailing fictional travels through the South of a Baron von Roorback, an imaginary German nobleman. The Ithaca &quot;Chronicle&quot; printed it without labeling it as fiction, and inserted a sentence alleging that the traveler had seen forty slaves who had been sold by Polk after being branded with his initials. The item was withdrawn by the &quot;Chronicle&quot; when challenged by the Democrats, but it was widely reprinted. Borneman suggested that the forgery backfired on Polk&#x27;s opponents as it served to remind voters that Clay too was a slaveholder. John Eisenhower, in his journal article on the election, stated that the smear came too late to be effectively rebutted, and likely cost Polk Ohio. Southern newspapers, on the other hand, went far in defending Polk, one Nashville newspaper alleging that his slaves preferred their bondage to freedom. Polk himself implied to newspaper correspondents that the only slaves he owned had either been inherited or had been purchased from relatives in financial distress; this paternalistic image was also painted by surrogates like Gideon Pillow. This was not true, though not known at the time; by then he had bought over thirty slaves, both from relatives and others, mainly for the purpose of procuring labor for his Mississippi cotton plantation.

There was no uniform election day in 1844; states voted between November 1 and 12. Polk won the election with 49.5% of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes. Becoming the first president elected despite losing his state of residence (Tennessee), Polk also lost his birth state, North Carolina. However, he won Pennsylvania and New York, where Clay lost votes to the antislavery Liberty Party candidate James G. Birney, who got more votes in New York than Polk&#x27;s margin of victory. Had Clay won New York, he would have been elected president.

== Presidency (1845–1849) ==

With a slender victory in the popular vote, but with a greater victory in the Electoral College (170–105), Polk proceeded to implement his campaign promises. He presided over a country whose population had doubled every twenty years since the American Revolution and which had reached demographic parity with Great Britain. During Polk&#x27;s tenure, technological advancements persisted, including the continued expansion of railroads and increased use of the telegraph. These improvements in communication encouraged a zest for expansionism. However, sectional divisions became worse during his tenure.

Polk set four clearly defined goals for his administration:
* Reestablish the Independent Treasury Systemthe Whigs had abolished the one created under Van Buren.
* Reduce tariffs.
* Acquire some or all of the Oregon Country.
* Acquire California and its harbors from Mexico.

While his domestic aims represented continuity with past Democratic policies, successful completion of Polk&#x27;s foreign policy goals would represent the first major American territorial gains since the Adams–Onís Treaty of 1819.

=== Transition, inauguration and appointments ===
Polk formed a geographically balanced Cabinet. He consulted Jackson and one or two other close allies, and decided that the large states of New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia should have representation in the six-member Cabinet, as should his home state of Tennessee. At a time when an incoming president might retain some or all of his predecessor&#x27;s department heads, Polk wanted an entirely fresh Cabinet, but this proved delicate. Tyler&#x27;s final Secretary of State was Calhoun, leader of a considerable faction of the Democratic Party, but, when approached by emissaries, he did not take offense and was willing to step down.

Polk did not want his Cabinet to contain presidential hopefuls, though he chose to nominate James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, whose ambition for the presidency was well-known, as Secretary of State. Tennessee&#x27;s Cave Johnson, a close friend and ally of Polk, was nominated for the position of Postmaster General, with George Bancroft, the historian who had played a crucial role in Polk&#x27;s nomination, as Navy Secretary. Polk&#x27;s choices met with the approval of Andrew Jackson, with whom Polk met for the last time in January 1845, as Jackson died that June.

Tyler&#x27;s last Navy Secretary, John Y. Mason of Virginia, Polk&#x27;s friend since college days and a longtime political ally, was not on the original list. As Cabinet choices were affected by factional politics and President Tyler&#x27;s drive to resolve the Texas issue before leaving office, Polk at the last minute chose Mason as Attorney General. Polk also chose Mississippi Senator Walker as Secretary of the Treasury and New York&#x27;s William Marcy as Secretary of War. The members worked well together, and few replacements were necessary. One reshuffle was required in 1846 when Bancroft, who wanted a diplomatic posting, became U.S. minister to Britain.

In his last days in office, President Tyler sought to complete the annexation of Texas. After the Senate had defeated an earlier treaty that required a two-thirds majority, Tyler urged Congress to pass a joint resolution, relying on its constitutional power to admit states. There were disagreements about the terms under which Texas would be admitted and Polk became involved in negotiations to break the impasse. With Polk&#x27;s help, the annexation resolution narrowly cleared the Senate. Tyler was unsure whether to sign the resolution or leave it for Polk and sent Calhoun to consult with Polk, who declined to give any advice. On his final evening in office, March 3, 1845, Tyler offered annexation to Texas according to the terms of the resolution.


Even before his inauguration, Polk wrote to Cave Johnson, &quot;I intend to be President of the U.S.&quot; He would gain a reputation as a hard worker, spending ten to twelve hours at his desk, and rarely leaving Washington. Polk wrote, &quot;No President who performs his duty faithfully and conscientiously can have any leisure. I prefer to supervise the whole operations of the government myself rather than intrust the public business to subordinates, and this makes my duties very great.&quot; When he took office on March 4, 1845, Polk, at 49, became the youngest president to that point. Polk&#x27;s inauguration was the first inaugural ceremony to be reported by telegraph, and first to be shown in a newspaper illustration (in &quot;The Illustrated London News&quot;).

In his inaugural address, delivered in a steady rain, Polk made clear his support for Texas annexation by referring to the 28 states of the U.S., thus including Texas. He proclaimed his fidelity to Jackson&#x27;s principles by quoting his famous toast, &quot;Every lover of his country must shudder at the thought of the possibility of its dissolution and will be ready to adopt the patriotic sentiment, &#x27;Our Federal Union—it must be preserved.&#x27;&quot; He stated his opposition to a national bank, and repeated that the tariff could include incidental protection. Although he did not mention slavery specifically, he alluded to it, decrying those who would tear down an institution protected by the Constitution.

Polk devoted the second half of his speech to foreign affairs, and specifically to expansion. He applauded the annexation of Texas, warning that Texas was no affair of any other nation, and certainly none of Mexico&#x27;s. He spoke of the Oregon Country, and of the many who were migrating, pledging to safeguard America&#x27;s rights there and to protect the settlers.

As well as appointing Cabinet officers to advise him, Polk made his sister&#x27;s son, J. Knox Walker, his personal secretary, an especially important position because, other than his slaves, Polk had no staff at the White House. Walker, who lived at the White House with his growing family (two children were born to him while living there), performed his duties competently through his uncle&#x27;s presidency. Other Polk relatives visited at the White House, some for extended periods.

=== Foreign policy ===

==== Partition of Oregon Country ====
Britain and the U.S. each derived claims to the Oregon Country from the voyages of explorers. Russia and Spain had waived their weak claims. Claims of the indigenous peoples of the region to their traditional lands were not a factor.

Rather than war over the distant and unsettled territory, Washington and London negotiated amicably. Previous U.S. administrations had offered to divide the region along the 49th parallel, which was not acceptable to Britain, as it had commercial interests along the Columbia River. Britain&#x27;s preferred partition was unacceptable to Polk, as it would have awarded Puget Sound and all lands north of the Columbia River to Britain, and Britain was unwilling to accept the 49th parallel extended to the Pacific, as it meant the entire opening to Puget Sound would be in American hands, isolating its settlements along the Fraser River.

Edward Everett, Tyler&#x27;s minister in London, had informally proposed dividing the territory at the 49th parallel with the strategic Vancouver Island granted to the British, thus allowing an opening to the Pacific. But when the new British minister in Washington, Richard Pakenham arrived in 1844 prepared to follow up, he found that many Americans desired the entire territory, which extended north to 54 degrees, 40 minutes north latitude. Oregon had not been a major issue in the 1844 election, but the heavy influx of settlers, mostly American, to the Oregon Country in 1845, and the rising spirit of expansionism in the U.S. as Texas and Oregon seized the public&#x27;s eye, made a treaty with Britain more urgent. Many Democrats believed the U.S. should span from coast to coast, a philosophy called Manifest Destiny.

Though both sides sought an acceptable compromise, each also saw the territory as an important geopolitical asset that would play a large part in determining the dominant power in North America. In his inaugural address, Polk announced that he viewed the U.S. claim to the land as &quot;clear and unquestionable&quot;, provoking threats of war from British leaders should Polk attempt to take control of the entire territory. Polk had refrained in his address from asserting a claim to the entire territory, although the Democratic Party platform called for such a claim. Despite Polk&#x27;s hawkish rhetoric, he viewed war over Oregon as unwise, and Polk and Buchanan began negotiations with the British. Like his predecessors, Polk again proposed a division along the 49th parallel, which Pakenham immediately rejected. Buchanan was wary of a two-front war with Mexico and Britain, but Polk was willing to risk war with both countries in pursuit of a favorable settlement. In his annual message to Congress in December 1845, Polk requested approval of giving Britain a one-year notice (as required in the Treaty of 1818) of his intention to terminate the joint occupancy of Oregon. In that message, he quoted from the Monroe Doctrine to denote America&#x27;s intention of keeping European powers out, the first significant use of it since its origin in 1823. After much debate, Congress passed the resolution in April 1846, attaching its hope that the dispute would be settled amicably.

When the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Aberdeen, learned of the proposal Pakenham rejected, Aberdeen asked the U.S. to reopen negotiations, but Polk was unwilling unless the British made a proposal. With Britain moving toward free trade with the repeal of the Corn Laws, good trade relations with the U.S. were more important to Aberdeen than a distant territory. In February 1846, Louis McLane, the American minister in London, was told that Washington would look favorably on a British proposal to divide the continent at the 49th parallel. In June 1846, Pakenham presented an offer calling for a boundary line at the 49th parallel, with the exception that Britain would retain all of Vancouver Island, and there would be limited navigation rights for British subjects on the Columbia River until the expiration of the charter of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company in 1859. Polk and most of his Cabinet were prepared to accept the proposal. The Senate ratified the Oregon Treaty in a 41–14 vote. Polk&#x27;s willingness to risk war with Britain had frightened many, but his tough negotiation tactics may have gained concessions from the British (particularly regarding the Columbia River) that a more conciliatory president might not have won.

==== Annexation of Texas ====

The annexation resolution signed by Tyler gave the president the choice of asking Texas to approve annexation, or reopening negotiations; Tyler immediately sent a messenger with the first option. Polk allowed the messenger to continue. He also sent assurance that the United States would defend Texas, and would fix its southern border at the Rio Grande, as claimed by Texas, rather than at the Nueces River, as claimed by Mexico. Public sentiment in Texas favored annexation. In July 1845, a Texas convention ratified annexation, and thereafter voters approved it. In December 1845, Texas became the 28th state. However Mexico had broken diplomatic relations with the United States on passage of the joint resolution in March 1845; now annexation escalated tensions as Mexico had never recognized Texan independence.

==== Mexican-American War ====
===== Road to war =====
Following the annexation of Texas in 1845, Polk began preparations for a potential war, sending an army there, led by Brigadier General Zachary Taylor. American land and naval forces were both ordered to respond to any Mexican aggression but to avoid provoking a war. Polk thought Mexico would give in under duress.

Polk hoped that a show of force would lead to negotiations. In late 1845, He sent John Slidell to Mexico to purchase New Mexico and California for $30 million ($ in dollars ), as well as securing Mexico&#x27;s agreement to a Rio Grande border. Mexican opinion was hostile and President José Joaquín de Herrera refused to receive Slidell. Herrera soon was deposed by a military coup led by General Mariano Paredes, a hard-liner who pledged to take back Texas. Dispatches from Slidell warned Washington that war was near.

Polk regarded the treatment of Slidell as an insult and an &quot;ample cause of war&quot;, and he prepared to ask Congress to declare it. Meanwhile, in late March, General Taylor had reached the Rio Grande, and his army camped across the river from Matamoros, Tamaulipas. In April, after Mexican general Pedro de Ampudia demanded that Taylor return to the Nueces River, Taylor began a blockade of Matamoros. A skirmish on the northern side of the Rio Grande on April 25 ended in the death or capture of dozens of American soldiers and became known as the Thornton Affair. Word reached Washington on May 9, and Polk sent a war message to Congress on the ground that Mexico had, &quot;shed American blood on the American soil&quot;. The House overwhelmingly approved a resolution declaring war and authorizing the president to accept 50,000 volunteers into the military. In the Senate, war opponents led by Calhoun questioned Polk&#x27;s version of events. Nonetheless, the House resolution passed the Senate in a 40–2 vote, with Calhoun abstaining, marking the beginning of the Mexican–American War.

===== Course of the war =====
After the initial skirmishes, Taylor and much of his army marched away from the river to secure the supply line, leaving a makeshift base, Fort Texas. On the way back to the Rio Grande, Mexican forces under General Mariano Arista attempted to block Taylor&#x27;s way as other troops laid siege to Fort Texas, forcing the U.S. Army general to the attack if he hoped to relieve the fort. In the Battle of Palo Alto, the first major engagement of the war, Taylor&#x27;s troops forced Arista&#x27;s from the field, suffering only four dead to hundreds for the Mexicans. The next day, Taylor led the army to victory in the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, putting the Mexican Army to rout. The early successes boosted support for the war, which despite the lopsided votes in Congress, had deeply divided the nation. Many Northern Whigs opposed the war, as did others; they felt Polk had used patriotism to manipulate the nation into fighting a war, the goal of which was to give slavery room to expand.

Polk distrusted the two senior officers, Major General Winfield Scott and Taylor, as both were Whigs. Polk would have replaced them with Democrats, but felt Congress would not approve it. He offered Scott the position of top commander in the war, which the general accepted. Polk and Scott already knew and disliked each other: the President made the appointment despite the fact that Scott had sought his party&#x27;s presidential nomination for the 1840 election. Polk came to believe that Scott was too slow in getting himself and his army away from Washington and to the Rio Grande, and was outraged to learn Scott was using his influence in Congress to defeat the administration&#x27;s plan to expand the number of generals. The news of Taylor&#x27;s victory at Resaca de la Palma arrived then, and Polk decided to have Taylor take command in the field, and Scott to remain in Washington. Polk also ordered Commodore Conner to allow Antonio López de Santa Anna to return to Mexico from his exile in Havana, thinking that he would negotiate a treaty ceding territory to the U.S. for a price. Polk sent representatives to Cuba for talks with Santa Anna.

Polk sent an army expedition led by Stephen W. Kearny towards Santa Fe, to territory beyond the original claims in Texas. In 1845, Polk, fearful of French or British intervention, had sent Lieutenant Archibald H. Gillespie to California with orders to foment a pro-American rebellion that could be used to justify annexation of the territory. After meeting with Gillespie, Army captain John C. Frémont led settlers in northern California to overthrow the Mexican garrison in Sonoma in what became known as the Bear Flag Revolt. In August 1846, American forces under Kearny captured Santa Fe, capital of the province of New Mexico, without firing a shot. Almost simultaneously, Commodore Robert F. Stockton landed in Los Angeles and proclaimed the capture of California. After American forces put down a revolt, the United States held effective control of New Mexico and California. Nevertheless, the Western theater of the war would prove to be a political headache for Polk, since a dispute between Frémont and Kearny led to a break between Polk and the powerful Missouri senator (and father-in-law of Frémont), Thomas Hart Benton.

The initial public euphoria over the victories at the start of the war slowly dissipated. In August 1846, Polk asked Congress to appropriate $2 million (~$ in ) as a down payment for the potential purchase of Mexican lands. Polk&#x27;s request ignited opposition, as he had never before made public his desire to annex parts of Mexico (aside from lands claimed by Texas). It was unclear whether such newly acquired lands would be slave or free, and there was fierce and acrimonious sectional debate. A freshman Democratic Congressman, David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, previously a firm supporter of Polk&#x27;s administration, offered an amendment to the bill, the Wilmot Proviso, that would ban slavery in any land acquired using the money. The appropriation bill, with the Wilmot Proviso attached, passed the House, but died in the Senate. This discord cost Polk&#x27;s party, with Democrats losing control of the House in the 1846 elections. In early 1847, though, Polk was successful in passing a bill raising further regiments, and he also finally won approval for the appropriation.
To try to bring the war to a quick end, in July 1846, Polk considered supporting a potential coup led by the exiled Mexican former president, General Antonio López de Santa Anna, with the hope that Santa Anna would sell parts of California. Santa Anna was in exile in Cuba, still a colony of Spain. Polk sent an envoy to have secret talks with Santa Anna. The U.S. Consul in Havana, R.B. Campbell, began seeking a way to engage with Santa Anna. A U.S. citizen of Spanish birth, Col. Alejandro José Atocha, knew Santa Anna and acted initially as an intermediary. Polk noted his contacts with Atocha in his diary, who said that Santa Anna was interested in concluding a treaty with the U.S. gaining territory while Mexico received payment that would include settling its debts. Polk decided that Atocha was untrustworthy and sent his own representative, Alexander Slidell Mackenzie, (a relative of John Slidell) to meet with Santa Anna. Mackenzie told Santa Anna that Polk wished to see him in power and that if they came to an agreement that the U.S. naval blockade would be lifted briefly to allow Santa Anna to return to Mexico. Polk requested $2 million from Congress to be used to negotiate a treaty with Mexico or payment to Mexico before a treaty was signed. The blockade was indeed briefly lifted and Santa Anna returned to Mexico, not to head a government that would negotiate a treaty with the U.S., but rather to organize a military defense of his homeland. Santa Anna gloated over Polk&#x27;s naïveté; Polk had been &quot;snookered&quot; by Santa Anna. Instead of coming to a negotiated settlement with the U.S., Santa Anna mounted a defense of Mexico and fought to the bitter end. &quot;His actions would prolong the war for at least a year, and more than any other single person, it was Santa Anna who denied Polk&#x27;s dream of short war.&quot;

This caused Polk to harden his position on Mexico, and he ordered an American landing at Veracruz, the most important Mexican port on the Gulf of Mexico. From there, troops were to march through Mexico&#x27;s heartland to Mexico City, which it was hoped would end the war. Continuing to advance in northeast Mexico, Taylor defeated a Mexican army led by Ampudia in the September 1846 Battle of Monterrey, but allowed Ampudia&#x27;s forces to withdraw from the town, much to Polk&#x27;s consternation. Polk believed Taylor had not aggressively pursued the enemy and offered command of the Veracruz expedition to Scott.

The lack of trust Polk had in Taylor was returned by the Whig general, who feared the partisan president was trying to destroy him. Accordingly, Taylor disobeyed orders to remain near Monterrey. In March 1847, Polk learned that Taylor had continued to march south, capturing the northern Mexican town of Saltillo. Continuing beyond Saltillo, Taylor&#x27;s army fought a larger Mexican force, led by Santa Anna, in the Battle of Buena Vista. Initial reports gave the victory to Mexico, with great rejoicing, but Santa Anna retreated. Mexican casualties were five times that of the Americans, and the victory made Taylor even more of a military hero in the American public&#x27;s eyes, though Polk preferred to credit the bravery of the soldiers rather than the Whig general.

The U.S. changed the course of the war with its invasion of Mexico&#x27;s heartland through Veracruz and ultimately the capture of Mexico City, following hard fighting. In March 1847, Scott landed in Veracruz, and quickly won control of the city. The Mexicans expected that yellow fever and other tropical diseases would weaken the U.S. forces. With the capture of Veracruz, Polk dispatched Nicholas Trist, Buchanan&#x27;s chief clerk, to accompany Scott&#x27;s army and negotiate a peace treaty with Mexican leaders. Trist was instructed to seek the cession of Alta California, New Mexico, and Baja California, recognition of the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas, and U.S. access across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. Trist was authorized to make a payment of up to $30 million in exchange for these concessions.

In August 1847, as he advanced towards Mexico City, Scott defeated Santa Anna at the Battle of Contreras and the Battle of Churubusco. With the Americans at the gates of Mexico City, Trist negotiated with commissioners, but the Mexicans were willing to give up little. Scott prepared to take Mexico City, which he did in mid-September. In the United States, a heated political debate emerged regarding how much of Mexico the United States should seek to annex, Whigs such as Henry Clay arguing that the United States should only seek to settle the Texas border question, and some expansionists arguing for the annexation of all of Mexico. War opponents were also active; Whig Congressman Abraham Lincoln of Illinois introduced the &quot;exact spot&quot; resolutions, calling on Polk to state exactly where American blood had been shed on American soil to start the war, but the House refused to consider them.

===== Peace: the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo =====
Frustrated by a lack of progress in negotiations, Polk ordered Trist to return to Washington, but the diplomat, when the notice of recall arrived in mid-November 1847, ignored the order, deciding to remain and writing a lengthy letter to Polk the following month to justify his decision. Polk considered having Butler, designated as Scott&#x27;s replacement, forcibly remove him from Mexico City. Though outraged by Trist&#x27;s defiance, Polk decided to allow him some time to negotiate a treaty.

Throughout January 1848, Trist regularly met with officials in Mexico City, though at the request of the Mexicans, the treaty signing took place in Guadalupe Hidalgo, a small town near Mexico City. Trist was willing to allow Mexico to keep Baja California, as his instructions allowed, but successfully haggled for the inclusion of the important harbor of San Diego in a cession of Alta California. Provisions included the Rio Grande border and a $15 million payment to Mexico. On February 2, 1848, Trist and the Mexican delegation signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Polk received the document on February 19, and, after the Cabinet met on the 20th, decided he had no choice but to accept it. If he turned it down, with the House by then controlled by the Whigs, there was no assurance Congress would vote funding to continue the war. Both Buchanan and Walker dissented, wanting more land from Mexico, a position with which the President was sympathetic, though he considered Buchanan&#x27;s view motivated by his ambition.

Some senators opposed the treaty because they wanted to take no Mexican territory; others hesitated because of the irregular nature of Trist&#x27;s negotiations. Polk waited in suspense for two weeks as the Senate considered it, sometimes hearing that it would likely be defeated and that Buchanan and Walker were working against it. He was relieved when the two Cabinet officers lobbied on behalf of the treaty. On March 10, the Senate ratified the treaty in a 38–14 vote, a vote that cut across partisan and geographic lines. The Senate made some modifications to the treaty before ratification, and Polk worried that the Mexican government would reject them. On June 7, Polk learned that Mexico had ratified the treaty. Polk declared the treaty in effect as of July 4, 1848, thus ending the war. With the acquisition of California, Polk had accomplished all four of his major presidential goals. With the exception of the territory acquired by the 1853 Gadsden Purchase, and some later minor adjustments, the territorial acquisitions under Polk established the modern borders of the Contiguous United States.

==== Postwar and the territories ====

Polk was anxious to establish a territorial government for Oregon but the matter became embroiled in the arguments over slavery, though few thought Oregon suitable for it. Bills to establish a territorial government passed the House twice but died in the Senate. By the time Congress met again in December, California and New Mexico were in U.S. hands, and Polk in his annual message urged the establishment of territorial governments in all three. The Missouri Compromise had settled the issue of the geographic reach of slavery within the Louisiana Purchase by prohibiting slavery in states north of 36°30′ latitude, and Polk sought to extend this line into the newly acquired territory. This would have made slavery illegal in Oregon and San Francisco but allowed it in Los Angeles. Such an extension of slavery was defeated in the House by a bipartisan alliance of Northerners. In 1848 Polk signed a bill to establish the Territory of Oregon and prohibit slavery in it.

In December 1848, Polk sought to establish territorial governments in California and New Mexico, a task made especially urgent by the onset of the California Gold Rush. The divisive issue of slavery blocked the idea. Finally in the Compromise of 1850 the issue was resolved.

Polk had misgivings about a bill creating the Department of the Interior (March 3, 1849). He feared the federal government usurping power over public lands from the states. Nevertheless, he signed the bill.

==== Other initiatives ====
Polk&#x27;s ambassador to the Republic of New Granada, Benjamin Alden Bidlack, negotiated the Mallarino–Bidlack Treaty. Though Washington had initially only sought to remove tariffs on American goods, Bidlack and New Granadan&#x27;s Foreign Minister negotiated a broad agreement that deepened military and trade ties. A U.S. guarantee of New Granada&#x27;s sovereignty over the Isthmus of Panama was also included. The treaty was ratified in 1848 and in the long run it facilitated the Panama Canal, built in the early 20th century. It also allowed for the construction of the Panama Railway, which opened in 1855. The railway, built and operated by Americans and protected by the U.S. military, gave a quicker, safer journey to California and Oregon. The agreement was the only alliance Washington made in the 19th century. It established a strong American role in Central America and was a counterweight to British influence there.

In mid-1848, President Polk authorized his ambassador to Spain, Romulus Mitchell Saunders, to negotiate the purchase of Cuba and offer Spain up to $100 million, a large sum at the time for one territory, equal to $ in present-day terms. Cuba was close to the United States and had slavery, so the idea appealed to Southerners but was unwelcome in the North. However, Spain was still making profits in Cuba (notably in sugar, molasses, rum and tobacco), and thus the Spanish government rejected Saunders&#x27;s overtures. Though Polk was eager to acquire Cuba, he refused to support the filibuster expedition of Narciso López, who sought to invade and take over the island as a prelude to annexation.

=== Domestic policy ===

==== Fiscal policy ====

In his inaugural address, Polk called upon Congress to re-establish the Independent Treasury System under which government funds were held in the Treasury and not in banks or other financial institutions. President Van Buren had previously established a similar system, but it had been abolished during the Tyler administration. Polk made clear his opposition to a national bank in his inaugural address, and in his first annual message to Congress in December 1845, he called for the government to keep its funds itself. Congress was slow to act; the House passed a bill in April 1846 and the Senate in August, both without a single Whig vote. Polk signed the Independent Treasury Act into law on August 6, 1846. The act provided that the public revenues were to be retained in the Treasury building and in sub-treasuries in various cities, separate from private or state banks. The system would remain in place until the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.

Polk&#x27;s other major domestic initiative was the lowering of the tariff. Polk directed Secretary of the Treasury Robert Walker to draft a new and lower tariff, which Polk submitted to Congress. After intense lobbying by both sides, the bill passed the House and, in a close vote that required Vice President Dallas to break a tie, the Senate in July 1846. Dallas, although from protectionist Pennsylvania, voted for the bill, having decided his best political prospects lay in supporting the administration. Polk signed the Walker Tariff into law, substantially reducing the rates that had been set by the Tariff of 1842. The reduction of tariffs in the United States and the repeal of the Corn Laws in Great Britain led to a boom in Anglo-American trade.

==== Development of the country ====
Congress passed the Rivers and Harbors Bill in 1846 to provide $500,000 to improve port facilities, but Polk vetoed it. Polk believed that the bill was unconstitutional because it unfairly favored particular areas, including ports that had no foreign trade. Polk considered internal improvements to be matters for the states, and feared that passing the bill would encourage legislators to compete for favors for their home district—a type of corruption that he felt would spell doom to the virtue of the republic. In this regard he followed his hero Jackson, who had vetoed the Maysville Road Bill in 1830 on similar grounds.

Opposed by conviction to Federal funding for internal improvements, Polk stood strongly against all such bills. Congress, in 1847, passed another internal improvements bill; he pocket vetoed it and sent Congress a full veto message when it met in December. Similar bills continued to advance in Congress in 1848, though none reached his desk. When he came to the Capitol to sign bills on March 3, 1849, the last day of the congressional session and his final full day in office, he feared that an internal improvements bill would pass Congress, and he brought with him a draft veto message. The bill did not pass, so it was not needed, but feeling the draft had been ably written, he had it preserved among his papers.

Authoritative word of the discovery of gold in California did not arrive in Washington until after the 1848 election, by which time Polk was a lame duck. Polk&#x27;s political adversaries had claimed California was too far away to be useful and was not worth the price paid to Mexico. The President was delighted by the news, seeing it as validation of his stance on expansion, and referred to the discovery several times in his final annual message to Congress that December. Shortly thereafter, actual samples of the California gold arrived, and Polk sent a special message to Congress on the subject. The message, confirming less authoritative reports, caused large numbers of people to move to California, both from the U.S. and abroad, thus helping to spark the California Gold Rush.

==== Judicial appointments ====
Polk appointed the following justices to the U.S. Supreme Court:

The 1844 death of Justice Henry Baldwin left a vacant place on the Supreme Court, but Tyler had been unable to get the Senate to confirm a nominee. At the time, it was the custom to have a geographic balance on the Supreme Court, and Baldwin had been from Pennsylvania. Polk&#x27;s efforts to fill Baldwin&#x27;s seat became embroiled in Pennsylvania politics and the efforts of factional leaders to secure the lucrative post of Collector of Customs for the Port of Philadelphia. As Polk attempted to find his way through the minefield of Pennsylvania politics, a second position on the high court became vacant with the death, in September 1845, of Justice Joseph Story; his replacement was expected to come from his native New England. Because Story&#x27;s death had occurred while the Senate was not in session, Polk was able to make a recess appointment, choosing Senator Levi Woodbury of New Hampshire, and when the Senate reconvened in December 1845, Woodbury was confirmed. Polk&#x27;s initial nominee for Baldwin&#x27;s seat, George W. Woodward, was rejected by the Senate in January 1846, in large part due to the opposition of Buchanan and Pennsylvania Senator Simon Cameron.

Despite Polk&#x27;s anger at Buchanan, he eventually offered the Secretary of State the seat, but Buchanan, after some indecision, turned it down. Polk subsequently nominated Robert Cooper Grier of Pittsburgh, who won confirmation. Justice Woodbury died in 1851, but Grier served until 1870 and in the slavery case of &quot;Dred Scott v. Sandford&quot; (1857) wrote an opinion stating that slaves were property and could not sue.

Polk appointed eight other federal judges, one to the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia, and seven to various United States district courts.

== Election of 1848 ==

Honoring his pledge to serve only one term, Polk declined to seek re-election. At the 1848 Democratic National Convention, Lewis Cass was nominated. The 1848 Whig National Convention nominated Zachary Taylor for president and former congressman Millard Fillmore of New York for vice president. Martin Van Buren led a breakaway Free Soil group from the Democrats. Polk was surprised and disappointed by his former ally&#x27;s political conversion and worried about the divisiveness of a sectional party devoted to abolition. Polk did not give speeches for Cass, remaining at his desk at the White House. He did remove some Van Buren supporters from federal office during the campaign.

Taylor won the three-way election with a plurality of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote. Polk was disappointed by the outcome as he had a low opinion of Taylor, seeing the general as someone with poor judgment and few opinions on important public matters. Nevertheless, Polk observed tradition and welcomed President-elect Taylor to Washington, hosting him at a gala White House dinner. Polk departed the White House on March 3, leaving behind him a clean desk, though he worked from his hotel or the Capitol on last-minute appointments and bill signings. He attended Taylor&#x27;s inauguration on March 5 (March 4, the presidential inauguration day until 1937, fell on a Sunday, and thus the ceremony was postponed a day), and though he was unimpressed with the new president, wished him the best.

== Post-presidency and death (1849) ==
Polk&#x27;s time in the White House took its toll on his health. Full of enthusiasm and vigor when he entered office, Polk left the presidency exhausted by his years of public service. He left Washington on March 6 for a pre-arranged triumphal tour of the Southern United States, to end in Nashville. Polk had two years previously arranged to buy a house there, afterwards dubbed Polk Place, that had once belonged to his mentor, Felix Grundy.

James and Sarah Polk progressed down the Atlantic coast, and then westward through the Deep South. He was enthusiastically received and banqueted. By the time the Polks reached Alabama, he was suffering from a bad cold, and soon became concerned by reports of cholera—a passenger on Polk&#x27;s riverboat died of it, and it was rumored to be common in New Orleans, but it was too late to change plans. Worried about his health, he would have departed the city quickly but was overwhelmed by Louisiana hospitality. Several passengers on the riverboat up the Mississippi died of the disease, and Polk felt so ill that he went ashore for four days, staying in a hotel. A doctor assured him he did not have cholera, and Polk arrived in Nashville on April 2 to a huge reception.

After a visit to James&#x27;s mother in Columbia, the Polks settled into Polk Place. The exhausted former president seemed to gain new life, but in early June, he fell ill again, by most accounts of cholera. Attended by several doctors, he lingered for several days and chose to be baptized into the Methodist Church, which he had long admired, though his mother arrived from Columbia with her Presbyterian clergyman, and his wife was also a devout Presbyterian. On the afternoon of Friday, June 15, Polk died at his Polk Place home in Nashville, Tennessee at the age of 53. According to traditional accounts, his last words before he died were &quot;I love you, Sarah, for all eternity, I love you.&quot; Borneman noted that whether or not they were spoken, there was nothing in Polk&#x27;s life that would make the sentiment false.

At age 53, Polk had the shortest lifespan of any president not assassinated, he had the shortest post-presidency among the presidents who did not die in office (103 days). His funeral was held at the McKendree Methodist Church in Nashville. Following his death, Sarah Polk lived at Polk Place for 42 years and died on August 14, 1891, at the age of 87. Their house, Polk Place, was demolished in 1901.

==Burials==

Polk&#x27;s remains have been moved twice. After his death, he was buried in what is now Nashville City Cemetery due to a legal requirement related to his infectious disease death. Polk was then moved to a tomb on the grounds of Polk Place (as specified in his will) in 1850.

Then, in 1893, the bodies of James and Sarah Polk were relocated to their current resting place on the grounds of the Tennessee State Capitol in Nashville. In March 2017, the Tennessee Senate approved a resolution considered a &quot;first step&quot; toward relocating the Polks&#x27; remains to the family home in Columbia. Such a move would require approval by state lawmakers, the courts, and the Tennessee Historical Commission. A year later, a renewed plan to reinter Polk was defeated by Tennessee lawmakers before being taken up again and approved, and allowed to go through by the non-signature of Tennessee governor Bill Haslam. The state&#x27;s Capitol Commission heard arguments over the issue in November 2018, during which the THC reiterated its opposition to the tomb relocation, and a vote was delayed indefinitely.

==Historical legacy==
Polk&#x27;s reputation was forged early by attacks made on him during his lifetime. Whig politicians claimed that he was drawn from well-deserved obscurity. Sam Houston is said to have observed that Polk, a teetotaler, was &quot;a victim of the use of water as a beverage&quot;. Little was published about him, but two biographies were released in the wake of his death. Polk was not again the subject of a major biography until 1922 when Eugene I. McCormac published &quot;James K. Polk: A Political Biography&quot;. McCormac relied heavily on Polk&#x27;s presidential diary, first published in 1909. When historians began ranking the presidents in 1948, Polk ranked tenth in Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.&#x27;s poll, and has subsequently ranked eighth in Schlesinger&#x27;s 1962 poll, tenth in a 1982 &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; poll, ninth in Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.&#x27;s 1996 poll, and 14th in the 2017 survey by C-SPAN.

James Polk is widely considered a successful president; he is regarded as a man of destiny and a political chess master, who, through extraordinary diligence, worked to promote American democracy. Borneman deemed Polk the most effective president prior to the Civil War and noted that Polk expanded the power of the presidency, especially in its power as commander in chief and its oversight over the Executive Branch. Steven G. Calabresi and Christopher S. Yoo, in their history of presidential power, praised Polk&#x27;s conduct of the Mexican War, &quot;it seems unquestionable that his management of state affairs during this conflict was one of the strongest examples since Jackson of the use of presidential power to direct specifically the conduct of subordinate officers.&quot;

Historian John C. Pinheiro, analyzing Polk&#x27;s impact and legacy, wrote that:

Bergeron noted that the matters that Polk settled, he settled for his time. The questions of the banking system, and of the tariff, which Polk had made two of the main issues of his presidency, were not significantly revised until the 1860s. Similarly, the Gadsden Purchase, and that of Alaska (1867), were the only major U.S. expansions until the 1890s.

Paul H. Bergeron wrote in his study of Polk&#x27;s presidency: &quot;Virtually everyone remembers Polk and his expansionist successes. He produced a new map of the United States, which fulfilled a continent-wide vision.&quot; &quot;To look at that map,&quot; Robert W. Merry concluded, &quot;and to take in the western and southwestern expanse included in it, is to see the magnitude of Polk&#x27;s presidential accomplishments.&quot; Amy Greenberg, in her history of the Mexican War, found Polk&#x27;s legacy to be more than territorial, &quot;during a single brilliant term, he accomplished a feat that earlier presidents would have considered impossible. With the help of his wife, Sarah, he masterminded, provoked and successfully prosecuted a war that turned the United States into a world power.&quot; Borneman noted that in securing this expansion, Polk did not consider the likely effect on Mexicans and Native Americans, &quot;That ignorance may well be debated on moral grounds, but it cannot take away Polk&#x27;s stunning political achievement.&quot; James A. Rawley wrote in his &quot;American National Biography&quot; piece on Polk, &quot;he added extensive territory to the United States, including Upper California and its valuable ports, and bequeathed a legacy of a nation poised on the Pacific rim prepared to emerge as a superpower in future generations&quot;.

Historians have criticized Polk for not perceiving that his territorial gains set the table for civil war. Pletcher stated that Polk, like others of his time, failed &quot;to understand that sectionalism and expansion had formed a new, explosive compound&quot;. Fred I. Greenstein, in his journal article on Polk, noted that Polk &quot;lacked a far-seeing awareness of the problems that were bound to arise over the status of slavery in the territory acquired from Mexico&quot; William Dusinberre, in his volume on Polk as slave owner, suggested &quot;that Polk&#x27;s deep personal involvement in the plantation slavery system ... colored his stance on slavery-related issues&quot;.

Greenberg noted that Polk&#x27;s war served as the training ground for that later conflict:

===Polk and slavery===

Polk owned slaves for most of his adult life. His father left Polk more than 8,000 acres (32 km2) of land and divided about 53 enslaved people among his widow and children in his will. James inherited twenty slaves, either directly or from deceased brothers. In 1831, he became an absentee cotton planter, sending enslaved people to clear plantation land that his father had left him near Somerville, Tennessee. Four years later, Polk sold his Somerville plantation and, together with his brother-in-law, bought 920 acres (3.7 km2) of land, a cotton plantation near Coffeeville, Mississippi, hoping to increase his income. The land in Mississippi was richer than that in Somerville, and Polk transferred slaves there, taking care to conceal from them that they were to be sent south. From the start of 1839, Polk, having bought out his brother-in-law, owned all of the Mississippi plantations, and ran it on a mostly absentee basis for the rest of his life. He occasionally visited; for example, he spent much of April 1844 on his Mississippi plantation, right before the Democratic convention.

Adding to the inherited slaves, in 1831, Polk purchased five more, mostly buying them in Kentucky, and expending $1,870 (~$ in ); the youngest had a recorded age of 11. As older children sold for a higher price, slave-sellers routinely lied about age. Between 1834 and 1835, he bought five more, aged from 2 to 37, the youngest a granddaughter of the oldest. The amount expended was $2,250 (~$ in ). In 1839, he bought eight slaves from his brother William at a cost of $5,600 (~$ in ). This represented three young adults and most of a family, though not including the father, whom James Polk had previously owned, and who had been sold to a slave trader as he had repeatedly tried to escape his enslavement.

The expenses of four campaigns (three for governor, one for the presidency) in six years kept Polk from making more slave purchases until after he was living in the White House. In an era when the presidential salary was expected to cover wages for the White House servants, Polk replaced them with slaves from his home in Tennessee. Polk did not purchase enslaved people with his presidential salary, likely for political reasons. Instead, he reinvested earnings from his plantation in the purchase of slaves, enjoining secrecy on his agent: &quot;that as my &quot;private business&quot; does not concern the public, you will keep it to yourself&quot;.

Polk saw the plantation as his route to a comfortable existence after his presidency for himself and his wife; he did not intend to return to the practice of law. Hoping the increased labor force would increase his retirement income, he purchased seven slaves in 1846, through an agent, aged roughly between 12 and 17. The 17-year-old and one of the 12-year-olds were purchased together at an estate sale; the agent within weeks resold the younger boy to Polk&#x27;s profit. The year 1847 saw the purchase of nine more. Three he purchased from Gideon Pillow, and his agent purchased six enslaved people aged between 10 and 20. By the time of the purchase from Pillow, the Mexican War had begun and Polk sent payment with the letter in which he offered Pillow a commission in the Army. The purchase from Pillow was a man Polk had previously owned and had sold for being a disruption, and his wife and child. None of the other enslaved people Polk purchased as president, all younger than 20, came with a parent, and as only in the one case were two slaves bought together, most likely none had an accompanying sibling as each faced life on Polk&#x27;s plantation.

Discipline for those owned by Polk varied over time. At the Tennessee plantation, he employed an overseer named Herbert Biles, who was said to be relatively indulgent. Biles&#x27;s illness in 1833 resulted in Polk replacing him with Ephraim Beanland, who tightened discipline and increased work. Polk backed his overseer, returning escapees who complained of beatings and other harsh treatment, &quot;even though every report suggested that the overseer was a heartless brute&quot;. Beanland was hired for the Mississippi plantation but was soon dismissed by Polk&#x27;s partner, who deemed Beanland too harsh as the slaves undertook the arduous task of clearing the timber from the new plantation so it could be used for cotton farming. His replacement was discharged after a year for being too indulgent; the next died of dysentery in 1839. Others followed, and it was not until 1845 that Polk found a satisfactory overseer, John Mairs, who was still working at the plantation for Sarah Polk in 1860 when the widow sold a half-share in many of her slaves. There had been a constant stream of runaways under Mairs&#x27; predecessors, many seeking protection at the plantation of Polk relatives or friends; only one ran away between the time of Mairs&#x27; hiring and the end of 1847, but the overseer had to report three absconded slaves (including the one who had fled earlier) to Polk in 1848 and 1849.

Polk&#x27;s will, dated February 28, 1849, contained the nonbinding expectation that his slaves were to be freed when both he and Sarah Polk were dead. The Mississippi plantation was expected to support Sarah Polk during her widowhood. Sarah Polk lived until 1891, but the slaves were freed in 1865 by the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery in the United States. By selling a half-interest in the slaves in 1860, Sarah Polk had given up the sole power to free them, and it is unlikely that her new partner, having paid $28,500 (~$ in ) for a half-interest in the plantation and its slaves, would have allowed the laborers to go free had she died while slavery was legal.

Like Jackson, Polk saw the politics of slavery as a side issue compared to territorial expansion and economic policy. The issue of slavery became increasingly polarizing during the 1840s, and Polk&#x27;s expansionary successes redoubled its divisiveness. During his presidency, many abolitionists harshly criticized him as an instrument of the &quot;Slave Power&quot;, and claimed that spreading slavery was the reason he supported Texas Annexation and later war with Mexico. Polk did support the expansion of slavery&#x27;s realm, with his views informed by his own family&#x27;s experience of settling Tennessee, bringing slaves with them. He believed in Southern rights, meaning both the right of slave states not to have that institution interfered with by the Federal government and the right of individual Southerners to bring their slaves with them into the new territory. Though Polk opposed the Wilmot Proviso, he also condemned southern agitation on the issue, and he accused both northern and southern leaders of attempting to use the slavery issue for political gain.

==See also==
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
* List of presidents of the United States who owned slaves
* Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps

==Footnotes==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== References ===
* ; also see online book review
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* , short popular biography.
* Williams, Frank J. &quot;James K. Polk.&quot; in &quot;The Presidents and the Constitution, Volume One&quot; (New York University Press, 2020). 149–158. online


=== Further reading ===
* Bergeron, Paul H. &quot;President Polk and economic legislation.&quot; &quot;Presidential Studies Quarterly&quot; (1985): 782–795. online
* Chaffin, Tom. &quot;Met His Every Goal? James K. Polk and the Legends of Manifest Destiny&quot; (University of Tennessee Press; 2014) 124 pages.
* Cheathem, Mark R. &quot;Who Is James K. Polk? The Presidential Election of 1844&quot;. University Press of Kansas, 2023.
* Currie, David P., and Emily E. Kadens. &quot;President Polk on Internal Improvements: The Undelivered Veto.&quot; &quot;Green Bag&quot; 2 (2002): 5+ online.
* De Voto, Bernard. &quot;The Year of Decision: 1846&quot;. Houghton Mifflin, 1943. online
* Dusinberre, William. &quot;President Polk and the Politics of Slavery&quot;. &quot;American Nineteenth Century History&quot; 3.1 (2002): 1–16. . Argues he misrepresented the strength of abolitionism, grossly exaggerated likelihood of slaves&#x27; massacring white families and seemed to condone secession.
* Goodpasture, Albert V. &quot;The Boyhood of President Polk.&quot; &quot;Tennessee Historical Magazine&quot; 7.1 (1921): 36–50.
* Greenberg, Amy S. &quot;Lady First: The World of Mrs. James K. Polk&quot; (Knopf, 2019) online.
* Kornblith, Gary J. &quot;Rethinking the Coming of the Civil War: a Counterfactual Exercise&quot;. &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 90.1 (2003): 76–105. . Asks what if Polk had not gone to war with Mexico.
* McCormac, Eugene Irving. &quot;James K. Polk: A Political Biography to the End of a Career, 1845–1849&quot;. Univ. of California Press, 1922. (1995 reprint has .) hostile to Jacksonians.
* Morrison, Michael A. &quot;Martin Van Buren, the Democracy, and the Partisan Politics of Texas Annexation&quot;. &quot;Journal of Southern History&quot; 61.4 (1995): 695–724. . Discusses the election of 1844. online edition .
* Moten, Matthew. &quot;Polk against His Generals.&quot; in &quot;Presidents and Their Generals&quot; (Harvard University Press, 2014) pp. 97–123.
* Nelson, Anna Kasten. &quot;Secret agents: President Polk and the search for peace with Mexico&quot; (Taylor &amp; Francis, 1988).
* Pinheiro, John C. &quot;Manifest Ambition: James K. Polk and Civil-Military Relations during the Mexican War&quot;. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007.
* Rumsch, BreAnn. &quot;James K. Polk&quot; (ABDO, 2016) for middle schools. online.
* Schoenbeck, Henry Fred. &quot;The economic views of James K. Polk as expressed in the course of his political career&quot; (PhD dissertation, The University of Nebraska - Lincoln; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1951. DP13923).
* Sellers, Charles. &quot;James K. Polk, Jacksonian, 1795–1843&quot; (1957) vol 1 online; and &quot;James K. Polk, Continentalist, 1843–1846&quot;. (1966) vol 2 online; long scholarly biography.
* Smith, Justin Harvey. &quot;The War with Mexico, Vol 1.&quot; (2 vol 1919), full text online.
* Smith, Justin Harvey. &quot;The War with Mexico, Vol. 2&quot;. (2 vol 1919). full text online; Pulitzer prize; still a standard source.
* Stenberg, Richard R. &quot;President Polk and the Annexation of Texas.&quot; &quot;Southwestern Social Science Quarterly&quot; (1934): 333–356. online
* Winders, Richard Bruce. &quot;Mr. Polk&#x27;s army: the American military experience in the Mexican war&quot;. (Texas A&amp;M University Press, 2001).

==== Primary sources ====
Material that may be of interest but constitute primary sources.
* Cutler, Wayne, et al. &quot;Correspondence of James K. Polk&quot;. 1972–2014. . Fourteen volume. scholarly edition of the complete correspondence to and from Polk.
** Polk, James Knox. &quot;Correspondence of James K. Polk: Digital Edition&quot; (University of Virginia Press, 2021). online
* Polk, James K. Polk: &quot;The Diary of a President, 1845–1849: Covering the Mexican War, the Acquisition of Oregon, and the Conquest of California and the Southwest&quot;. Vol. 296. Capricorn Books, 1952.
* Polk, James K. &quot;The Diary of James K. Polk During His Presidency, 1845–1849&quot; edited by Milo Milton Quaife, 4 vols. 1910. Abridged version by Allan Nevins. 1929, online .

== External links ==

* James K. Polk Presidential Papers Collection, The American Presidency Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara

* Extensive essay on James K. Polk and short essays on his presidency from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
* 
* James K. Polk: A Resource Guide, from the Library of Congress
* James K. Polk&#x27;s Personal Correspondence Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Inaugural Address of James K. Polk from The Avalon Project at the Yale Law School
* President James K. Polk State Historic Site, Pineville, North Carolina from a State of North Carolina website
* &quot;Life Portrait of James K. Polk&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, May 28, 1999</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="0" end="15" title="James K. Polk" label="James Knox Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="66" end="96" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="138" end="152" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="173" end="189" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="213" end="233" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="311" end="331" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="362" end="369" title="Texas annexation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="374" end="391" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="397" end="413" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="423" end="438" title="Mexican Cession" label="Mexican Cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="485" end="494" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700086" start="516" end="537" title="Tennessee Legislature" label="its state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="562" end="600" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q260239" start="683" end="707" title="United States House Committee on Ways and Means" label="Ways and Means Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="719" end="739" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589724" start="840" end="861" title="governor of Tennessee" label="governor of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="917" end="927" title="dark horse" label="dark-horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q698731" start="945" end="971" title="1844 United States presidential election" label="1844 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="979" end="995" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="1258" end="1268" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="1276" end="1286" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1405" end="1418" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="1428" end="1451" title="Oregon boundary dispute" label="disputed Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="1508" end="1521" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443295" start="1584" end="1590" title="Second Federal Republic of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="1620" end="1638" title="Southwestern United States" label="American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686042" start="1678" end="1684" title="Tariff in United States history" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962356" start="1700" end="1713" title="Walker tariff" label="Walker tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017327" start="1795" end="1815" title="Independent Treasury" label="Independent Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="2004" end="2011" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="2084" end="2090" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="ranked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2329" end="2338" title="Sectionalism#In the United States" label="sectional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="2411" end="2422" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="2694" end="2715" title="Slave states and free states" label="free and slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2763" end="2772" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029607" start="2856" end="2881" title="Pineville, North Carolina" label="Pineville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q20767911" start="3013" end="3024" title="Samuel Polk" label="Samuel Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="3068" end="3079" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="3177" end="3202" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Eastern Shore of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="3237" end="3249" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3322" end="3334" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423160" start="3422" end="3434" title="Ezekiel Polk" label="Ezekiel Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="3441" end="3446" title="deism" label="deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="3762" end="3775" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63487745" start="3846" end="3861" title="James A. Rawley" label="James A. Rawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q465854" start="3875" end="3902" title="American National Biography" label="American National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q652618" start="3998" end="4008" title="Duck River (Tennessee)" label="Duck River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502393" start="4029" end="4052" title="Maury County, Tennessee" label="Maury County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675279" start="4171" end="4179" title="Columbia, Tennessee" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="4247" end="4261" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="4437" end="4453" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="4475" end="4491" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184447" start="4651" end="4670" title="Philip Syng Physick" label="Philip Syng Physick"/>
<link wikidata="Q978991" start="4755" end="4771" title="Ephraim McDowell" label="Ephraim McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q988923" start="4775" end="4793" title="Danville, Kentucky" label="Danville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072553" start="5170" end="5181" title="Zion Presbyterian Church (Tennessee)" label="Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q501766" start="5280" end="5303" title="Murfreesboro, Tennessee" label="Murfreesboro, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="5387" end="5430" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016984" start="5612" end="5624" title="William Polk (colonel)" label="William Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q744046" start="5665" end="5685" title="William Dunn Moseley" label="William Dunn Moseley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270502" start="5745" end="5762" title="Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies" label="Dialectic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="5920" end="5931" title="Monarchism" label="monarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="5953" end="5971" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="6069" end="6089" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375704" start="6133" end="6145" title="Felix Grundy" label="Felix Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772204" start="6227" end="6249" title="Tennessee State Senate" label="Tennessee State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131100" start="6698" end="6711" title="Panic of 1819" label="Panic of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145213" start="6965" end="6999" title="Tennessee House of Representatives" label="Tennessee House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="7139" end="7145" title="Freemasonry" label="Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q357958" start="7307" end="7322" title="William Carroll (Tennessee politician)" label="William Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q234285" start="7740" end="7755" title="Sarah Childress" label="Sarah Childress"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="8419" end="8430" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="8531" end="8552" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700086" start="8794" end="8815" title="Tennessee Legislature" label="Tennessee Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q618127" start="9527" end="9567" title="1824 United States presidential election" label="1824 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="9684" end="9701" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="9736" end="9765" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="9798" end="9815" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="9931" end="9941" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10057" end="10072" title="Corrupt bargain#Election of 1824" label="Corrupt Bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699994" start="10246" end="10289" title="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="Tennessee&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10784" end="10800" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="10953" end="10964" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824558" start="11246" end="11266" title="presidency of John Quincy Adams" label="Adams administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q698489" start="11700" end="11704" title="1828 United States presidential election" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047872" start="11952" end="11973" title="internal improvements" label="internal improvements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797994" start="12065" end="12084" title="Maysville Road veto" label="Maysville Road veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429998" start="12337" end="12348" title="pork barrel" label="pork barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855994" start="12530" end="12538" title="Bank War" label="Bank War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="12622" end="12654" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="12683" end="12698" title="Nicholas Biddle (banker)" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21834499" start="13033" end="13063" title="House Ways and Means Committee" label="House Ways and Means Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q534192" start="13482" end="13510" title="1832 United States presidential election" label="won easy re-election in 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="13611" end="13626" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686034" start="13652" end="13674" title="Tariff of Abominations" label="Tariff of Abominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q472699" start="13686" end="13706" title="Nullification Crisis" label="Nullification Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564464" start="13944" end="13954" title="Force Bill" label="Force Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686036" start="14084" end="14101" title="Tariff of 1833" label="compromise tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171567" start="14721" end="14730" title="pet banks" label="pet banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="14848" end="14868" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q344157" start="14869" end="14885" title="Andrew Stevenson" label="Andrew Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="14919" end="14949" title="United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom" label="Minister to the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349142" start="15027" end="15036" title="John Bell (Tennessee politician)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693934" start="15055" end="15074" title="Richard Henry Wilde" label="Richard Henry Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219838" start="15080" end="15102" title="Joel Barlow Sutherland" label="Joel Barlow Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174492" start="15971" end="15997" title="1836 United States presidential election" label="1836 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="16014" end="16030" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="16083" end="16087" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634433" start="16128" end="16145" title="Hugh Lawson White" label="Hugh Lawson White"/>
<link wikidata="Q93794" start="16621" end="16637" title="Churchill C. Cambreleng" label="C. C. Cambreleng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092480" start="16836" end="16849" title="Panic of 1837" label="Panic of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228948" start="16895" end="16903" title="Gag rule (United States)" label="gag rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492841" start="17356" end="17371" title="Specie Circular" label="Specie Circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q39387" start="19067" end="19080" title="Newton Cannon" label="Newton Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841610" start="19597" end="19613" title="Middle Tennessee" label="Middle Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554544" start="20239" end="20274" title="1840 Democratic National Convention" label="1840 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q109463" start="20347" end="20369" title="Richard Mentor Johnson" label="Richard Mentor Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="20963" end="20985" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865387" start="20997" end="21018" title="William Henry Harrison presidential campaign, 1840" label="a rollicking campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808882" start="21040" end="21064" title="Tippecanoe and Tyler Too" label="Tippecanoe and Tyler Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376587" start="21246" end="21259" title="The Hermitage (Nashville, Tennessee)" label="the Hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q795980" start="21385" end="21402" title="faithless elector" label="faithless elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="21410" end="21427" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="21552" end="21562" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q698694" start="22091" end="22104" title="1840 U.S. presidential election" label="1840 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q501606" start="22212" end="22225" title="Wilson County, Tennessee" label="Wilson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q358277" start="22227" end="22241" title="James C. Jones" label="James C. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="23203" end="23238" title="vice president of the United States" label="vice president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q698731" start="23317" end="23321" title="1844 United States presidential election" label="1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="23635" end="23659" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655578" start="23678" end="23688" title="Hard money (policy)" label="hard money"/>
<link wikidata="Q503119" start="23821" end="23831" title="Lewis Cass" label="Lewis Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="24305" end="24322" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="24327" end="24348" title="Texas Revolution" label="successfully revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q596106" start="24457" end="24469" title="Sabine River (Texas–Louisiana)" label="Sabine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="25086" end="25102" title="Manifest Destiny" label="Manifest Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554644" start="25194" end="25223" title="1844 Whig National Convention" label="1844 Whig National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389796" start="25248" end="25270" title="Theodore Frelinghuysen" label="Theodore Frelinghuysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="25340" end="25356" title="Texas annexation" label="Texas annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085007" start="25796" end="25809" title="old Southwest" label="old Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554639" start="26738" end="26773" title="1844 Democratic National Convention" label="1844 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603914" start="26788" end="26809" title="Gideon Johnson Pillow" label="Gideon Johnson Pillow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="27658" end="27672" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="28138" end="28153" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q777453" start="28375" end="28387" title="Silas Wright" label="Silas Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q817486" start="28613" end="28631" title="Benjamin Franklin Butler (lawyer)" label="Benjamin F. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="29889" end="29898" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q879106" start="30030" end="30046" title="Robert J. Walker" label="Robert J. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q310849" start="30112" end="30128" title="George M. Dallas" label="George M. Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965890" start="30416" end="30434" title="Walter R. Borneman" label="Walter R. Borneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="31009" end="31019" title="dark horse" label="dark horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="31132" end="31147" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="31151" end="31168" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q502479" start="33091" end="33103" title="Giles County, Tennessee" label="Giles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686037" start="33219" end="33233" title="Tariff of 1842" label="Tariff of 1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q937791" start="34148" end="34169" title="Francis Preston Blair" label="Francis Preston Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q362186" start="34447" end="34462" title="Francis Pickens" label="Francis Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35543" end="35559" title="black propaganda#United States media" label="Roorback forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="35599" end="35611" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q538633" start="36202" end="36217" title="John Eisenhower" label="John Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q446438" start="37365" end="37380" title="James G. Birney" label="James G. Birney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="37619" end="37636" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="37784" end="37803" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="37850" end="37863" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031250" start="38071" end="38083" title="expansionism" label="expansionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017327" start="38225" end="38252" title="Independent Treasury" label="Independent Treasury System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686042" start="38318" end="38325" title="Tariffs in American history" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="38356" end="38370" title="Oregon boundary dispute" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="38591" end="38617" title="United States territorial acquisitions" label="American territorial gains"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="38628" end="38645" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="39438" end="39452" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928265" start="39560" end="39572" title="Cave Johnson" label="Cave Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258123" start="39950" end="39963" title="John Y. Mason" label="John Y. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q389258" start="40363" end="40376" title="William Marcy" label="William Marcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="40559" end="40583" title="United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom" label="U.S. minister to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099823" start="41906" end="41924" title="List of presidents of the United States by age" label="youngest president"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="41979" end="41997" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="inaugural ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q856192" start="42087" end="42114" title="The Illustrated London News" label="The Illustrated London News"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898179" start="43305" end="43319" title="Joseph Knox Walker" label="J. Knox Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201013" start="43325" end="43343" title="Secretary to the President of the United States" label="personal secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="44179" end="44192" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="44374" end="44385" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q269710" start="44629" end="44641" title="Fraser River" label="Fraser River"/>
<link wikidata="Q434905" start="44644" end="44658" title="Edward Everett" label="Edward Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="44780" end="44796" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431093" start="44911" end="44927" title="Richard Pakenham" label="Richard Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="45453" end="45469" title="Manifest Destiny" label="Manifest Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="46692" end="46707" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="46998" end="47011" title="George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen" label="Lord Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="47210" end="47233" title="repeal of the Corn Laws" label="repeal of the Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q551362" start="47346" end="47358" title="Louis McLane" label="Louis McLane"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="47800" end="47825" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="47926" end="47939" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="48580" end="48590" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468723" start="48632" end="48644" title="Nueces River" label="Nueces River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="49247" end="49261" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182472" start="49510" end="49522" title="John Slidell" label="John Slidell"/>
<link wikidata="Q373622" start="49714" end="49737" title="José Joaquín de Herrera" label="José Joaquín de Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q440461" start="49825" end="49840" title="Mariano Paredes (President of Mexico)" label="Mariano Paredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q738353" start="50198" end="50219" title="Matamoros, Tamaulipas" label="Matamoros, Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q727321" start="50253" end="50269" title="Pedro de Ampudia" label="Pedro de Ampudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796515" start="50504" end="50519" title="Thornton Affair" label="Thornton Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613729" start="51218" end="51228" title="Fort Texas" label="Fort Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q431576" start="51294" end="51308" title="Mariano Arista" label="Mariano Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q815139" start="51362" end="51386" title="Siege of Fort Texas" label="laid siege to Fort Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736004" start="51472" end="51491" title="Battle of Palo Alto" label="Battle of Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890818" start="51697" end="51725" title="Battle of Resaca de la Palma" label="Battle of Resaca de la Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="52116" end="52129" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="52130" end="52144" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="53013" end="53040" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q518351" start="53269" end="53286" title="Stephen W. Kearny" label="Stephen W. Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786346" start="53433" end="53455" title="Archibald H. Gillespie" label="Archibald H. Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="53619" end="53634" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="53708" end="53714" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17557" start="53743" end="53759" title="California Republic" label="Bear Flag Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="53852" end="53862" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q878374" start="53920" end="53938" title="Robert F. Stockton" label="Robert F. Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="53949" end="53960" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="54346" end="54364" title="Thomas Hart Benton (politician)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241190" start="54902" end="54914" title="David Wilmot (politician)" label="David Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661295" start="55029" end="55043" title="Wilmot Proviso" label="Wilmot Proviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324519" start="55293" end="55307" title="1846 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1846 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="55603" end="55630" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q535898" start="56305" end="56332" title="Alexander Slidell Mackenzie" label="Alexander Slidell Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="57402" end="57410" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="57451" end="57465" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628057" start="57697" end="57716" title="Battle of Monterrey" label="Battle of Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q53077" start="58236" end="58244" title="Saltillo" label="Saltillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808450" start="58350" end="58371" title="Battle of Buena Vista" label="Battle of Buena Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745368" start="58929" end="58940" title="Siege of Veracruz" label="won control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985012" start="59098" end="59112" title="Nicholas Trist" label="Nicholas Trist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="59302" end="59317" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q392250" start="59409" end="59431" title="Isthmus of Tehuantepec" label="Isthmus of Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399696" start="59614" end="59633" title="Battle of Contreras" label="Battle of Contreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333407" start="59642" end="59662" title="Battle of Churubusco" label="Battle of Churubusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546566" start="59813" end="59832" title="Battle for Mexico City" label="to take Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511131" start="60139" end="60166" title="All of Mexico Movement" label="annexation of all of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="60217" end="60232" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="61346" end="61355" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="61533" end="61560" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q827212" start="62976" end="62992" title="Gadsden Purchase" label="Gadsden Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="63106" end="63130" title="Contiguous United States" label="Contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="63625" end="63644" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="63713" end="63731" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="64098" end="64117" title="Oregon Territory" label="Territory of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="64294" end="64314" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="64379" end="64397" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="64469" end="64495" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q630882" start="64689" end="64712" title="Republic of New Granada" label="Republic of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219562" start="64714" end="64736" title="Benjamin Alden Bidlack" label="Benjamin Alden Bidlack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090617" start="64753" end="64777" title="Mallarino–Bidlack Treaty" label="Mallarino–Bidlack Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="65037" end="65054" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="65145" end="65157" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q649965" start="65236" end="65250" title="Panama Canal Railway" label="Panama Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="65525" end="65540" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165336" start="65658" end="65683" title="Romulus Mitchell Saunders" label="Romulus Mitchell Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073738" start="66180" end="66190" title="Filibuster (military)" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362170" start="66205" end="66218" title="Narciso López" label="Narciso López"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017327" start="66417" end="66437" title="Independent Treasury" label="Independent Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836795" start="67128" end="67145" title="Treasury Building (Washington, D.C.)" label="Treasury building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982567" start="67283" end="67302" title="Federal Reserve Act" label="Federal Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643351" start="67634" end="67645" title="List of tie-breaking votes cast by vice presidents of the United States" label="break a tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962356" start="67840" end="67853" title="Walker tariff" label="Walker Tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338315" start="68130" end="68153" title="Rivers and Harbors Bill" label="Rivers and Harbors Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="68553" end="68563" title="Political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="68601" end="68623" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="virtue of the republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797994" start="68689" end="68708" title="Maysville Road veto" label="Maysville Road Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q615305" start="68915" end="68926" title="pocket veto" label="pocket veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="70225" end="70245" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="70325" end="70343" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q915480" start="70372" end="70385" title="Henry Baldwin (judge)" label="Henry Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="71004" end="71016" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901949" start="71185" end="71203" title="recess appointment" label="recess appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q579228" start="71222" end="71235" title="Levi Woodbury" label="Levi Woodbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546053" start="71380" end="71398" title="George W. Woodward" label="George W. Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348975" start="71517" end="71530" title="Simon Cameron" label="Simon Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648806" start="71708" end="71727" title="Robert Cooper Grier" label="Robert Cooper Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="71857" end="71879" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott v. Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889613" start="72018" end="72073" title="United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia" label="United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="72096" end="72124" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554737" start="72238" end="72273" title="1848 Democratic National Convention" label="1848 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554742" start="72305" end="72334" title="1848 Whig National Convention" label="1848 Whig National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="72397" end="72413" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="73952" end="73974" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225467" start="74076" end="74086" title="Polk Place" label="Polk Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="74228" end="74238" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="74401" end="74408" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q863970" start="74436" end="74445" title="riverboat" label="riverboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710103" start="76256" end="76279" title="Nashville City Cemetery" label="Nashville City Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570396" start="76562" end="76585" title="Tennessee State Capitol" label="Tennessee State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137070" start="76739" end="76754" title="President James K. Polk Home &amp;amp; Museum" label="the family home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700092" start="76843" end="76874" title="Tennessee Historical Commission" label="Tennessee Historical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q862186" start="77068" end="77079" title="Bill Haslam" label="Bill Haslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="77454" end="77465" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799614" start="77974" end="77999" title="Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr." label="Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="78103" end="78118" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="78140" end="78165" title="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr." label="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="78215" end="78221" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745445" start="78393" end="78419" title="Democracy promotion by the United States" label="promote American democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614726" start="78643" end="78662" title="Steven G. Calabresi" label="Steven G. Calabresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113479" start="78667" end="78685" title="Christopher S. Yoo" label="Christopher S. Yoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="79372" end="79386" title="Alaska Purchase" label="that of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q28861492" start="79708" end="79723" title="Robert W. Merry" label="Robert W. Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499749" start="79884" end="79897" title="Amy Greenberg" label="Amy Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63487745" start="80512" end="80527" title="James A. Rawley" label="James A. Rawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q465854" start="80547" end="80574" title="American National Biography" label="American National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="81972" end="81982" title="Plantations in the American South" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q252214" start="82022" end="82043" title="Somerville, Tennessee" label="Somerville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283243" start="82199" end="82223" title="Coffeeville, Mississippi" label="Coffeeville, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388078" start="84488" end="84499" title="estate sale" label="estate sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603914" start="84639" end="84652" title="Gideon Pillow" label="Gideon Pillow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85356" end="85364" title="Plantations in the American South#Overseer" label="overseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="86083" end="86092" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="86972" end="86992" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522748" start="87699" end="87710" title="Slave Power" label="Slave Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661295" start="88253" end="88267" title="Wilmot Proviso" label="Wilmot Proviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="88445" end="88484" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="88487" end="88549" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068012" start="88552" end="88608" title="List of presidents of the United States who owned slaves" label="List of presidents of the United States who owned slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875917" start="88611" end="88665" title="Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps" label="Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638666" start="89574" end="89590" title="Bernard DeVoto" label="De Voto, Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="92388" end="92402" title="primary source" label="primary source"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="93198" end="93237" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="93318" end="93349" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="93397" end="93416" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="93562" end="93577" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="93658" end="93681" title="North Carolina" label="State of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="93741" end="93747" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="93761" end="93796" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15982" wikidata="Q2168" url="?curid=15982" title="January 4">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*46 BC – Julius Caesar fights Titus Labienus in the Battle of Ruspina.
* 871 – Battle of Reading: Æthelred of Wessex and his brother Alfred are defeated by a Danish invasion army.

===1601–1900===
*1642 – English Civil War: King Charles I, accompanied by 400 soldiers, attempts to arrest five members of Parliament for treason, only to discover the men had been tipped off and fled.
*1649 – English Civil War: The Rump Parliament votes to put Charles I on trial.
*1717 – The Netherlands, Great Britain, and France sign the Triple Alliance. 
*1762 – Great Britain declares war on Spain, which meant the entry of Spain into the Seven Years&#x27; War.
*1798 – Constantine Hangerli arrives in Bucharest, Wallachia, as its new Prince, invested by the Ottoman Empire.
*1844 – The first issue of the Swedish-languaged &quot;Saima&quot; newspaper founded by J. V. Snellman is published in Kuopio, Finland.
*1853 – After having been kidnapped and sold into slavery in the American South, Solomon Northup regains his freedom; his memoir &quot;Twelve Years a Slave&quot; later becomes a national bestseller.
*1854 – The McDonald Islands are discovered by Captain William McDonald aboard the &quot;Samarang&quot;.
*1863 – The New Apostolic Church, a Christian and chiliastic church, is established in Hamburg, Germany.
*1878 – Russo-Turkish War (1877–78): Sofia is liberated from Ottoman rule.
*1884 – The Fabian Society is founded in London, United Kingdom.
*1885 – Sino-French War: French troops under General Oscar de Négrier defeat a numerically superior Qing force at Núi Bop in northern Vietnam.
*1896 – Utah is admitted as the 45th U.S. state.

===1901–present===
*1903 – Topsy, an elephant, is electrocuted by the owners of Luna Park, Coney Island. The Edison film company records the film &quot;Electrocuting an Elephant&quot; of Topsy&#x27;s death.
*1909 – Explorer Aeneas Mackintosh of the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition escaped death by fleeing across ice floes.
*1912 – The Scout Association is incorporated throughout the British Empire by royal charter.
*1918 – The Finnish Declaration of Independence is recognized by Russia, Sweden, Germany and France.
*1944 – World War II: Operation Carpetbagger, involving the dropping of arms and supplies to resistance fighters in Europe, begins.
*1946 – The first day of a three-day &quot;disastrous&quot; tornado outbreak across the south-central United States leaves 41 people dead and at least 412 others injured.
*1948 – Burma gains its independence from the United Kingdom, becoming an independent republic. 
*1951 – Korean War: Chinese and North Korean forces capture Seoul for the second time.
*1956 – The Greek National Radical Union is formed by Konstantinos Karamanlis.
*1958 – Sputnik 1, the first artificial Earth satellite, launched by the Soviet Union in 1957, falls to Earth from orbit.
*1959 – &quot;Luna 1&quot; becomes the first spacecraft to reach the vicinity of the Moon.
*1965 – Aeroflot Flight 101/X-20 crashes on approach to Alma-Ata Airport, killing 64 people.
*1972 – Rose Heilbron becomes the first female judge to sit at the Old Bailey in London, UK. 
*1975 – This date overflowed the 12-bit field that had been used in TOPS-10. There were numerous problems and crashes related to this bug while an alternative format was developed. 
*1976 – The Troubles: The Ulster Volunteer Force shoots dead six Irish Catholic civilians in County Armagh, Northern Ireland. The next day, gunmen would shoot dead ten Protestant civilians nearby in retaliation.
*1987 – The Maryland train collision: An Amtrak train &quot;en route&quot; to Boston from Washington, D.C., collides with Conrail engines in Chase, Maryland, United States, killing 16 people.
*1989 – Second Gulf of Sidra incident: A pair of Libyan MiG-23 &quot;Floggers&quot; are shot down by a pair of US Navy F-14 Tomcats during an air-to-air confrontation.
*1990 – In Pakistan&#x27;s deadliest train accident an overloaded passenger train collides with an empty freight train, resulting in 307 deaths and 700 injuries.
*1998 – A massive ice storm hits eastern Canada and the northeastern United States, continuing through January 10 and causing widespread destruction.
*1999 – Former professional wrestler Jesse Ventura is sworn in as governor of Minnesota, United States.
*2000 – A Norwegian passenger train departing from Trondheim, collides with a local train coming from Hamar in Åsta, Åmot; 19 people are killed and 68 injured in the accident.
*2004 – &quot;Spirit&quot;, a NASA Mars rover, lands successfully on Mars at 04:35 UTC.
* 2004 – Mikheil Saakashvili is elected President of Georgia following the November 2003 Rose Revolution.
*2006 – Ehud Olmert becomes acting Prime Minister of Israel after the incumbent, Ariel Sharon, suffers a second, apparently more serious stroke. 
*2007 – The 110th United States Congress convenes, electing Nancy Pelosi as the first female Speaker of the House in U.S. history.
*2008 – A Let L-410 Turbolet crashes in the Los Roques Archipelago in Venezuela, killing 14 people.
*2010 – The Burj Khalifa, the current tallest building in the world, officially opens in Dubai.
*2013 – A gunman kills eight people in a house-to-house rampage in Kawit, Cavite, Philippines.
*2018 – Hennenman–Kroonstad train crash: A passenger train operated by Shosholoza Meyl collides with a truck on a level crossing at Geneva Station between Hennenman and Kroonstad, Free State, South Africa. Twenty people are killed and 260 injured.
*2019 – A fire in an escape room in Koszalin, Poland, kills five teenagers through carbon monoxide poisoning.
==Births==

===Pre-1600===
* 659 – Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin (d.680)
*1077 – Emperor Zhezong of China (d. 1100)
*1334 – Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy (d. 1383)
*1467 – Bodo VIII, Count of Stolberg-Wernigerode (d. 1538)
*1581 – James Ussher, Irish archbishop and historian (d. 1656)

===1601–1900===
*1643 (NS) – Isaac Newton, English mathematician and physicist (d. 1726/27)
*1654 – Lars Roberg, Swedish physician and academic (d. 1742)
*1672 – Hugh Boulter, English-Irish archbishop (d. 1742)
*1710 – Giovanni Battista Pergolesi, Italian composer, violinist, and organist (d. 1736)
*1720 – Johann Friedrich Agricola, German organist and composer (d. 1774)
*1731 – Karl Abraham Zedlitz, Prussian minister of education (d. 1793)
*1785 – Jacob Grimm, German philologist and mythologist (d. 1863)
*1809 – Louis Braille, French educator, invented Braille (d. 1852)
*1813 – Isaac Pitman, English linguist and educator (d. 1897)
*1832 – George Tryon, English admiral (d. 1893)
*1838 – General Tom Thumb, American circus performer (d. 1883)
*1839 – Carl Humann, German archaeologist, architect, and engineer (d. 1896)
*1848 – Katsura Tarō, Japanese general and politician, 6th Prime Minister of Japan (d. 1913)
*1858 – Carter Glass, American publisher and politician, 47th United States Secretary of the Treasury (d. 1946)
*1864 – Clara Emilia Smitt, Swedish doctor and author (d. 1928)
*1869 – Tommy Corcoran, American baseball player and umpire (d. 1960)
*1874 – Josef Suk, Czech violinist and composer (d. 1935)
*1877 – Gibson Gowland, English film actor (d. 1951)
* 1877 – Marsden Hartley, American painter and poet (d. 1943)
*1878 – A. E. Coppard, English poet and short story writer (d. 1957)
* 1878 – Augustus John, Welsh painter and illustrator (d. 1961)
*1881 – Wilhelm Lehmbruck, German sculptor (d. 1919)
*1883 – Max Eastman, American author and poet (d. 1969)
* 1883 – Johanna Westerdijk, Dutch pathologist and academic (d. 1961)
*1884 – Guy Pène du Bois, American painter, critic, and educator (d. 1958)
*1889 – M. Patanjali Sastri, Indian lawyer and jurist, 2nd Chief Justice of India (d. 1963)
*1891 – Edward Brooker, English-Australian sergeant and politician, 31st Premier of Tasmania (d. 1948)
*1895 – Leroy Grumman, American engineer and businessman, co-founded Grumman Aeronautical Engineering Co. (d. 1982)
*1896 – Everett Dirksen, American politician (d. 1969)
* 1896 – André Masson, French painter and illustrator (d. 1987)
*1897 – Chen Cheng, Chinese politician, Vice President of the Republic of China (d. 1965)
*1900 – James Bond, American ornithologist and zoologist (d. 1989)

===1901–present===
*1901 – C. L. R. James, Trinidadian journalist and theorist (d. 1989)
*1902 – John A. McCone, American businessman and politician, 6th Director of Central Intelligence (d. 1991)
*1903 – Georg Elser, German carpenter and attempted assassin of Adolf Hitler (d. 1945)
*1913 – Malietoa Tanumafili II, Samoan ruler (d. 2007)
*1916 – Lionel Newman, American pianist and composer (d. 1989)
* 1916 – Robert Parrish, American actor and director (d. 1995)
*1920 – William Colby, American intelligence officer, 10th Director of Central Intelligence (d. 1996)
* 1920 – Rosalie Crutchley, British actress (d. 1997)
*1924 – Marianne Werner, German shot putter (d. 2023) 
*1925 – Veikko Hakulinen, Finnish skier and technician (d. 2003)
*1927 – Paul Desmarais, Canadian businessman and philanthropist (d. 2013)
* 1927 – Barbara Rush, American actress (d. 2024)
*1929 – Günter Schabowski, German journalist and politician (d. 2015)
*1930 – Sorrell Booke, American actor and director (d. 1994)
* 1930 – Don Shula, American football player and coach (d. 2020)
*1931 – William Deane, Australian judge and politician, 22nd Governor-General of Australia
* 1931 – Nora Iuga, Romanian poet, writer and translator
*1932 – Carlos Saura, Spanish director and screenwriter (d. 2023)
* 1932 – Clint Hill, American Secret Service agent (d. 2025)
*1934 – Rudolf Schuster, Slovak politician, 2nd President of Slovakia
*1935 – Floyd Patterson, American boxer (d. 2006)
*1937 – Grace Bumbry, American operatic soprano (d. 2023)
* 1937 – Dyan Cannon, American actress, director, producer, and screenwriter
*1938 – Jim Norton, Irish stage, film and television actor
*1938 – Eberhard Wagner, German academic, linguist and author
*1940 – Brian Josephson, Welsh physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
* 1940 – Gao Xingjian, Chinese novelist, playwright, and critic, Nobel Prize laureate
*1941 – George P. Cosmatos, Italian-Canadian director and screenwriter (d. 2005)
* 1941 – Kalpnath Rai, Indian politician (d. 1999)
*1942 – Bolaji Akinyemi, Nigerian political scientist, academic, and politician
* 1942 – Jim Downing, American race car driver and inventor
* 1942 – John McLaughlin, English guitarist and songwriter 
*1943 – Doris Kearns Goodwin, American historian and author
* 1943 – Hwang Sok-yong, South Korean author and educator
*1944 – Gary Stevens, Australian rugby league player
* 1944 – Alan Sutherland, New Zealand rugby player (d. 2020)
*1945 – Vesa-Matti Loiri, Finnish actor, musician and comedian (d. 2022)
* 1945 – Richard R. Schrock, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
*1946 – Arthur Conley, American singer-songwriter (d. 2003)
*1947 – Chris Cutler, English percussionist, lyricist and music theorist
* 1947 – Marie-Thérèse Letablier, French sociologist and academic
*1948 – Kostas Davourlis, Greek footballer (d. 1992)
* 1948 – Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé, Malian civil servant and politician, Prime Minister of Mali (d. 2021)
*1949 – Mick Mills, English footballer and manager
* 1949 – Bwanga Tshimen, Congolese footballer
*1950 – Khondakar Ashraf Hossain, Bangladesh poet and academic (d. 2013)
*1953 – Norberto Alonso, Argentinian footballer
*1954 – Rob Kerin, Australian politician, 43rd Premier of South Australia
* 1954 – Tina Knowles, American fashion designer, founded House of Deréon
*1956 – Tom Borton, American jazz saxophonist, songwriter and composer (d. 2011)
* 1956 – Zehava Gal-On, Israeli politician
* 1956 – Ann Magnuson, American actress and performance artist
* 1956 – Bernard Sumner, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer 
*1957 – Patty Loveless, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1958 – Matt Frewer, American-Canadian actor
* 1958 – Julian Sands, English actor (d. 2023)
*1960 – Gavin Miller, Australian rugby league player
* 1960 – Michael Stipe, American singer-songwriter and producer 
*1961 – Sidney Green, American basketball player and coach
* 1961 – Cliff Levingston, American basketball player and coach
* 1961 – Graham McTavish, Scottish actor and author
*1962 – Joe Kleine, American basketball player and coach
*1963 – Dave Foley, Canadian comedian, actor, director, and producer
* 1963 – Till Lindemann, German singer, songwriter, and poet
* 1963 – Martina Proeber, German diver
*1964 – Susan Devoy, New Zealand squash player
* 1964 – Dot-Marie Jones, American actress and athlete
* 1964 – Adrian Shelford, New Zealand rugby league player (d. 2003)
*1965 – Guy Forget, French tennis player
* 1965 – Craig Revel Horwood, Australian-English dancer, choreographer, and director
* 1965 – Julia Ormond, English actress and producer
*1966 – Deana Carter, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1967 – Johnny Nelson, English boxer and sportscaster
* 1967 – David Toms, American golfer and philanthropist
* 1967 – David Wilson, Australian rugby player
*1969 – Corie Blount, American basketball player
* 1969 – Kees van Wonderen, Dutch footballer and manager
*1970 – Josh Stamberg, American actor
*1971 – Shane Walker, Australian rugby league player
* 1971 – Colin Ward, Australian rugby league player
*1973 – Frank Høj, Danish cyclist
*1974 – Danilo Hondo, German cyclist 
*1975 – Shane Carwin, American mixed martial artist and wrestler
* 1975 – Paul Watson, English footballer and physiotherapist
*1976 – Ted Lilly, American baseball player
*1978 – Dominik Hrbatý, Slovak tennis player
*1979 – Shergo Biran, German footballer 
* 1979 – Tristan Gommendy, French racing driver
*1980 – D&#x27;Arcy Carden, American actress and comedian
* 1980 – Miguel Monteiro, Portuguese footballer
* 1980 – Justin Ontong, South African cricketer
*1982 – Richard Logan, English footballer
* 1982 – Danny Sullivan, Australian rugby league player
* 1982 – Kang Hye-jung, South Korean actress
*1983 – Will Bynum, American basketball player
* 1983 – Richard Rankin, Scottish film, television and theatre actor
*1984 – Jiří Hudler, Czech ice hockey player
*1985 – Lenora Crichlow, British actress
* 1985 – Kari Aalvik Grimsbø, Norwegian handball player
* 1985 – Gökhan Gönül, Turkish footballer
* 1985 – Al Jefferson, American basketball player
* 1985 – Jung Sung-ryong, South Korean footballer
* 1985 – Ross Turnbull, English footballer and coach
*1986 – Younès Kaboul, French footballer
* 1986 – Andrei Krauchanka, Belarusian decathlete
* 1986 – Russell Martin, Scottish footballer and manager
* 1986 – James Milner, English footballer
* 1986 – Charlyne Yi, American actor, comedian, musician, and writer
*1987 – Marissa Coleman, American basketball player
* 1987 – Przemysław Tytoń, Polish footballer
* 1987 – Danny Simpson, English footballer
* 1987 – Kay Voser, Swiss footballer
*1988 – Anestis Argyriou, Greek footballer
* 1988 – Maximilian Riedmüller, German footballer
*1989 – Kevin Pillar, American baseball player
* 1989 – Graham Rahal, American race car driver
*1990 – Iago Falque, Spanish footballer
* 1990 – Raisel Iglesias, Cuban baseball player
* 1990 – Toni Kroos, German footballer
* 1990 – Alberto Paloschi, Italian footballer
*1991 – Charles Melton, American actor
*1992 – Kris Bryant, American baseball player
* 1992 – Quincy Promes, Dutch footballer
*1993 – James Michael McAdoo, American basketball player
* 1993 – Mahmoud Metwalli, Egyptian footballer
*1994 – Derrick Henry, American football player
*1995 – Sarah Nurse, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1995 – Adam Webster, English footballer
*1996 – Michael Dickson, Australian gridiron football player
* 1996 – Jackson Hastings, Australian rugby league player
* 1996 – Marcus Ingvartsen, Danish footballer
* 1996 – Jasmine Paolini, Italian tennis player
*1997 – Angeliño, Spanish footballer
* 1997 – Ante Žižić, Croatian basketball player 
*1998 – Coco Jones, American singer-songwriter and actress
* 1998 – Arnoldas Kulboka, Lithuanian basketball player
* 1998 – Rodrigo Garro, Argentine footballer
* 1998 – Liza Soberano, Filipina actress
*1999 – Daniel Arzani, Iranian-Australian footballer
*1999 – Nico Hischier, Swiss ice hockey player
* 1999 – Jaeman Salmon, Australian rugby league player
* 1999 – Collin Sexton, American basketball player
*2000 – Max Aarons, English footballer
*2001 – Odilon Kossounou, Ivorian footballer
* 2001 – Lola Young, English singer and songwriter
*2003 – Jaeden Martell, American actor
*2004 – Victor Wembanyama, French basketball player
*2005 – Dafne Keen, British-Spanish actress
* 2005 – Rob Dillingham, American basketball player
*2006 – Marc Guiu, Spanish footballer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 871 – Æthelwulf, Saxon ealdorman
* 874 – Hasan al-Askari, eleventh of the Twelve Imams (probable; b. 846)
*1248 – Sancho II of Portugal (b. 1209)
*1344 – Robert de Lisle, 1st Baron Lisle, English peer (b. 1288)
*1399 – Nicholas Eymerich, Catalan theologian and inquisitor
*1424 – Muzio Sforza, Italian condottiero (b. 1369)
*1428 – Frederick I, Elector of Saxony (b. 1370)
*1584 – Tobias Stimmer, Swiss painter and illustrator (b. 1539)

===1601–1900===
*1604 – Ferenc Nádasdy, Hungarian noble (b. 1555)
*1695 – François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg, French general (b. 1628)
*1761 – Stephen Hales, English clergyman and physiologist (b. 1677)
*1782 – Ange-Jacques Gabriel, French architect, designed École Militaire (b. 1698)
*1786 – Moses Mendelssohn, German philosopher and theologian (b. 1729)
*1804 – Charlotte Lennox, English author and poet (b. 1730)
*1821 – Elizabeth Ann Seton, American nun and saint (b. 1774)
*1825 – Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies (b. 1751)
*1863 – Roger Hanson, American general (b. 1827)
*1874 – Thomas Gregson, English-Australian lawyer and politician, 2nd Premier of Tasmania (b. 1798)
*1877 – Cornelius Vanderbilt, American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1794)
*1880 – Anselm Feuerbach, German painter and educator (b. 1829)
* 1880 – Edward William Cooke, English painter and illustrator (b. 1811)
*1882 – John William Draper, English-American physician, chemist, and photographer (b. 1811)
*1883 – Antoine Chanzy, French general (b. 1823)
*1891 – Antoine Labelle, Canadian priest (b. 1833)
*1896 – Joseph Hubert Reinkens, German bishop and academic (b. 1821)
*1900 – Stanisław Mieroszewski, Polish-born politician, writer, historian and member of the Imperial Council of Austria (b. 1827)

===1901–present===
*1904 – Anna Winlock, American astronomer and academic (b. 1857)
*1910 – Léon Delagrange, French pilot and sculptor (b. 1873)
*1912 – Clarence Dutton, American geologist and soldier (b. 1841)
*1919 – Georg von Hertling, German academic and politician, 7th Chancellor of the German Empire (b. 1843)
*1920 – Benito Pérez Galdós, Spanish author and playwright (b. 1843)
*1924 – Alfred Grünfeld, Austrian pianist and composer (b. 1852)
*1925 – Nellie Cashman, American nurse, restaurateur, entrepreneur, and gold prospector (b. 1845)
*1927 – Süleyman Nazif, Turkish poet and civil servant (b. 1870)
*1931 – Art Acord, American actor and stuntman (b. 1890)
*1931 – Louise, Princess Royal of the United Kingdom (b. 1867)
*1931 – Mohammad Ali Jauhar, Indian Muslim activist (b. 1878)
*1941 – Henri Bergson, French philosopher and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1859)
*1943 – Jerzy Iwanow-Szajnowicz, Greek-Polish swimmer and water polo player (b. 1911)
* 1943 – Marina Raskova, Russian pilot and navigator (b. 1912)
*1944 – Kaj Munk, Danish playwright and pastor (b. 1898)
*1960 – Albert Camus, French novelist, philosopher, and journalist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1913)
*1961 – Erwin Schrödinger, Austrian physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1887)
*1965 – T. S. Eliot, American-English poet, playwright, and critic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1888)
*1967 – Donald Campbell, English racing driver and world speed record holder (b. 1921)
*1969 – Paul Chambers, American bassist and composer (b. 1935)
*1975 – Carlo Levi, Italian painter, author, and activist (b. 1902)
*1985 – Brian Horrocks, Indian-English general (b. 1895)
*1986 – Christopher Isherwood, English-American author and academic (b. 1904)
* 1986 – Phil Lynott, Irish singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (b. 1949)
*1988 – Lily Laskine, French harp player (b. 1893)
*1990 – Harold Eugene Edgerton, American engineer and academic (b. 1903)
* 1990 – Henry Bolte, Australian politician, 38th Premier of Victoria (b. 1908)
*1994 – R. D. Burman, Indian film composer and music director (b. 1939)
*1995 – Eduardo Mata, Mexican conductor and composer (b. 1942)
* 1995 – Sol Tax, American anthropologist and academic (b. 1907)
*1997 – Harry Helmsley, American businessman (b. 1909)
*1998 – Mae Questel, American actress (b. 1908)
*1999 – Iron Eyes Cody, American actor and stuntman (b. 1904)
*2001 – Les Brown, American bandleader and composer (b. 1912)
*2004 – Brian Gibson, English director and screenwriter (b. 1944)
* 2004 – Joan Aiken, English author (b. 1924)
* 2004 – John Toland, American historian and author (b. 1912)
*2005 – Bud Poile, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager (b. 1924)
* 2005 – Frank Harary, American mathematician and academic (b. 1921)
* 2005 – Humphrey Carpenter, English radio host and author (b. 1946)
* 2005 – Robert Heilbroner, American economist and historian (b. 1919)
*2006 – Irving Layton, Romanian-Canadian poet and academic (b. 1912)
* 2006 – Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Emirati politician, 1st Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates (b. 1946)
* 2006 – Milton Himmelfarb, American sociographer, author, and academic (b. 1918)
*2007 – Helen Hill, American director and producer (b. 1970)
* 2007 – Marais Viljoen, South African politician, 5th State President of South Africa (b. 1915)
*2008 – Xavier Chamorro Cardenal, Nicaraguan journalist (b. 1932)
*2009 – Gert Jonke, Austrian poet, playwright, and author (b. 1946)
*2010 – Johan Ferrier, Surinamese educator and politician, 1st President of Suriname (b. 1910)
* 2010 – Tsutomu Yamaguchi, Japanese engineer (b. 1916)
*2011 – Coen Moulijn, Dutch footballer (b. 1937)
* 2011 – Gerry Rafferty, Scottish singer-songwriter (b. 1947)
* 2011 – Salmaan Taseer, Pakistani businessman and politician, 26th Governor of Punjab, Pakistan (b. 1944)
*2012 – Eve Arnold, American photographer and journalist (b. 1912)
* 2012 – Rod Robbie, English-Canadian architect, designed the Canadian Pavilion and Rogers Centre (b. 1928)
*2013 – Anwar Shamim, Pakistani general (b. 1931)
* 2013 – Zoran Žižić, Montenegrin politician, 4th Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (b. 1951)
*2015 – Pino Daniele, Italian singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1955)
*2016 – S. H. Kapadia, Indian lawyer, judge, and politician, 38th Chief Justice of India (b. 1947)
* 2016 – Stephen W. Bosworth, American academic and diplomat, United States Ambassador to South Korea (b. 1939)
*2017 – Milt Schmidt, Canadian ice hockey player, coach and general manager (b. 1918)
* 2017 – Georges Prêtre, French orchestral and opera conductor (b. 1924)
*2019 – Harold Brown, 14th United States Secretary of Defense (b. 1927)
*2020 – Tom Long, Australian actor (b. 1968)
*2021 – Tanya Roberts, American actress (b. 1949)
*2023 – Rosi Mittermaier, German alpine skier and Olympic champion (b. 1950)
*2024 – Glynis Johns, British actress and singer (b. 1923)
* 2024 – David Soul, American-British actor and singer (b. 1943)
* 2024 – Christian Oliver, German actor (b. 1972)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian feast day:
** Angela of Foligno
** Elizabeth Ann Seton
** Ferréol of Uzès
** Mavilus
** Pharaildis of Ghent
** Rigobert
** January 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* The eleventh of the Twelve Days of Christmas. (Western Christianity)
* Independence Day (Myanmar), celebrates the independence of Myanmar from the United Kingdom in 1948.
* Colonial Martyrs Repression Day (Angola)
* Day of the Martyrs (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
* Ogoni Day (Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People)
*Tokyo Dome Show: The annual Wrestle Kingdom event run by New Japan Pro-Wrestling
* World Braille Day

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day 
* Historical Events on January 4 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4180" start="27" end="32" title="46 BC" label="46 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="35" end="48" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q311265" start="56" end="70" title="Titus Labienus" label="Titus Labienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q762458" start="78" end="95" title="Battle of Ruspina" label="Battle of Ruspina"/>
<link wikidata="Q24754" start="99" end="102" title="871" label="871"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065046" start="105" end="122" title="Battle of Reading (871)" label="Battle of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q272233" start="124" end="142" title="Æthelred of Wessex" label="Æthelred of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="159" end="165" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912" start="224" end="228" title="1642" label="1642"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="255" end="264" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="330" end="340" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945" start="410" end="414" title="1649" label="1649"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477668" start="440" end="455" title="Rump Parliament" label="Rump Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895" start="490" end="494" title="1717" label="1717"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="501" end="512" title="Dutch Republic" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="514" end="527" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q283511" start="549" end="564" title="Triple Alliance (1717)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652" start="568" end="572" title="1762" label="1762"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="605" end="610" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="652" end="673" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823" start="676" end="680" title="1798" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994983" start="683" end="703" title="Constantine Hangerli" label="Constantine Hangerli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="715" end="724" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="726" end="735" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115215358" start="748" end="754" title="Prince of Wallachia" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="772" end="786" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633" start="789" end="793" title="1844" label="1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491056" start="837" end="864" title="Saima (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Saima&amp;quot; newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688" start="876" end="890" title="Johan Vilhelm Snellman" label="J. V. Snellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q162279" start="907" end="922" title="Kuopio" label="Kuopio, Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666" start="925" end="929" title="1853" label="1853"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489578" start="1005" end="1020" title="Solomon Northup" label="Solomon Northup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857661" start="1059" end="1079" title="Twelve Years a Slave" label="Twelve Years a Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670" start="1124" end="1128" title="1854" label="1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q131198" start="1135" end="1151" title="Heard Island and McDonald Islands" label="McDonald Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="1229" end="1233" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q512232" start="1240" end="1260" title="New Apostolic Church" label="New Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="1278" end="1288" title="Millennialism" label="chiliastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1315" end="1322" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="1334" end="1338" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="1341" end="1368" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="1370" end="1375" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273318" start="1379" end="1388" title="Battle of Sofia" label="liberated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451496" start="1394" end="1406" title="Ottoman Bulgaria" label="Ottoman rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="1409" end="1413" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="1420" end="1434" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="1474" end="1478" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="1481" end="1496" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357062" start="1526" end="1542" title="Oscar de Négrier" label="Oscar de Négrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889551" start="1543" end="1549" title="Battle of Núi Bop" label="defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1573" end="1577" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="1617" end="1621" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="1624" end="1628" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="1653" end="1663" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="1686" end="1690" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q973447" start="1693" end="1698" title="Topsy (elephant)" label="Topsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="1703" end="1711" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q924944" start="1746" end="1769" title="Luna Park, Coney Island (1903)" label="Luna Park, Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q606359" start="1775" end="1794" title="Edison Studios" label="Edison film company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325978" start="1818" end="1843" title="Electrocuting an Elephant" label="Electrocuting an Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="1874" end="1878" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q380910" start="1890" end="1907" title="Aeneas Mackintosh" label="Aeneas Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162294" start="1915" end="1950" title="Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition" label="Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378564" start="1983" end="1992" title="drift ice" label="ice floes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="1995" end="1999" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q849740" start="2002" end="2023" title="The Scout Association" label="The Scout Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2055" end="2069" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="2073" end="2086" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="2089" end="2093" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994771" start="2100" end="2135" title="Finnish Declaration of Independence" label="Finnish Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="2190" end="2194" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2197" end="2209" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026003" start="2211" end="2233" title="Operation Carpetbagger" label="Operation Carpetbagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="2322" end="2326" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q117836928" start="2348" end="2397" title="Tornado outbreak of January 4–6, 1946" label="three-day &amp;quot;disastrous&amp;quot; tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="2493" end="2497" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="2500" end="2505" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="2590" end="2594" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2597" end="2607" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="2621" end="2632" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q493922" start="2641" end="2654" title="Third Battle of Seoul" label="capture Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="2677" end="2681" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371314" start="2694" end="2716" title="National Radical Union" label="National Radical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="2730" end="2753" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="2756" end="2760" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="2763" end="2772" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2859" end="2864" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="2878" end="2882" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159913" start="2891" end="2897" title="Luna 1" label="Luna 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="2922" end="2932" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2962" end="2966" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="2969" end="2973" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488142" start="2976" end="3000" title="Aeroflot Flight 101/X-20" label="Aeroflot Flight 101/X-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q858844" start="3024" end="3040" title="Almaty International Airport" label="Alma-Ata Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="3062" end="3066" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166737" start="3069" end="3082" title="Rose Heilbron" label="Rose Heilbron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="3128" end="3138" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="3156" end="3160" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="3223" end="3230" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="3338" end="3342" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="3345" end="3357" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127576" start="3363" end="3385" title="Ulster Volunteer Force" label="Ulster Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301565" start="3386" end="3426" title="Reavey and O&amp;#x27;Dowd killings" label="shoots dead six Irish Catholic civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="3430" end="3443" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q547328" start="3484" end="3525" title="Kingsmill massacre" label="would shoot dead ten Protestant civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="3550" end="3554" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583758" start="3561" end="3585" title="1987 Maryland train collision" label="Maryland train collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="3590" end="3596" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3627" end="3633" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="3671" end="3678" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087064" start="3690" end="3705" title="Chase, Maryland" label="Chase, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="3742" end="3746" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603955" start="3749" end="3778" title="1989 air battle near Tobruk" label="Second Gulf of Sidra incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="3797" end="3824" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23" label="MiG-23 &amp;quot;Floggers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="3860" end="3871" title="Grumman F-14 Tomcat" label="F-14 Tomcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="3910" end="3914" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242644" start="3991" end="4027" title="Sukkur rail disaster" label="collides with an empty freight train"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="4072" end="4076" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090886" start="4079" end="4098" title="North American Ice Storm of 1998" label="A massive ice storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243" start="4174" end="4184" title="January 10" label="January 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="4222" end="4226" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q311161" start="4258" end="4271" title="Jesse Ventura" label="Jesse Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="4299" end="4308" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="4326" end="4330" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="4376" end="4385" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424555" start="4387" end="4414" title="Åsta accident" label="collides with a local train"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738335" start="4427" end="4432" title="Hamar" label="Hamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770072" start="4436" end="4440" title="Åsta" label="Åsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q271063" start="4442" end="4446" title="Åmot" label="Åmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="4502" end="4506" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q176276" start="4509" end="4527" title="Spirit (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Spirit&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4531" end="4535" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q389459" start="4536" end="4546" title="Mars rover" label="Mars rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="4570" end="4574" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="4584" end="4587" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43330" start="4598" end="4617" title="Mikheil Saakashvili" label="Mikheil Saakashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220035" start="4621" end="4628" title="Georgian presidential election, 2004" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q843405" start="4629" end="4649" title="President of Georgia" label="President of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="4678" end="4693" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="4696" end="4700" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q93181" start="4703" end="4714" title="Ehud Olmert" label="Ehud Olmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="4730" end="4754" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="4776" end="4788" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="4842" end="4846" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q170018" start="4853" end="4881" title="110th United States Congress" label="110th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="4901" end="4913" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="4934" end="4954" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="4973" end="4977" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q157925" start="4982" end="5000" title="Let L-410 Turbolet" label="Let L-410 Turbolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q736968" start="5001" end="5008" title="2008 Los Roques archipelago Transaven Let L-410 crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q318678" start="5016" end="5038" title="Los Roques Archipelago" label="Los Roques Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="5042" end="5051" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="5073" end="5077" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495" start="5084" end="5096" title="Burj Khalifa" label="Burj Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="5161" end="5166" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="5169" end="5173" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210461" start="5185" end="5203" title="Kawit shooting" label="kills eight people"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="5235" end="5240" title="Kawit" label="Kawit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="5242" end="5248" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="5264" end="5268" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q47068137" start="5271" end="5302" title="Hennenman–Kroonstad train crash" label="Hennenman–Kroonstad train crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643636" start="5334" end="5349" title="Shosholoza Meyl" label="Shosholoza Meyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642568" start="5418" end="5427" title="Hennenman" label="Hennenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q264014" start="5432" end="5441" title="Kroonstad" label="Kroonstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="5512" end="5516" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q60441169" start="5521" end="5543" title="ToNiePokój escape room fire" label="fire in an escape room"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="5547" end="5555" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="5594" end="5619" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q31092" start="5650" end="5653" title="659" label="659"/>
<link wikidata="Q314978" start="5656" end="5685" title="Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin" label="Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19441" start="5695" end="5699" title="1077" label="1077"/>
<link wikidata="Q7484" start="5702" end="5717" title="Emperor Zhezong" label="Emperor Zhezong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007" start="5738" end="5742" title="1334" label="1334"/>
<link wikidata="Q451995" start="5745" end="5771" title="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561" start="5783" end="5787" title="1467" label="1467"/>
<link wikidata="Q831671" start="5790" end="5830" title="Bodo VIII, Count of Stolberg-Wernigerode" label="Bodo VIII, Count of Stolberg-Wernigerode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717" start="5842" end="5846" title="1581" label="1581"/>
<link wikidata="Q333481" start="5849" end="5861" title="James Ussher" label="James Ussher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917" start="5922" end="5926" title="1643" label="1643"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="5928" end="5930" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="5934" end="5946" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970" start="5998" end="6002" title="1654" label="1654"/>
<link wikidata="Q55071968" start="6005" end="6016" title="Lars Roberg" label="Lars Roberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614" start="6060" end="6064" title="1672" label="1672"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945732" start="6067" end="6079" title="Hugh Boulter" label="Hugh Boulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861" start="6117" end="6121" title="1710" label="1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q185312" start="6124" end="6151" title="Giovanni Battista Pergolesi" label="Giovanni Battista Pergolesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908" start="6206" end="6210" title="1720" label="1720"/>
<link wikidata="Q60965" start="6213" end="6238" title="Johann Friedrich Agricola" label="Johann Friedrich Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963" start="6280" end="6284" title="1731" label="1731"/>
<link wikidata="Q96859" start="6287" end="6307" title="Karl Abraham Zedlitz" label="Karl Abraham Zedlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756" start="6351" end="6355" title="1785" label="1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="6358" end="6369" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="6417" end="6421" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q93182" start="6424" end="6437" title="Louis Braille" label="Louis Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="6465" end="6472" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="6484" end="6488" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390838" start="6491" end="6503" title="Isaac Pitman" label="Isaac Pitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="6546" end="6550" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508380" start="6553" end="6565" title="George Tryon" label="George Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612" start="6594" end="6598" title="1838" label="1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q918691" start="6601" end="6618" title="General Tom Thumb" label="General Tom Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="6657" end="6661" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q64445" start="6664" end="6675" title="Carl Humann" label="Carl Humann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647" start="6734" end="6738" title="1848" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q159048" start="6741" end="6753" title="Katsura Tarō" label="Katsura Tarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="6792" end="6815" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="6827" end="6831" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045879" start="6834" end="6846" title="Carter Glass" label="Carter Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="6888" end="6927" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="United States Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="6939" end="6943" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q22910229" start="6946" end="6964" title="Clara Emilia Smitt" label="Clara Emilia Smitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720" start="7003" end="7007" title="1869" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819323" start="7010" end="7024" title="Tommy Corcoran (baseball)" label="Tommy Corcoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="7073" end="7077" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q312700" start="7080" end="7089" title="Josef Suk (composer)" label="Josef Suk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="7131" end="7135" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q731233" start="7138" end="7152" title="Gibson Gowland" label="Gibson Gowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q553259" start="7192" end="7207" title="Marsden Hartley" label="Marsden Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="7246" end="7250" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647724" start="7253" end="7266" title="A. E. Coppard" label="A. E. Coppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q562540" start="7323" end="7336" title="Augustus John" label="Augustus John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="7379" end="7383" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q551282" start="7386" end="7403" title="Wilhelm Lehmbruck" label="Wilhelm Lehmbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="7432" end="7436" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q788572" start="7439" end="7450" title="Max Eastman" label="Max Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912854" start="7496" end="7514" title="Johanna Westerdijk" label="Johanna Westerdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="7558" end="7562" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622550" start="7565" end="7581" title="Guy Pène du Bois" label="Guy Pène du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="7633" end="7637" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712992" start="7640" end="7659" title="M. Patanjali Sastri" label="M. Patanjali Sastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="7691" end="7713" title="Chief Justice of India" label="Chief Justice of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="7725" end="7729" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048465" start="7732" end="7746" title="Edward Brooker" label="Edward Brooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="7797" end="7816" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="7828" end="7832" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q563196" start="7835" end="7848" title="Leroy Grumman" label="Leroy Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q463261" start="7896" end="7932" title="Grumman" label="Grumman Aeronautical Engineering Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="7944" end="7948" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382002" start="7951" end="7966" title="Everett Dirksen" label="Everett Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312529" start="8007" end="8019" title="André Masson" label="André Masson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="8063" end="8067" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q701313" start="8070" end="8080" title="Chen Cheng" label="Chen Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q707830" start="8102" end="8141" title="Vice President of the Republic of China" label="Vice President of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="8153" end="8157" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q241031" start="8160" end="8170" title="James Bond (ornithologist)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="8240" end="8244" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q773828" start="8247" end="8261" title="C. L. R. James" label="C. L. R. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="8310" end="8314" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q973836" start="8317" end="8331" title="John A. McCone" label="John A. McCone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="8374" end="8406" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="8418" end="8422" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q77269" start="8425" end="8436" title="Georg Elser" label="Georg Elser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="8505" end="8509" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q317378" start="8512" end="8534" title="Malietoa Tanumafili II" label="Malietoa Tanumafili II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="8560" end="8564" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827266" start="8567" end="8580" title="Lionel Newman" label="Lionel Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386549" start="8631" end="8645" title="Robert Parrish" label="Robert Parrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="8686" end="8690" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q482827" start="8693" end="8706" title="William Colby" label="William Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="8744" end="8776" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442206" start="8796" end="8813" title="Rosalie Crutchley" label="Rosalie Crutchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="8842" end="8846" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q69998" start="8849" end="8864" title="Marianne Werner" label="Marianne Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="8897" end="8901" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q472364" start="8904" end="8920" title="Veikko Hakulinen" label="Veikko Hakulinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="8962" end="8966" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371061" start="8969" end="8983" title="Paul Desmarais" label="Paul Desmarais"/>
<link wikidata="Q441705" start="9044" end="9056" title="Barbara Rush" label="Barbara Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="9086" end="9090" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q57445" start="9093" end="9110" title="Günter Schabowski" label="Günter Schabowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="9156" end="9160" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368537" start="9163" end="9176" title="Sorrell Booke" label="Sorrell Booke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239512" start="9225" end="9234" title="Don Shula" label="Don Shula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="9282" end="9286" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q267745" start="9289" end="9302" title="William Deane" label="William Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="9342" end="9371" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q532565" start="9381" end="9390" title="Nora Iuga" label="Nora Iuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="9430" end="9434" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q295855" start="9437" end="9449" title="Carlos Saura" label="Carlos Saura"/>
<link wikidata="Q325710" start="9504" end="9514" title="Clint Hill (Secret Service)" label="Clint Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="9557" end="9561" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q163813" start="9564" end="9579" title="Rudolf Schuster" label="Rudolf Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="9604" end="9625" title="President of Slovakia" label="President of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="9627" end="9631" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q314051" start="9634" end="9649" title="Floyd Patterson" label="Floyd Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="9677" end="9681" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q451180" start="9684" end="9696" title="Grace Bumbry" label="Grace Bumbry"/>
<link wikidata="Q236688" start="9743" end="9754" title="Dyan Cannon" label="Dyan Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="9812" end="9816" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593157" start="9819" end="9829" title="Jim Norton (Irish actor)" label="Jim Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="9871" end="9875" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q95312791" start="9878" end="9893" title="Eberhard Wagner" label="Eberhard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="9933" end="9937" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q181363" start="9940" end="9955" title="Brian Josephson" label="Brian Josephson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="9987" end="9998" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18143" start="10017" end="10029" title="Gao Xingjian" label="Gao Xingjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="10073" end="10084" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="10095" end="10099" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q504722" start="10102" end="10120" title="George P. Cosmatos" label="George P. Cosmatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354405" start="10184" end="10196" title="Kalpnath Rai" label="Kalpnath Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="10227" end="10231" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938894" start="10234" end="10249" title="Bolaji Akinyemi" label="Bolaji Akinyemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194705" start="10315" end="10326" title="Jim Downing" label="Jim Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164757" start="10375" end="10390" title="John McLaughlin (musician)" label="John McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="10427" end="10431" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q442008" start="10434" end="10454" title="Doris Kearns Goodwin" label="Doris Kearns Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q484947" start="10495" end="10509" title="Hwang Sok-yong" label="Hwang Sok-yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="10545" end="10549" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526001" start="10552" end="10564" title="Gary Stevens (rugby league)" label="Gary Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830597" start="10606" end="10621" title="Alan Sutherland (rugby player)" label="Alan Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="10659" end="10663" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q553742" start="10666" end="10682" title="Vesa-Matti Loiri" label="Vesa-Matti Loiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q202159" start="10740" end="10758" title="Richard R. Schrock" label="Richard R. Schrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10791" end="10802" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="10813" end="10817" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q708969" start="10820" end="10833" title="Arthur Conley" label="Arthur Conley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="10873" end="10877" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077158" start="10880" end="10892" title="Chris Cutler" label="Chris Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292276" start="10954" end="10977" title="Marie-Thérèse Letablier" label="Marie-Thérèse Letablier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="11012" end="11016" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433490" start="11019" end="11035" title="Kostas Davourlis" label="Kostas Davourlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q293119" start="11073" end="11100" title="Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé" label="Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264364" start="11139" end="11161" title="Prime Minister of Mali" label="Prime Minister of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="11173" end="11177" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q729841" start="11180" end="11190" title="Mick Mills" label="Mick Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095451" start="11232" end="11246" title="Bwanga Tshimen" label="Bwanga Tshimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="11270" end="11274" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402216" start="11277" end="11301" title="Khondakar Ashraf Hossain" label="Khondakar Ashraf Hossain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="11343" end="11347" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q94949" start="11350" end="11365" title="Norberto Alonso" label="Norberto Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="11391" end="11395" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434193" start="11398" end="11407" title="Rob Kerin" label="Rob Kerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="11437" end="11463" title="Premier of South Australia" label="Premier of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623520" start="11473" end="11485" title="Tina Knowles" label="Tina Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494779" start="11522" end="11537" title="House of Deréon" label="House of Deréon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="11539" end="11543" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q113754575" start="11546" end="11556" title="Tom Borton" label="Tom Borton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630062" start="11628" end="11641" title="Zehava Gal-On" label="Zehava Gal-On"/>
<link wikidata="Q538546" start="11671" end="11683" title="Ann Magnuson" label="Ann Magnuson"/>
<link wikidata="Q438885" start="11734" end="11748" title="Bernard Sumner" label="Bernard Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="11803" end="11807" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q455939" start="11810" end="11824" title="Patty Loveless" label="Patty Loveless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="11868" end="11872" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q545172" start="11875" end="11886" title="Matt Frewer" label="Matt Frewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q363518" start="11921" end="11933" title="Julian Sands" label="Julian Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="11960" end="11964" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528223" start="11967" end="11979" title="Gavin Miller" label="Gavin Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q215182" start="12021" end="12034" title="Michael Stipe" label="Michael Stipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="12078" end="12082" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960167" start="12085" end="12097" title="Sidney Green (basketball)" label="Sidney Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566860" start="12145" end="12161" title="Cliff Levingston" label="Cliff Levingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q609464" start="12209" end="12224" title="Graham McTavish" label="Graham McTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="12253" end="12257" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562137" start="12260" end="12270" title="Joe Kleine" label="Joe Kleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="12310" end="12314" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q607793" start="12317" end="12327" title="Dave Foley" label="Dave Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q154852" start="12387" end="12401" title="Till Lindemann" label="Till Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905491" start="12448" end="12463" title="Martina Proeber" label="Martina Proeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="12479" end="12483" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913290" start="12486" end="12497" title="Susan Devoy" label="Susan Devoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q270770" start="12534" end="12549" title="Dot-Marie Jones" label="Dot-Marie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685353" start="12589" end="12604" title="Adrian Shelford" label="Adrian Shelford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="12649" end="12653" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q560175" start="12656" end="12666" title="Guy Forget" label="Guy Forget"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181359" start="12698" end="12717" title="Craig Revel Horwood" label="Craig Revel Horwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q229059" start="12783" end="12795" title="Julia Ormond" label="Julia Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="12827" end="12831" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q509285" start="12834" end="12846" title="Deana Carter" label="Deana Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="12890" end="12894" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388183" start="12897" end="12910" title="Johnny Nelson" label="Johnny Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725869" start="12952" end="12962" title="David Toms" label="David Toms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018168" start="13008" end="13020" title="David Wilson (rugby union, born 1967)" label="David Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="13047" end="13051" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132507" start="13054" end="13066" title="Corie Blount" label="Corie Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q675519" start="13104" end="13121" title="Kees van Wonderen" label="Kees van Wonderen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="13153" end="13157" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152486" start="13160" end="13173" title="Josh Stamberg" label="Josh Stamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="13191" end="13195" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488312" start="13198" end="13210" title="Shane Walker (rugby league, born 1971)" label="Shane Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145655" start="13252" end="13262" title="Colin Ward (rugby league)" label="Colin Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="13296" end="13300" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q951784" start="13303" end="13312" title="Frank Høj" label="Frank Høj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="13330" end="13334" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q702880" start="13337" end="13349" title="Danilo Hondo" label="Danilo Hondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="13368" end="13372" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q116896" start="13375" end="13387" title="Shane Carwin" label="Shane Carwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154258" start="13441" end="13452" title="Paul Watson (footballer, born 1975)" label="Paul Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="13494" end="13498" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076790" start="13501" end="13510" title="Ted Lilly" label="Ted Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="13538" end="13542" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q314767" start="13545" end="13559" title="Dominik Hrbatý" label="Dominik Hrbatý"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="13583" end="13587" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679172" start="13590" end="13602" title="Shergo Biran" label="Shergo Biran"/>
<link wikidata="Q930551" start="13632" end="13648" title="Tristan Gommendy" label="Tristan Gommendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="13672" end="13676" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q26922240" start="13679" end="13697" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Carden" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Carden"/>
<link wikidata="Q295315" start="13738" end="13753" title="Miguel Monteiro" label="Miguel Monteiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317980" start="13786" end="13799" title="Justin Ontong" label="Justin Ontong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="13826" end="13830" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327430" start="13833" end="13846" title="Richard Logan (footballer, born 1982)" label="Richard Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220863" start="13876" end="13890" title="Danny Sullivan (rugby league)" label="Danny Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485387" start="13932" end="13945" title="Kang Hye-jung" label="Kang Hye-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="13969" end="13973" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q983767" start="13976" end="13986" title="Will Bynum" label="Will Bynum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222401" start="14024" end="14038" title="Richard Rankin" label="Richard Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="14085" end="14089" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q722653" start="14092" end="14103" title="Jiří Hudler" label="Jiří Hudler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="14130" end="14134" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604359" start="14137" end="14152" title="Lenora Crichlow" label="Lenora Crichlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270435" start="14179" end="14198" title="Kari Aalvik Grimsbø" label="Kari Aalvik Grimsbø"/>
<link wikidata="Q730284" start="14235" end="14247" title="Gökhan Gönül" label="Gökhan Gönül"/>
<link wikidata="Q442623" start="14277" end="14289" title="Al Jefferson" label="Al Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q350199" start="14327" end="14342" title="Jung Sung-ryong" label="Jung Sung-ryong"/>
<link wikidata="Q245022" start="14377" end="14390" title="Ross Turnbull" label="Ross Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="14422" end="14426" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q311334" start="14429" end="14442" title="Younès Kaboul" label="Younès Kaboul"/>
<link wikidata="Q463474" start="14471" end="14488" title="Andrei Krauchanka" label="Andrei Krauchanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q555382" start="14521" end="14535" title="Russell Martin (footballer)" label="Russell Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191136" start="14578" end="14590" title="James Milner" label="James Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301339" start="14620" end="14631" title="Charlyne Yi" label="Charlyne Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="14681" end="14685" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q431920" start="14688" end="14703" title="Marissa Coleman" label="Marissa Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q299525" start="14741" end="14757" title="Przemysław Tytoń" label="Przemysław Tytoń"/>
<link wikidata="Q315294" start="14786" end="14799" title="Danny Simpson" label="Danny Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q671973" start="14829" end="14838" title="Kay Voser" label="Kay Voser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="14858" end="14862" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q974560" start="14865" end="14881" title="Anestis Argyriou" label="Anestis Argyriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q654823" start="14909" end="14930" title="Maximilian Riedmüller" label="Maximilian Riedmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="14951" end="14955" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911906" start="14958" end="14970" title="Kevin Pillar" label="Kevin Pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q933837" start="15006" end="15018" title="Graham Rahal" label="Graham Rahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="15046" end="15050" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q439282" start="15053" end="15064" title="Iago Falque" label="Iago Falque"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211896" start="15094" end="15109" title="Raisel Iglesias" label="Raisel Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q131234" start="15142" end="15152" title="Toni Kroos" label="Toni Kroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q114413" start="15181" end="15197" title="Alberto Paloschi" label="Alberto Paloschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="15219" end="15223" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796239" start="15226" end="15240" title="Charles Melton" label="Charles Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="15258" end="15262" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234450" start="15265" end="15276" title="Kris Bryant" label="Kris Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092290" start="15312" end="15325" title="Quincy Promes" label="Quincy Promes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="15345" end="15349" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139707" start="15352" end="15372" title="James Michael McAdoo" label="James Michael McAdoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47402136" start="15410" end="15426" title="Mahmoud Metwalli" label="Mahmoud Metwalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="15449" end="15453" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729768" start="15456" end="15469" title="Derrick Henry" label="Derrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="15497" end="15501" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622238" start="15504" end="15515" title="Sarah Nurse" label="Sarah Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679961" start="15553" end="15565" title="Adam Webster (footballer, born 1995)" label="Adam Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="15587" end="15591" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808914" start="15594" end="15609" title="Michael Dickson (American football)" label="Michael Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17916902" start="15656" end="15672" title="Jackson Hastings" label="Jackson Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16514253" start="15714" end="15731" title="Marcus Ingvartsen" label="Marcus Ingvartsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973674" start="15760" end="15775" title="Jasmine Paolini" label="Jasmine Paolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="15800" end="15804" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q20688718" start="15807" end="15815" title="Angeliño" label="Angeliño"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662887" start="15845" end="15855" title="Ante Žižić" label="Ante Žižić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="15886" end="15890" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q454994" start="15893" end="15903" title="Coco Jones" label="Coco Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q27859504" start="15953" end="15969" title="Arnoldas Kulboka" label="Arnoldas Kulboka"/>
<link wikidata="Q61609728" start="16009" end="16022" title="Rodrigo Garro" label="Rodrigo Garro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696586" start="16054" end="16067" title="Liza Soberano" label="Liza Soberano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="16087" end="16091" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663373" start="16094" end="16107" title="Daniel Arzani" label="Daniel Arzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="16140" end="16144" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q23817773" start="16147" end="16160" title="Nico Hischier" label="Nico Hischier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043320" start="16195" end="16208" title="Jaeman Salmon" label="Jaeman Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29044421" start="16250" end="16263" title="Collin Sexton" label="Collin Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="16293" end="16297" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641599" start="16300" end="16310" title="Max Aarons" label="Max Aarons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="16332" end="16336" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009388" start="16339" end="16355" title="Odilon Kossounou" label="Odilon Kossounou"/>
<link wikidata="Q115869427" start="16385" end="16395" title="Lola Young (singer)" label="Lola Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="16428" end="16432" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q19019158" start="16435" end="16449" title="Jaeden Martell" label="Jaeden Martell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="16467" end="16471" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941595" start="16474" end="16491" title="Victor Wembanyama" label="Victor Wembanyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="16519" end="16523" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q27560621" start="16526" end="16536" title="Dafne Keen" label="Dafne Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108435545" start="16571" end="16585" title="Rob Dillingham" label="Rob Dillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="16615" end="16619" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q118472572" start="16622" end="16631" title="Marc Guiu" label="Marc Guiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24754" start="16680" end="16683" title="871" label="871"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077403" start="16686" end="16695" title="Æthelwulf of Berkshire" label="Æthelwulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114438" start="16703" end="16712" title="ealdorman" label="ealdorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23843" start="16715" end="16718" title="874" label="874"/>
<link wikidata="Q315920" start="16721" end="16736" title="Hasan al-Askari" label="Hasan al-Askari"/>
<link wikidata="Q57560" start="16750" end="16766" title="the Twelve Imams" label="the Twelve Imams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="16787" end="16791" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q203996" start="16794" end="16815" title="Sancho II of Portugal" label="Sancho II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="16827" end="16831" title="1344" label="1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q15110556" start="16834" end="16866" title="Robert de Lisle, 1st Baron Lisle" label="Robert de Lisle, 1st Baron Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422" start="16892" end="16896" title="1399" label="1399"/>
<link wikidata="Q718567" start="16899" end="16916" title="Nicholas Eymerich" label="Nicholas Eymerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276" start="16953" end="16957" title="1424" label="1424"/>
<link wikidata="Q932356" start="16960" end="16972" title="Muzio Sforza" label="Muzio Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315" start="17005" end="17009" title="1428" label="1428"/>
<link wikidata="Q704939" start="17012" end="17042" title="Frederick I, Elector of Saxony" label="Frederick I, Elector of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728" start="17054" end="17058" title="1584" label="1584"/>
<link wikidata="Q677071" start="17061" end="17075" title="Tobias Stimmer" label="Tobias Stimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738" start="17135" end="17139" title="1604" label="1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q964147" start="17142" end="17156" title="Ferenc Nádasdy" label="Ferenc Nádasdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="17185" end="17189" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q357136" start="17192" end="17240" title="François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg" label="François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649" start="17268" end="17272" title="1761" label="1761"/>
<link wikidata="Q312017" start="17275" end="17288" title="Stephen Hales" label="Stephen Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740" start="17336" end="17340" title="1782" label="1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q352451" start="17343" end="17363" title="Ange-Jacques Gabriel" label="Ange-Jacques Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273480" start="17392" end="17407" title="École Militaire" label="École Militaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760" start="17419" end="17423" title="1786" label="1786"/>
<link wikidata="Q76997" start="17426" end="17443" title="Moses Mendelssohn" label="Moses Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894" start="17490" end="17494" title="1804" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q441757" start="17497" end="17513" title="Charlotte Lennox" label="Charlotte Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976" start="17550" end="17554" title="1821" label="1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q459032" start="17557" end="17576" title="Elizabeth Ann Seton" label="Elizabeth Ann Seton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6997" start="17612" end="17616" title="1825" label="1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="17619" end="17650" title="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="17662" end="17666" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358299" start="17669" end="17681" title="Roger Hanson" label="Roger Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="17711" end="17715" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525172" start="17718" end="17732" title="Thomas Gregson" label="Thomas Gregson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="17780" end="17799" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="17811" end="17815" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q313721" start="17818" end="17838" title="Cornelius Vanderbilt" label="Cornelius Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="17891" end="17895" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q250194" start="17898" end="17914" title="Anselm Feuerbach" label="Anselm Feuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356624" start="17963" end="17983" title="Edward William Cooke" label="Edward William Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="18028" end="18032" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q472490" start="18035" end="18054" title="John William Draper" label="John William Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="18121" end="18125" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q239760" start="18128" end="18142" title="Antoine Chanzy" label="Antoine Chanzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="18170" end="18174" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083681" start="18177" end="18192" title="Antoine Labelle" label="Antoine Labelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="18221" end="18225" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q70236" start="18228" end="18250" title="Joseph Hubert Reinkens" label="Joseph Hubert Reinkens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="18290" end="18294" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q20428120" start="18297" end="18319" title="Stanisław Mieroszewski" label="Stanisław Mieroszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="18440" end="18444" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767624" start="18447" end="18459" title="Anna Winlock" label="Anna Winlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="18505" end="18509" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q968411" start="18512" end="18527" title="Léon Delagrange" label="Léon Delagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="18566" end="18570" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q595919" start="18573" end="18588" title="Clarence Dutton" label="Clarence Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="18632" end="18636" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q161084" start="18639" end="18657" title="Georg von Hertling" label="Georg von Hertling"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="18695" end="18726" title="Chancellor of the German Empire" label="Chancellor of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="18738" end="18742" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q189869" start="18745" end="18764" title="Benito Pérez Galdós" label="Benito Pérez Galdós"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="18807" end="18811" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q78657" start="18814" end="18829" title="Alfred Grünfeld" label="Alfred Grünfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="18872" end="18876" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q602294" start="18879" end="18893" title="Nellie Cashman" label="Nellie Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="18970" end="18974" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671172" start="18977" end="18991" title="Süleyman Nazif" label="Süleyman Nazif"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="19035" end="19039" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q705354" start="19042" end="19051" title="Art Acord" label="Art Acord"/>
<link wikidata="Q233516" start="19099" end="19121" title="Louise, Princess Royal" label="Louise, Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241714" start="19162" end="19181" title="Mohammad Ali Jauhar" label="Mohammad Ali Jauhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="19217" end="19221" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="19224" end="19237" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="19272" end="19283" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="19304" end="19308" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q630758" start="19311" end="19334" title="Jerzy Iwanow-Szajnowicz" label="Jerzy Iwanow-Szajnowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49463" start="19398" end="19412" title="Marina Raskova" label="Marina Raskova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="19453" end="19457" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q551699" start="19460" end="19468" title="Kaj Munk" label="Kaj Munk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="19510" end="19514" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="19517" end="19529" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="19577" end="19588" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="19609" end="19613" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="19616" end="19633" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="19668" end="19679" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="19700" end="19704" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="19707" end="19718" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="19767" end="19778" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="19799" end="19803" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q971150" start="19806" end="19821" title="Donald Campbell" label="Donald Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="19886" end="19890" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q541659" start="19893" end="19906" title="Paul Chambers" label="Paul Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="19949" end="19953" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q312628" start="19956" end="19966" title="Carlo Levi" label="Carlo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="20017" end="20021" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q434110" start="20024" end="20038" title="Brian Horrocks" label="Brian Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="20074" end="20078" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q310111" start="20081" end="20102" title="Christopher Isherwood" label="Christopher Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q298930" start="20160" end="20171" title="Phil Lynott" label="Phil Lynott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="20235" end="20239" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q442337" start="20242" end="20254" title="Lily Laskine" label="Lily Laskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="20286" end="20290" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q475733" start="20293" end="20315" title="Harold Eugene Edgerton" label="Harold Eugene Edgerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718350" start="20367" end="20378" title="Henry Bolte" label="Henry Bolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="20408" end="20427" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="20439" end="20443" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351160" start="20446" end="20458" title="R. D. Burman" label="R. D. Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="20511" end="20515" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q953007" start="20518" end="20530" title="Eduardo Mata" label="Eduardo Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407131" start="20582" end="20589" title="Sol Tax" label="Sol Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="20639" end="20643" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533272" start="20646" end="20660" title="Harry Helmsley" label="Harry Helmsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="20694" end="20698" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q434502" start="20701" end="20712" title="Mae Questel" label="Mae Questel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="20742" end="20746" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q587113" start="20749" end="20763" title="Iron Eyes Cody" label="Iron Eyes Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="20804" end="20808" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q353587" start="20811" end="20820" title="Les Brown (bandleader)" label="Les Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="20866" end="20870" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q912217" start="20873" end="20885" title="Brian Gibson (director)" label="Brian Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263648" start="20940" end="20950" title="Joan Aiken" label="Joan Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246921" start="20986" end="20997" title="John Toland (historian)" label="John Toland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="21040" end="21044" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000556" start="21047" end="21056" title="Bud Poile" label="Bud Poile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443394" start="21124" end="21136" title="Frank Harary" label="Frank Harary"/>
<link wikidata="Q92775" start="21193" end="21211" title="Humphrey Carpenter" label="Humphrey Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144214" start="21262" end="21279" title="Robert Heilbroner" label="Robert Heilbroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="21325" end="21329" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673289" start="21332" end="21345" title="Irving Layton" label="Irving Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q215477" start="21402" end="21431" title="Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum" label="Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153355" start="21457" end="21499" title="Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates" label="Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935897" start="21519" end="21536" title="Milton Himmelfarb" label="Milton Himmelfarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="21593" end="21597" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q532967" start="21600" end="21610" title="Helen Hill" label="Helen Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q359566" start="21662" end="21676" title="Marais Viljoen" label="Marais Viljoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q890030" start="21708" end="21739" title="State President of South Africa" label="State President of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="21751" end="21755" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q610239" start="21758" end="21782" title="Xavier Chamorro Cardenal" label="Xavier Chamorro Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="21817" end="21821" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q84532" start="21824" end="21834" title="Gert Jonke" label="Gert Jonke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="21885" end="21889" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q333129" start="21892" end="21905" title="Johan Ferrier" label="Johan Ferrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q878254" start="21947" end="21968" title="President of Suriname" label="President of Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q17579" start="21988" end="22005" title="Tsutomu Yamaguchi" label="Tsutomu Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="22036" end="22040" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q554122" start="22043" end="22055" title="Coen Moulijn" label="Coen Moulijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q110919" start="22093" end="22107" title="Gerry Rafferty" label="Gerry Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q314774" start="22155" end="22169" title="Salmaan Taseer" label="Salmaan Taseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695540" start="22214" end="22242" title="Governor of Punjab, Pakistan" label="Governor of Punjab, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="22254" end="22258" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q238374" start="22261" end="22271" title="Eve Arnold" label="Eve Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q609983" start="22329" end="22339" title="Rod Robbie" label="Rod Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030458" start="22382" end="22399" title="Canadian Pavilion" label="Canadian Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q76318" start="22404" end="22417" title="Rogers Centre" label="Rogers Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="22429" end="22433" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778058" start="22436" end="22448" title="Anwar Shamim" label="Anwar Shamim"/>
<link wikidata="Q280605" start="22487" end="22498" title="Zoran Žižić" label="Zoran Žižić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921795" start="22528" end="22580" title="Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="22592" end="22596" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q736851" start="22599" end="22611" title="Pino Daniele" label="Pino Daniele"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="22664" end="22668" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647356" start="22671" end="22684" title="S. H. Kapadia" label="S. H. Kapadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="22729" end="22751" title="Chief Justice of India" label="Chief Justice of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q488066" start="22771" end="22790" title="Stephen W. Bosworth" label="Stephen W. Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889322" start="22824" end="22863" title="United States Ambassador to South Korea" label="United States Ambassador to South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="22875" end="22879" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355449" start="22882" end="22894" title="Milt Schmidt" label="Milt Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q342381" start="22969" end="22983" title="Georges Prêtre" label="Georges Prêtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="23034" end="23038" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q552916" start="23041" end="23053" title="Harold Brown (Secretary of Defense)" label="Harold Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="23060" end="23094" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="United States Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="23106" end="23110" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q366168" start="23113" end="23121" title="Tom Long (actor)" label="Tom Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="23151" end="23155" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q232356" start="23158" end="23171" title="Tanya Roberts" label="Tanya Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="23201" end="23205" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q61624" start="23208" end="23224" title="Rosi Mittermaier" label="Rosi Mittermaier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="23278" end="23282" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q272579" start="23285" end="23297" title="Glynis Johns" label="Glynis Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q727752" start="23345" end="23355" title="David Soul" label="David Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q61677" start="23410" end="23426" title="Christian Oliver" label="Christian Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="23492" end="23501" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q240297" start="23506" end="23523" title="Angela of Foligno" label="Angela of Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q459032" start="23527" end="23546" title="Elizabeth Ann Seton" label="Elizabeth Ann Seton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506510" start="23550" end="23565" title="Ferréol of Uzès" label="Ferréol of Uzès"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201503" start="23569" end="23576" title="Mavilus" label="Mavilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q929800" start="23580" end="23599" title="Pharaildis" label="Pharaildis of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q686561" start="23603" end="23611" title="Rigobert" label="Rigobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155864" start="23615" end="23653" title="January 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="January 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262992" start="23676" end="23700" title="Twelve Days of Christmas" label="Twelve Days of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="23703" end="23723" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015989" start="23727" end="23753" title="Independence Day (Myanmar)" label="Independence Day (Myanmar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="23786" end="23793" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="23803" end="23817" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848754" start="23829" end="23860" title="Baixa de Cassanje revolt" label="Colonial Martyrs Repression Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="23862" end="23868" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376342" start="23872" end="23925" title="Day of the Martyrs (Democratic Republic of the Congo)" label="Day of the Martyrs (Democratic Republic of the Congo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951159" start="23928" end="23937" title="Ogoni Day" label="Ogoni Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951159" start="23939" end="23984" title="Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People" label="Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People"/>
<link wikidata="Q864814" start="23987" end="24002" title="January 4 Tokyo Dome Show" label="Tokyo Dome Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347712" start="24015" end="24030" title="Wrestle Kingdom" label="Wrestle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="24044" end="24067" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880318" start="24070" end="24087" title="World Braille Day" label="World Braille Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15986" wikidata="Q2221" url="?curid=15986" title="January 6">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*1066 – Following the death of Edward the Confessor on the previous day, the Witan meets to confirm Harold Godwinson as the new King of England; Harold is crowned the same day, sparking a succession crisis that will eventually lead to the Norman conquest of England.
*1205 – Philip of Swabia undergoes a second coronation as King of the Romans.
*1322 – Stephen Uroš III is crowned King of Serbia, having defeated his half-brother Stefan Konstantin in battle. His son is crowned &quot;young king&quot; in the same ceremony.
*1355 – Charles IV of Bohemia is crowned with the Iron Crown of Lombardy as King of Italy in Milan.
*1449 – Constantine XI is crowned Byzantine Emperor at Mystras.
*1492 – The Catholic Monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella enter Granada at the conclusion of the Granada War.
*1536 – The first European school of higher learning in the Americas, Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco, is founded by Viceroy Antonio de Mendoza and Bishop Juan de Zumárraga in Mexico City.
*1540 – King Henry VIII of England marries Anne of Cleves.
*1579 – The Union of Arras unites the southern Netherlands under the Duke of Parma (Ottavio Farnese), governor in the name of King Philip II of Spain.

===1601–1900===
*1641 – Arauco War: The first Parliament of Quillín is celebrated, putting a temporary hold on hostilities between Mapuches and Spanish in Chile.
*1661 – English Restoration: The Fifth Monarchists unsuccessfully attempt to seize control of London, England. The revolt is suppressed after a few days.
*1721 – The Committee of Inquiry on the South Sea Bubble publishes its findings, revealing details of fraud among company directors and corrupt politicians.
*1724 – &quot;Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen&quot;, BWV 65, a Bach cantata, for Epiphany, is performed the first time.
*1725 – J. S. Bach leads the first performance of &quot;Liebster Immanuel, Herzog der Frommen&quot;, BWV 123, a chorale cantata for Epiphany.
*1781 – In the Battle of Jersey, the British defeat the last attempt by France to invade Jersey in the Channel Islands.
*1809 – Combined British, Portuguese and colonial Brazilian forces begin the Invasion of Cayenne during the Napoleonic Wars.
*1838 – Alfred Vail and colleagues demonstrate a telegraph system using dots and dashes (this is the forerunner of Morse code).
*1839 – The Night of the Big Wind, the most damaging storm in 300 years, sweeps across Ireland, damaging or destroying more than 20% of the houses in Dublin.
*1847 – Samuel Colt obtains his first contract for the sale of revolver pistols to the United States government.
*1870 – The inauguration of the Musikverein in Vienna, Austria.
*1893 – The Washington National Cathedral is chartered by Congress. The charter is signed by President Benjamin Harrison.
*1900 – Second Boer War: Having already besieged the fortress at Ladysmith, Boer forces attack it, but are driven back by British defenders.

===1901–present===
*1907 – Maria Montessori opens her first school and daycare center for working class children in Rome, Italy.
*1912 – New Mexico is admitted to the Union as the 47th U.S. state.
* 1912 – German geophysicist Alfred Wegener first presents his theory of continental drift.
*1929 – King Alexander of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes suspends his country&#x27;s constitution, starting the January 6th Dictatorship.
* 1929 – Mother Teresa arrives by sea in Calcutta, India, to begin her work among India&#x27;s poorest and sick people.
*1930 – Clessie Cummins arrives at the National Automobile Show in New York City, having driven a car powered by one of his diesel engines from Indianapolis.
*1941 – United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt delivers his Four Freedoms speech in the State of the Union address.
*1946 – The first general election ever in Vietnam is held.
*1947 – Pan American Airlines becomes the first commercial airline to offer a round-the-world ticket.
*1950 – The United Kingdom recognizes the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The Republic of China severs diplomatic relations with the UK in response.
*1951 – Korean War: Beginning of the Ganghwa massacre, in the course of which an estimated 200–1,300 South Korean communist sympathizers are slaughtered.
*1960 – National Airlines Flight 2511 is destroyed in mid-air by a bomb, while en route from New York City to Miami.
* 1960 – The Associations Law comes into force in Iraq, allowing registration of political parties.
*1967 – Vietnam War: United States Marine Corps and ARVN troops launch &quot;Operation Deckhouse Five&quot; in the Mekong River delta.
*1968 – Aeroflot Flight 1668 crashes near Olyokminsk, killing 45.
*1969 – Allegheny Airlines Flight 737 crashes in Lafayette Township, McKean County, Pennsylvania, United States, killing 11.
*1974 – In response to the 1973 oil crisis, daylight saving time commences nearly four months early in the United States.
*1974 – Aeroflot Flight H-75 crashes near Mukachevo, killing 24.
*1989 – Satwant Singh and Kehar Singh are sentenced to death for conspiracy in the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi; the two men are executed the same day.
*1992 – President of Georgia Zviad Gamsakhurdia flees the country as a result of the military coup.
*1993 – Indian Border Security Force units kill 55 Kashmiri civilians in Sopore, Jammu and Kashmir, in revenge after militants ambushed a BSF patrol.
* 1993 – Four people are killed when Lufthansa CityLine Flight 5634 crashes on approach to Charles de Gaulle Airport in Roissy-en-France, France.
*1994 – U.S. figure skater Nancy Kerrigan is attacked and injured by an assailant hired by her rival Tonya Harding&#x27;s ex-husband during the U.S. Figure Skating Championships.
*1995 – A chemical fire in an apartment complex in Manila, Philippines, leads to the discovery of plans for Project Bojinka, a mass-terrorist attack.
*2000 – The last natural Pyrenean ibex, Celia, is killed by a falling tree, thus making the species extinct.
*2005 – Edgar Ray Killen is indicted for the 1964 murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner during the American Civil Rights Movement.
* 2005 – A train collision in Graniteville, South Carolina, United States, releases about 60 tons of chlorine gas.
*2012 – Twenty-six people are killed and 63 wounded when a suicide bomber blows himself up at a police station in Damascus.
*2017 – Five people are killed and six others injured in a mass shooting at Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport in Broward County, Florida.
*2019 – Forty people are killed in a gold mine collapse in Badakhshan province, in northern Afghanistan.
* 2019 – Muhammad V of Kelantan resigns as the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, becoming the first monarch to do so.
*2021 – Americans storm the United States Capitol Building to disrupt certification of the 2020 presidential election, resulting in four deaths and evacuation of the U.S. Congress.
*2025 – Justin Trudeau announces his resignation as leader of the Liberal Party of Canada and Prime Minister of Canada after 9 years in office.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1256 – Gertrude the Great, German mystic (d. 1302)
*1367 – Richard II of England (d. 1400)
*1384 – Edmund Holland, 4th Earl of Kent (d. 1408)
*1412 – Joan of Arc, French martyr and saint (d. 1431)
*1486 – Martin Agricola, German composer and theorist (d. 1556)
*1488 – Helius Eobanus Hessus, German poet (d. 1540)
*1493 – Olaus Petri, Swedish clergyman (d. 1552)
*1500 – John of Ávila, Spanish mystic and saint (d. 1569)
*1525 – Caspar Peucer, German physician and scholar (d. 1602)
*1538 – Jane Dormer, Duchess of Feria (d. 1612)
*1561 – Thomas Fincke, Danish mathematician and physicist (d. 1656)
*1587 – Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares (d. 1645)
*1595 – Claude Favre de Vaugelas, French educator and courtier (d. 1650)

===1601–1900===
*1617 – Christoffer Gabel, Danish politician (d. 1673)
*1632 – Anne Hamilton, 3rd Duchess of Hamilton, Scottish peeress (d. 1716)
*1655 – Eleonor Magdalene of Neuburg (d. 1720)
*1673 – James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos, English academic and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Radnorshire (d. 1744)
*1695 – Giuseppe Sammartini, Italian oboe player and composer (d. 1750)
*1702 – José de Nebra, Spanish composer (d. 1768)
*1714 – Percivall Pott, English surgeon (d. 1788)
*1745 – Jacques-Etienne Montgolfier, French co-inventor of the hot air balloon (d. 1799)
*1766 – José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia, Paraguayan lawyer and politician, first dictator of Paraguay (d. 1840)
*1785 – Andreas Moustoxydis, Greek historian and philologist (d. 1860)
*1793 – James Madison Porter, American lawyer and politician, 18th United States Secretary of War (d. 1862)
*1795 – Anselme Payen, French chemist and academic (d. 1871)
*1799 – Jedediah Smith, American hunter, explorer, and author (d. 1831)
*1803 – Henri Herz, Austrian pianist and composer (d. 1888)
*1807 – Joseph Petzval, German-Hungarian mathematician and physicist (d. 1891)
*1808 – Joseph Pitty Couthouy, American conchologist and paleontologist (d. 1864)
*1811 – Charles Sumner, American lawyer and politician (d. 1874)
*1822 – Heinrich Schliemann, German archaeologist and businessman (d. 1890)
*1832 – Gustave Doré, French painter and sculptor (d. 1883)
*1838 – Max Bruch, German composer and conductor (d. 1920)
*1842 – Clarence King, American geologist, mountaineer, and critic (d. 1901)
*1856 – Giuseppe Martucci, Italian pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 1909)
*1857 – Hugh Mahon, Irish-Australian publisher and politician, 10th Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs (d. 1931)
* 1857 – William Russell, American lawyer and politician, 37th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1896)
*1859 – Samuel Alexander, Australian-English philosopher and academic (d. 1938)
*1860 – Morton Selten, British actor (d. 1939)
*1861 – Victor Horta, Belgian architect, designed Hôtel van Eetvelde (d. 1947)
* 1861 – George Lloyd, English-Canadian bishop and theologian (d. 1940)
*1870 – Gustav Bauer, German journalist and politician, 11th Chancellor of Germany (d. 1944)
*1872 – Alexander Scriabin, Russian pianist and composer (d. 1915)
*1874 – Fred Niblo, American actor, director, and producer (d. 1948)
*1878 – Adeline Genée, Danish-born British ballerina (d. 1970)
* 1878 – Carl Sandburg, American poet and historian (d. 1967)
*1880 – Tom Mix, American cowboy and actor (d. 1940)
*1881 – Ion Minulescu, Romanian author, poet, and critic (d. 1944)
*1882 – Fan S. Noli, Albanian-American bishop and politician, 13th Prime Minister of Albania (d. 1965)
* 1882 – Sam Rayburn, American lawyer and politician, 48th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (d. 1961)
*1883 – Kahlil Gibran, Lebanese-American poet, painter, and philosopher (d. 1931)
*1891 – Ted McDonald, Australian cricketer (d. 1937)
*1898 – James Fitzmaurice, Irish soldier and pilot (d. 1965)
*1899 – Heinrich Nordhoff, German engineer (d. 1968)
*1900 – Maria of Yugoslavia, Queen of Yugoslavia (d. 1961)

===1901–present===
*1903 – Maurice Abravanel, Greek-American pianist and conductor (d. 1993)
*1910 – Kid Chocolate, Cuban boxer (d. 1988)
* 1910 – Wright Morris, American author and photographer (d. 1998)
* 1910 – Yiannis Papaioannou, Greek composer and educator (d. 1989)
*1912 – Jacques Ellul, French philosopher and critic (d. 1994)
* 1912 – Danny Thomas, American actor, comedian, producer, and humanitarian (d. 1991)
*1913 – Edward Gierek, Polish lawyer and politician (d. 2001)
* 1913 – Loretta Young, American actress (d. 2000)
*1914 – Godfrey Edward Arnold, Austrian-American physician and academic (d. 1989)
*1915 – Don Edwards, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (d. 2015)
* 1915 – John C. Lilly, American psychoanalyst, physician, and philosopher (d. 2001)
* 1915 – Alan Watts, English-American philosopher and author (d. 1973)
*1916 – Park Mok-wol, influential Korean poet and academic (d. 1978)
*1917 – Koo Chen-fu, Taiwanese businessman and diplomat (d. 2005)
*1920 – Henry Corden, Canadian-born American actor (d. 2005)
* 1920 – John Maynard Smith, English biologist and geneticist (d. 2004)
* 1920 – Sun Myung Moon, Korean religious leader; founder of the Unification Church (d. 2012)
* 1920 – Early Wynn, American baseball player, coach, and sportscaster (d. 1999)
*1921 – Marianne Grunberg-Manago, Russian-French biochemist and academic (d. 2013)
* 1921 – Cary Middlecoff, American golfer and sportscaster (d. 1998)
*1923 – Vladimir Kazantsev, Russian runner (d. 2007)
* 1923 – Norman Kirk, New Zealand engineer and politician, 29th Prime Minister of New Zealand (d. 1974)
* 1923 – Jacobo Timerman, Argentinian journalist and author (d. 1999)
*1924 – Kim Dae-jung, South Korean soldier and politician, 8th President of South Korea, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2009)
* 1924 – Earl Scruggs, American banjo player (d. 2012)
*1925 – John DeLorean, American engineer and businessman, founded the DeLorean Motor Company (d. 2005)
*1926 – Ralph Branca, American baseball player (d. 2016)
* 1926 – Pat Flaherty, American race car driver (d. 2002)
* 1926 – Mickey Hargitay, Hungarian-American actor and bodybuilder (d. 2006)
*1927 – Jesse Leonard Steinfeld, American physician and academic, 11th Surgeon General of the United States (d. 2014)
*1928 – Capucine, French actress and model (d. 1990)
*1930 – Vic Tayback, American actor (d. 1990)
*1931 – E. L. Doctorow, American novelist, playwright, and short story writer (d. 2015)
*1932 – Simon Oates, English actor (d. 2009)
* 1932 – Stuart A. Rice, American chemist and academic (d. 2024)
*1933 – John Clive, English actor and author (d. 2012)
* 1933 – Oleg Grigoryevich Makarov, Russian engineer and astronaut (d. 2003)
*1934 – Harry M. Miller, New Zealand-Australian talent agent and publicist (d. 2018)
* 1934 – Sylvia Syms, English actress (d. 2023)
*1935 – Ian Meckiff, Australian cricketer
* 1935 – Nino Tempo, American musician, singer, and actor
*1936 – Darlene Hard, American tennis player (d. 2021)
* 1936 – Julio María Sanguinetti, Uruguayan journalist, lawyer, and politician, 29th President of Uruguay
*1937 – Ludvík Daněk, Czech discus thrower (d. 1998)
* 1937 – Lou Holtz, American football player, coach, and sportscaster
* 1937 – Doris Troy, American singer-songwriter (d. 2004)
*1938 – Adriano Celentano, Italian singer-songwriter, actor, and director
* 1938 – Adrienne Clarke, Australian botanist and academic
* 1938 – Larisa Shepitko, Soviet film director, screenwriter, and actress (d. 1979)
*1939 – Valeriy Lobanovskyi, Ukrainian footballer and manager (d. 2002)
* 1939 – Murray Rose, English-Australian swimmer and sportscaster (d. 2012)
*1940 – Van McCoy, American singer-songwriter and producer (d. 1979)
*1943 – Terry Venables, English footballer and manager (d. 2023)
*1944 – Bonnie Franklin, American actress and singer (d. 2013)
* 1944 – Alan Stivell, French singer-songwriter and harp player
* 1944 – Rolf M. Zinkernagel, Swiss immunologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
*1945 – Barry John, Welsh rugby player (d. 2024)
*1946 – Syd Barrett, English singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2006)
*1947 – Sandy Denny, English folk-rock singer-songwriter (d. 1978)
*1948 – Guy Gardner, American colonel and astronaut
* 1948 – Dayle Hadlee, New Zealand cricketer
*1949 – Mike Boit, Kenyan runner and academic
* 1949 – Carolyn D. Wright, American poet and academic (d. 2016)
*1950 – Louis Freeh, American lawyer and jurist, 10th Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
*1951 – Don Gullett, American baseball player and coach (d. 2024)
* 1951 – Kim Wilson, American singer-songwriter and harmonica player
*1953 – Malcolm Young, Scottish-Australian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (d. 2017)
*1954 – Anthony Minghella, English director and screenwriter (d. 2008)
*1955 – Rowan Atkinson, English actor, producer, and screenwriter
*1955 – Debbie Mathers, Mother of Eminem (d. 2024)
*1956 – Elizabeth Strout, American novelist and short story writer
* 1956 – Justin Welby, English archbishop
* 1956 – Clive Woodward, English rugby player and coach
*1957 – Michael Foale, British-American astrophysicist and astronaut
* 1957 – Nancy Lopez, American golfer and sportscaster
*1958 – Shlomo Glickstein, Israeli tennis player
*1959 – Kapil Dev, Indian cricketer
*1960 – Paul Azinger, American golfer and sportscaster
* 1960 – Kari Jalonen, Finnish ice hockey player and coach
* 1960 – Nigella Lawson, English chef and author
* 1960 – Howie Long, American football player and sports commentator
*1961 – Georges Jobé, Belgian motocross racer (d. 2012)
* 1961 – Nigel Melville, English rugby player
* 1961 – Peter Whittle, British politician, author, journalist, and broadcaster
*1963 – Norm Charlton, American baseball player and coach
* 1963 – Paul Kipkoech, Kenyan runner (d. 1995)
*1964 – Charles Haley, American football player
* 1964 – Jyrki Kasvi, Finnish journalist and politician (d. 2021)
* 1964 – Jacqueline Moore, American wrestler and manager
*1965 – Bjørn Lomborg, Danish author and academic
*1966 – Sharon Cuneta, Filipino singer and actress
* 1966 – Attilio Lombardo, Italian footballer and manager
*1967 – A. R. Rahman, Indian composer, singer-songwriter, music producer, musician, and philanthropist
*1968 – John Singleton, American director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2019)
*1969 – Norman Reedus, American actor and model
*1969 – Aron Eisenberg, American actor and podcaster (d. 2019)
*1970 – Julie Chen, American television journalist, presenter, and producer
* 1970 – Radoslav Látal, Czech footballer and manager
* 1970 – Gabrielle Reece, American volleyball player, sportscaster, and actress
*1971 – Irwin Thomas, American-Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1973 – Vasso Karantasiou, Greek beach volleyball player
*1974 – Marlon Anderson, American baseball player and sportscaster
* 1974 – Daniel Cordone, Argentinian footballer
* 1974 – Paul Grant, American basketball player and coach
*1975 – James Farrior, American football player
*1976 – Johan Davidsson, Swedish ice hockey player
* 1976 – Danny Pintauro, American actor
* 1976 – Richard Zedník, Slovak ice hockey player
*1978 – Casey Fossum, American baseball player 
* 1978 – Bubba Franks, American football player
*1981 – Rinko Kikuchi, Japanese actress 
* 1981 – Asante Samuel, American football player
*1982 – Gilbert Arenas, American basketball player
* 1982 – Roy Asotasi, New Zealand rugby league player
* 1982 – Tiffany Pollard, American television personality
* 1982 – Eddie Redmayne, English actor and model
*1983 – Adam Burish, American ice hockey player
* 1983 – Chen Nan, Chinese basketball player
*1984 – A. J. Hawk, American football player and analyst
* 1984 – Kate McKinnon, American actress and comedian
* 1984 – Eric Trump, American businessman
*1986 – Paul McShane, Irish footballer
* 1986 – Petter Northug, Norwegian skier
* 1986 – Alex Turner, English singer, songwriter, and musician
*1987 – Arin Hanson, American YouTuber
* 1987 – Bongani Khumalo, South African footballer
* 1987 – Ndamukong Suh, American football player
*1989 – Andy Carroll, English footballer
* 1989 – Sergio León, Spanish footballer
* 1989 – Derrick Morgan, American football player
*1990 – Sean Kilpatrick, American basketball player
* 1990 – Alex Teixeira, Brazilian footballer
*1991 – Duarte Alves, Portuguese politician
* 1991 – Will Barton, American basketball player
* 1991 – Kevin Gausman, American baseball player
*1992 – Corey Conners, Canadian professional golfer
*1993 – Pat Connaughton, American basketball player
* 1993 – Jesús Manuel Corona, Mexican footballer
*1994 – Catriona Gray, Filipino-Australian model, singer and beauty queen, Miss Universe 2018
* 1994 – Denis Suárez, Spanish footballer
* 1994 – Jameis Winston, American football player
* 1994 – Jay B, South Korean singer
*1999 – Polo G, American rapper
* 1999 – Mac McClung, American basketball player
*2000 – Kwon Eun-bin, South Korean singer and actress
* 2000 – Jack McBain, Canadian ice hockey player
*2001 – Kenyon Martin Jr., American basketball player
*2004 – Roméo Lavia, Belgian footballer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 786 – Abo of Tiflis, Iraqi martyr and saint (b. 756)
*1088 – Berengar of Tours, French scholar and theologian (b. 999)
*1148 – Gilbert de Clare, 1st Earl of Pembroke (b. 1100)
*1233 – Matilda of Chester, Countess of Huntingdon, Anglo-Norman noblewoman (b. 1171)
*1275 – Raymond of Penyafort, Catalan archbishop and saint (b. 1175)
*1350 – Giovanni I di Murta, second doge of the Republic of Genoa
*1358 – Gertrude van der Oosten, Beguine mystic
*1406 – Roger Walden, English bishop
*1448 – Christopher of Bavaria, King of Denmark, Norway and Sweden (b. 1418)
*1477 – Jean VIII, Count of Vendôme (b. 1425)
*1478 – Uzun Hasan, 9th Shahanshah of the Turkoman Aq Qoyunlu dynasty (b. 1423)
*1481 – Ahmed Khan bin Küchük, Mongolian ruler
*1537 – Alessandro de&#x27; Medici, Duke of Florence (b. 1510)
* 1537 – Baldassare Peruzzi, Italian architect and painter, designed the Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne (b. 1481)

===1601–1900===
*1616 – Philip Henslowe, English impresario (b. 1550)
*1646 – Elias Holl, German architect, designed the Augsburg Town Hall (b. 1573)
*1689 – Seth Ward, English bishop, mathematician, and astronomer (b. 1617)
*1693 – Mehmed IV, Ottoman sultan (b. 1642)
*1711 – Philips van Almonde, Dutch admiral (b. 1646)
*1718 – Giovanni Vincenzo Gravina, Italian lawyer and jurist (b. 1664)
*1725 – Chikamatsu Monzaemon, Japanese actor and playwright (b. 1653)
*1731 – Étienne François Geoffroy, French physician and chemist (b. 1672)
*1734 – John Dennis, English playwright and critic (b. 1657)
*1813 – Louis Baraguey d&#x27;Hilliers, French general (b. 1764)
*1829 – Josef Dobrovský, Czech philologist and historian (b. 1753)
*1831 – Rodolphe Kreutzer, French violinist, composer, and conductor (b. 1766)
*1840 – Frances Burney, English author and playwright (b. 1752)
*1852 – Louis Braille, French educator, invented Braille (b. 1809)
*1855 – Giacomo Beltrami, Italian jurist, explorer, and author (b. 1779)
*1882 – Richard Henry Dana Jr., American lawyer and politician (b. 1815)
*1884 – Gregor Mendel, Czech geneticist and botanist (b. 1822)
*1885 – Bharatendu Harishchandra, Indian author, poet, and playwright (b. 1850)

===1901–present===
*1902 – Lars Hertervig, Norwegian painter (b. 1830)
*1917 – Hendrick Peter Godfried Quack, Dutch economist and historian (b. 1834)
*1918 – Georg Cantor, German mathematician and philosopher (b. 1845)
*1919 – Theodore Roosevelt, American colonel and politician, 26th President of the United States (b. 1858)
*1921 – Devil Anse Hatfield, American guerrilla leader (b. 1839)
*1922 – Jakob Rosanes, Ukrainian-German mathematician and chess player (b. 1842)
*1928 – Alvin Kraenzlein, American hurdler and long jumper (b. 1876)
* 1928 – Wilhelm Ramsay, Finnish geologist and professor (b. 1865)
*1933 – Vladimir de Pachmann, Ukrainian-German pianist (b. 1848)
*1934 – Herbert Chapman, English footballer and manager (b. 1878)
*1937 – André Bessette, Canadian saint (b. 1845)
*1939 – Gustavs Zemgals, Latvian journalist and politician, 2nd President of Latvia (b. 1871)
*1941 – Charley O&#x27;Leary, American baseball player and coach (b. 1882)
*1942 – Emma Calvé, French soprano and actress (b. 1858)
* 1942 – Henri de Baillet-Latour, Belgian businessman, 3rd President of the International Olympic Committee (b. 1876)
*1944 – Jacques Rosenbaum, Estonian-German architect (b. 1878)
* 1944 – Ida Tarbell, American journalist, reformer, and educator (b. 1857)
*1945 – Vladimir Vernadsky, Russian mineralogist and chemist (b. 1863)
*1949 – Victor Fleming, American director, producer, and cinematographer (b. 1883)
*1966 – Jean Lurçat, French painter (b. 1892)
*1972 – Chen Yi, Chinese general and politician, 2nd Foreign Minister of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (b. 1901)
*1974 – David Alfaro Siqueiros, Mexican painter (b. 1896)
*1978 – Burt Munro, New Zealand motorcycle racer (b. 1899)
*1981 – A. J. Cronin, Scottish physician and author (b. 1896)
*1984 – Ernest Laszlo, Hungarian-American cinematographer (b. 1898)
*1990 – Ian Charleson, Scottish-English actor (b. 1949)
* 1990 – Pavel Cherenkov, Russian physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1904)
*1991 – Alan Wiggins, American baseball player (b. 1958)
*1992 – Steve Gilpin, New Zealand vocalist and songwriter (b. 1949)
*1993 – Dizzy Gillespie, American singer-songwriter and trumpet player (b. 1917)
* 1993 – Rudolf Nureyev, Russian-French dancer and choreographer (b. 1938)
*1995 – Joe Slovo, Lithuanian-South African lawyer and politician (b. 1926)
*1999 – Michel Petrucciani, French-American pianist (b. 1962)
*2004 – Pierre Charles, Dominican educator and politician, 5th Prime Minister of Dominica (b. 1954)
*2005 – Eileen Desmond, Irish civil servant and politician, 12th Irish Minister for Health (b. 1932)
* 2005 – Lois Hole, Canadian academic and politician, 15th Lieutenant Governor of Alberta (b. 1929)
* 2005 – Tarquinio Provini, Italian motorcycle racer (b. 1933)
*2006 – Lou Rawls, American singer-songwriter (b. 1933)
*2007 – Roberta Wohlstetter, American political scientist, historian, and academic (b. 1912)
*2008 – Shmuel Berenbaum, Rabbi of Mir Yeshiva (Brooklyn) (b. 1920)
*2009 – Ron Asheton, American guitarist, songwriter, and actor (probable; b. 1948)
*2011 – Uche Okafor, Nigerian footballer, coach, and sportscaster (b. 1967)
*2012 – Bob Holness, South African-English radio and television host (b. 1928)
* 2012 – Spike Pola, Australian footballer and soldier (b. 1914)
*2013 – Ruth Carter Stevenson, American art collector, founded the Amon Carter Museum of American Art (b. 1923)
*2014 – Marina Ginestà, French Resistance soldier and photographer (b. 1919)
* 2014 – Nelson Ned, Brazilian singer-songwriter (b. 1947)
* 2014 – Julian Rotter, American psychologist and academic (b. 1916)
*2015 – Arthur Jackson, American lieutenant and target shooter (b. 1918)
* 2015 – Basil John Mason, English meteorologist and academic (b. 1923)
*2016 – Pat Harrington, Jr., American actor and screenwriter (b. 1929)
* 2016 – Florence King, American journalist and author (b. 1936)
* 2016 – Christy O&#x27;Connor Jnr, Irish golfer and architect (b. 1948)
* 2016 – Silvana Pampanini, Italian model, actress, and director, Miss Italy 1946 (b. 1925)
*2017 – Octavio Lepage, Venezuelan politician, President of Venezuela (b. 1923)
* 2017 – Om Puri, Indian actor (b. 1950)
*2019 – José Ramón Fernández, Cuban revolution leader (b. 1923)
* 2019 – Lamin Sanneh, Gambian-born American professor (b. 1942)
* 2019 – W. Morgan Sheppard, British actor (b. 1932)
* 2019 – Paul Streeten, Austrian-born British economics professor (b. 1917)
*2020 – Richard Maponya, South African businessman (b. 1920)
* 2021 – Gordon Renwick, Canadian ice hockey administrator and businessman (b. 1935)
*2021 – James Cross, British diplomat kidnapped during the 1970 October crisis in Québec (b. 1921)
*2022 – Peter Bogdanovich, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1939)
*2022 – Sidney Poitier, Bahamian-American actor, director, and diplomat (b. 1927)
* 2022 – Francisco Sionil Jose, Philippine novelist (b. 1924)
* 2023 – Mary Lou Kownacki, American Roman Catholic nun, peace activist, and writer
==Holidays and observances==
* Armed Forces Day (Iraq)
* Christian Feast day:
** André Bessette (Roman Catholic Church)
** January 6 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Christmas:
** Christmas (Armenian Apostolic Church)
** Christmas Eve (Russia)
** Christmas Eve (Ukraine)
** Christmas Eve (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
** Christmas Eve (North Macedonia)
* Epiphany or Three Kings&#x27; Day (Western Christianity) or Theophany (Eastern Christianity), and its related observances:
** Befana Day (Italy)
** Little Christmas (Ireland)
** Þrettándinn (Iceland)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day 
* Historical Events on January 6 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19411" start="27" end="31" title="1066" label="1066"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="57" end="77" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="103" end="108" title="Witan" label="Witan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="126" end="142" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="265" end="291" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229" start="294" end="298" title="1205" label="1205"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="301" end="317" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="351" end="369" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770" start="372" end="376" title="1322" label="1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q314346" start="379" end="395" title="Stefan Dečanski" label="Stephen Uroš III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415003" start="407" end="421" title="Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)" label="King of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281457" start="456" end="473" title="Stefan Konstantin" label="Stefan Konstantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="550" end="554" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="557" end="578" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545902" start="599" end="621" title="Iron Crown of Lombardy" label="Iron Crown of Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="625" end="638" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="642" end="647" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446" start="650" end="654" title="1449" label="1449"/>
<link wikidata="Q37142" start="657" end="671" title="Constantine XI Palaiologos" label="Constantine XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="683" end="700" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19053" start="704" end="711" title="Mystras" label="Mystras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679" start="714" end="718" title="1492" label="1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="743" end="765" title="Ferdinand and Isabella" label="Ferdinand and Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552718" start="805" end="816" title="Granada War" label="Granada War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457" start="819" end="823" title="1536" label="1536"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477757" start="888" end="923" title="Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco" label="Colegio de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q441300" start="947" end="965" title="Antonio de Mendoza" label="Antonio de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q442901" start="977" end="994" title="Juan de Zumárraga" label="Juan de Zumárraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482" start="1012" end="1016" title="1540" label="1540"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1024" end="1045" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q57126" start="1054" end="1068" title="Anne of Cleves" label="Anne of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709" start="1071" end="1075" title="1579" label="1579"/>
<link wikidata="Q700027" start="1082" end="1096" title="Union of Arras" label="Union of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604378" start="1139" end="1152" title="Duke of Parma" label="Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q442497" start="1154" end="1169" title="Ottavio Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Ottavio Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1196" end="1219" title="Philip II of Spain" label="King Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907" start="1239" end="1243" title="1641" label="1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q431806" start="1246" end="1256" title="Arauco War" label="Arauco War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48838712" start="1268" end="1289" title="Parliament of Quillín (1641)" label="Parliament of Quillín"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="1353" end="1360" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005" start="1385" end="1389" title="1661" label="1661"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="1392" end="1411" title="Restoration (England)" label="English Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908027" start="1417" end="1434" title="Fifth Monarchists" label="Fifth Monarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1478" end="1484" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913" start="1539" end="1543" title="1721" label="1721"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="1578" end="1594" title="South Sea Company" label="South Sea Bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926" start="1696" end="1700" title="1724" label="1724"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759028" start="1703" end="1754" title="Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen, BWV 65" label="&amp;quot;Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen&amp;quot;, BWV 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369421" start="1758" end="1770" title="Bach cantata" label="Bach cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="1776" end="1784" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932" start="1816" end="1820" title="1725" label="1725"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="1823" end="1833" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631532" start="1865" end="1923" title="Liebster Immanuel, Herzog der Frommen, BWV 123" label="&amp;quot;Liebster Immanuel, Herzog der Frommen&amp;quot;, BWV 123"/>
<link wikidata="Q24949660" start="1927" end="1942" title="Chorale cantata cycle" label="chorale cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="1947" end="1955" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719" start="1958" end="1962" title="1781" label="1781"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501743" start="1972" end="1988" title="Battle of Jersey" label="Battle of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="2060" end="2075" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="2078" end="2082" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286965" start="2154" end="2173" title="Invasion of Cayenne (1809)" label="Invasion of Cayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2185" end="2200" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612" start="2203" end="2207" title="1838" label="1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q454292" start="2210" end="2221" title="Alfred Vail" label="Alfred Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="2251" end="2260" title="telegraphy" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="2317" end="2327" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="2331" end="2335" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747635" start="2342" end="2363" title="Night of the Big Wind" label="Night of the Big Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2480" end="2486" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644" start="2489" end="2493" title="1847" label="1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q183246" start="2496" end="2507" title="Samuel Colt" label="Samuel Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="2551" end="2559" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="2602" end="2606" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q686720" start="2633" end="2644" title="Musikverein" label="Musikverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2648" end="2663" title="Vienna" label="Vienna, Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="2666" end="2670" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="2677" end="2706" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2723" end="2731" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2758" end="2767" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="2768" end="2785" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="2788" end="2792" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="2795" end="2810" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543997" start="2827" end="2835" title="Siege of Ladysmith" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q874262" start="2852" end="2861" title="Ladysmith, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="2863" end="2867" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="2909" end="2916" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="2949" end="2953" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q131117" start="2956" end="2972" title="Maria Montessori" label="Maria Montessori"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="3019" end="3032" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3045" end="3049" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="3059" end="3063" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="3066" end="3076" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="3114" end="3124" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="3142" end="3154" title="Geophysics" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76323" start="3155" end="3169" title="Alfred Wegener" label="Alfred Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="3199" end="3216" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="3219" end="3223" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="3231" end="3274" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="3284" end="3295" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="his country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="3330" end="3354" title="January 6th Dictatorship" label="January 6th Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q30547" start="3365" end="3378" title="Mother Teresa" label="Mother Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="3397" end="3405" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="3477" end="3481" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131954" start="3484" end="3499" title="Clessie Cummins" label="Clessie Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="3635" end="3639" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3666" end="3687" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q646350" start="3701" end="3714" title="Four Freedoms" label="Four Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="3729" end="3755" title="State of the Union address" label="State of the Union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="3758" end="3762" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q107107935" start="3769" end="3791" title="1946 North Vietnamese legislative election" label="first general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="3800" end="3807" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="3818" end="3822" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="3825" end="3846" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142056" start="3895" end="3917" title="round-the-world ticket" label="round-the-world ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="3920" end="3924" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3961" end="3992" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3998" end="4015" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="4070" end="4074" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="4077" end="4087" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q496095" start="4106" end="4122" title="Ganghwa massacre" label="Ganghwa massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="4224" end="4228" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970261" start="4231" end="4260" title="National Airlines Flight 2511" label="National Airlines Flight 2511"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="4333" end="4338" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810162" start="4353" end="4369" title="Associations Law" label="Associations Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="4390" end="4394" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="4441" end="4445" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4448" end="4459" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4461" end="4487" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="4492" end="4496" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="ARVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096964" start="4517" end="4541" title="Operation Deckhouse Five" label="Operation Deckhouse Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="4555" end="4561" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="4576" end="4580" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662381" start="4583" end="4603" title="Aeroflot Flight 1668" label="Aeroflot Flight 1668"/>
<link wikidata="Q176348" start="4617" end="4627" title="Olyokminsk" label="Olyokminsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="4642" end="4646" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731274" start="4649" end="4678" title="Allegheny Airlines Flight 737" label="Allegheny Airlines Flight 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q579290" start="4690" end="4737" title="Lafayette Township, McKean County, Pennsylvania" label="Lafayette Township, McKean County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="4767" end="4771" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="4793" end="4808" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36669" start="4810" end="4830" title="daylight saving time" label="daylight saving time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16495728" start="4896" end="4916" title="Aeroflot Flight H-75" label="Aeroflot Flight H-75"/>
<link wikidata="Q146456" start="4930" end="4939" title="Mukachevo" label="Mukachevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="4954" end="4958" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546004" start="4961" end="4974" title="Satwant Singh" label="Satwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383467" start="4979" end="4990" title="Kehar Singh" label="Kehar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347903" start="5036" end="5049" title="Assassination of Indira Gandhi" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="5068" end="5081" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="5123" end="5127" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q843405" start="5130" end="5150" title="President of Georgia" label="President of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218435" start="5151" end="5169" title="Zviad Gamsakhurdia" label="Zviad Gamsakhurdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60820213" start="5216" end="5220" title="1991–1992 Georgian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="5223" end="5227" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723836" start="5237" end="5258" title="Border Security Force" label="Border Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563178" start="5265" end="5291" title="1993 Sopore massacre" label="kill 55 Kashmiri civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321929" start="5295" end="5301" title="Sopore" label="Sopore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="5303" end="5320" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875659" start="5409" end="5439" title="Lufthansa CityLine Flight 5634" label="Lufthansa CityLine Flight 5634"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="5463" end="5488" title="Charles de Gaulle Airport" label="Charles de Gaulle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q680463" start="5492" end="5508" title="Roissy-en-France" label="Roissy-en-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="5519" end="5523" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q239988" start="5545" end="5559" title="Nancy Kerrigan" label="Nancy Kerrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q95521351" start="5563" end="5571" title="1994 Cobo Arena attack" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q236278" start="5619" end="5632" title="Tonya Harding" label="Tonya Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589790" start="5662" end="5695" title="1994 United States Figure Skating Championships" label="U.S. Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="5698" end="5702" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="5748" end="5767" title="Manila" label="Manila, Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q692398" start="5805" end="5820" title="Bojinka plot" label="Project Bojinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="5848" end="5852" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941059" start="5872" end="5885" title="Pyrenean ibex" label="Pyrenean ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="5957" end="5961" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284122" start="5964" end="5980" title="Edgar Ray Killen" label="Edgar Ray Killen"/>
<link wikidata="Q635051" start="6006" end="6047" title="murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner" label="murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="6059" end="6089" title="American Civil Rights Movement" label="American Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312242" start="6102" end="6117" title="Graniteville train crash" label="train collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474244" start="6121" end="6133" title="Graniteville, South Carolina" label="Graniteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="6192" end="6200" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="6207" end="6211" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155798" start="6280" end="6296" title="January 2012 al-Midan bombing" label="blows himself up"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="6320" end="6328" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="6331" end="6335" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q28133931" start="6389" end="6402" title="Fort Lauderdale airport shooting" label="mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q635361" start="6406" end="6453" title="Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport" label="Fort Lauderdale–Hollywood International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q494624" start="6457" end="6471" title="Broward County, Florida" label="Broward County"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="6483" end="6487" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587132" start="6519" end="6528" title="Mining in Afghanistan" label="gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165376" start="6541" end="6560" title="Badakhshan province" label="Badakhshan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244614" start="6596" end="6618" title="Muhammad V of Kelantan" label="Muhammad V of Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="6634" end="6655" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="6707" end="6711" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="6724" end="6764" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="storm the United States Capitol Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q102422710" start="6768" end="6775" title="Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election" label="disrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q104706517" start="6776" end="6789" title="2021 United States Electoral College vote count" label="certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="6797" end="6823" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6872" end="6885" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q49616" start="6888" end="6892" title="2025" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="6895" end="6909" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694178" start="6924" end="6935" title="Resignation of Justin Trudeau" label="resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="6953" end="6976" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="6981" end="7005" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="7059" end="7063" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q61934" start="7066" end="7084" title="Gertrude the Great" label="Gertrude the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q823154" start="7086" end="7099" title="German mystic" label="German mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="7111" end="7115" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="7118" end="7139" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="7151" end="7155" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589610" start="7158" end="7190" title="Edmund Holland, 4th Earl of Kent" label="Edmund Holland, 4th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162" start="7202" end="7206" title="1412" label="1412"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="7209" end="7220" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646" start="7257" end="7261" title="1486" label="1486"/>
<link wikidata="Q76588" start="7264" end="7279" title="Martin Agricola" label="Martin Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853" start="7321" end="7325" title="1488" label="1488"/>
<link wikidata="Q532384" start="7328" end="7349" title="Helius Eobanus Hessus" label="Helius Eobanus Hessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687" start="7374" end="7378" title="1493" label="1493"/>
<link wikidata="Q381010" start="7381" end="7392" title="Olaus Petri" label="Olaus Petri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126" start="7423" end="7427" title="1500" label="1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q320160" start="7430" end="7443" title="John of Ávila" label="John of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314" start="7481" end="7485" title="1525" label="1525"/>
<link wikidata="Q159632" start="7488" end="7501" title="Caspar Peucer" label="Caspar Peucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470" start="7543" end="7547" title="1538" label="1538"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152150" start="7550" end="7561" title="Jane Dormer" label="Jane Dormer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615258" start="7563" end="7579" title="Duchess of Feria" label="Duchess of Feria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618" start="7591" end="7595" title="1561" label="1561"/>
<link wikidata="Q77520" start="7598" end="7611" title="Thomas Fincke" label="Thomas Fincke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744" start="7659" end="7663" title="1587" label="1587"/>
<link wikidata="Q371833" start="7666" end="7706" title="Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares" label="Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782" start="7718" end="7722" title="1595" label="1595"/>
<link wikidata="Q560343" start="7725" end="7749" title="Claude Favre de Vaugelas" label="Claude Favre de Vaugelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798" start="7808" end="7812" title="1617" label="1617"/>
<link wikidata="Q76355" start="7815" end="7832" title="Christoffer Gabel" label="Christoffer Gabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865" start="7863" end="7867" title="1632" label="1632"/>
<link wikidata="Q529415" start="7870" end="7908" title="Anne Hamilton, 3rd Duchess of Hamilton" label="Anne Hamilton, 3rd Duchess of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975" start="7938" end="7942" title="1655" label="1655"/>
<link wikidata="Q57527" start="7945" end="7973" title="Eleonor Magdalene of Neuburg" label="Eleonor Magdalene of Neuburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617" start="7985" end="7989" title="1673" label="1673"/>
<link wikidata="Q333238" start="7992" end="8026" title="James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos" label="James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679646" start="8061" end="8091" title="Lord Lieutenant of Radnorshire" label="Lord Lieutenant of Radnorshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="8103" end="8107" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q514997" start="8110" end="8129" title="Giuseppe Sammartini" label="Giuseppe Sammartini"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="8139" end="8143" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819" start="8175" end="8179" title="1702" label="1702"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246203" start="8182" end="8195" title="José de Nebra" label="José de Nebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878" start="8225" end="8229" title="1714" label="1714"/>
<link wikidata="Q957900" start="8232" end="8246" title="Percivall Pott" label="Percivall Pott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586" start="8275" end="8279" title="1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q193751" start="8282" end="8309" title="Jacques-Etienne Montgolfier" label="Jacques-Etienne Montgolfier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669" start="8364" end="8368" title="1766" label="1766"/>
<link wikidata="Q34063" start="8371" end="8403" title="José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia" label="José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756" start="8477" end="8481" title="1785" label="1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q902399" start="8484" end="8503" title="Andreas Moustoxydis" label="Andreas Moustoxydis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="8548" end="8552" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q331036" start="8555" end="8575" title="James Madison Porter" label="James Madison Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="8614" end="8644" title="United States Secretary of War" label="United States Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815" start="8656" end="8660" title="1795" label="1795"/>
<link wikidata="Q560917" start="8663" end="8676" title="Anselme Payen" label="Anselme Payen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="8717" end="8721" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q465232" start="8724" end="8738" title="Jedediah Smith" label="Jedediah Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887" start="8789" end="8793" title="1803" label="1803"/>
<link wikidata="Q572547" start="8796" end="8806" title="Henri Herz" label="Henri Herz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909" start="8849" end="8853" title="1807" label="1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q520053" start="8856" end="8870" title="Joseph Petzval" label="Joseph Petzval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914" start="8928" end="8932" title="1808" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286268" start="8935" end="8956" title="Joseph Pitty Couthouy" label="Joseph Pitty Couthouy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928" start="9010" end="9014" title="1811" label="1811"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066198" start="9017" end="9031" title="Charles Sumner" label="Charles Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983" start="9075" end="9079" title="1822" label="1822"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="9082" end="9101" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="9151" end="9155" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682" start="9158" end="9170" title="Gustave Doré" label="Gustave Doré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612" start="9211" end="9215" title="1838" label="1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434" start="9218" end="9227" title="Max Bruch" label="Max Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625" start="9270" end="9274" title="1842" label="1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095462" start="9277" end="9290" title="Clarence King" label="Clarence King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676" start="9347" end="9351" title="1856" label="1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q769966" start="9354" end="9371" title="Giuseppe Martucci" label="Giuseppe Martucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680" start="9425" end="9429" title="1857" label="1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q747564" start="9432" end="9442" title="Hugh Mahon" label="Hugh Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="9492" end="9531" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q680460" start="9551" end="9566" title="William Russell (governor)" label="William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="9605" end="9630" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687" start="9642" end="9646" title="1859" label="1859"/>
<link wikidata="Q379900" start="9649" end="9665" title="Samuel Alexander" label="Samuel Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="9722" end="9726" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452914" start="9729" end="9742" title="Morton Selten" label="Morton Selten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="9769" end="9773" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q49744" start="9776" end="9788" title="Victor Horta" label="Victor Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818182" start="9818" end="9836" title="Hôtel van Eetvelde" label="Hôtel van Eetvelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541780" start="9856" end="9868" title="George Lloyd (bishop of Saskatchewan)" label="George Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="9920" end="9924" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q57159" start="9927" end="9939" title="Gustav Bauer" label="Gustav Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="9980" end="10001" title="Chancellor of Germany (German Reich)" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="10013" end="10017" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="10020" end="10038" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="10080" end="10084" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q153527" start="10087" end="10097" title="Fred Niblo" label="Fred Niblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="10149" end="10153" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q272778" start="10156" end="10169" title="Adeline Genée" label="Adeline Genée"/>
<link wikidata="Q193608" start="10220" end="10233" title="Carl Sandburg" label="Carl Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="10274" end="10278" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q345468" start="10281" end="10288" title="Tom Mix" label="Tom Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="10327" end="10331" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063157" start="10334" end="10347" title="Ion Minulescu" label="Ion Minulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="10394" end="10398" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q366307" start="10401" end="10412" title="Fan S. Noli" label="Fan S. Noli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009376" start="10460" end="10485" title="Prime Minister of Albania" label="Prime Minister of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378052" start="10505" end="10516" title="Sam Rayburn" label="Sam Rayburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="10555" end="10608" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="10620" end="10624" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q47737" start="10627" end="10640" title="Kahlil Gibran" label="Kahlil Gibran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="10702" end="10706" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693504" start="10709" end="10721" title="Ted McDonald" label="Ted McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="10755" end="10759" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q883373" start="10762" end="10779" title="James Fitzmaurice (pilot)" label="James Fitzmaurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="10816" end="10820" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q68625" start="10823" end="10840" title="Heinrich Nordhoff" label="Heinrich Nordhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="10869" end="10873" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q167387" start="10876" end="10895" title="Maria of Yugoslavia" label="Maria of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="10948" end="10952" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q214989" start="10955" end="10972" title="Maurice Abravanel" label="Maurice Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="11022" end="11026" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740848" start="11029" end="11042" title="Kid Chocolate" label="Kid Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q920901" start="11075" end="11088" title="Wright Morris" label="Wright Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522683" start="11142" end="11161" title="Yiannis Papaioannou" label="Yiannis Papaioannou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="11202" end="11206" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q322922" start="11209" end="11222" title="Jacques Ellul" label="Jacques Ellul"/>
<link wikidata="Q719588" start="11273" end="11285" title="Danny Thomas" label="Danny Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="11351" end="11355" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q312185" start="11358" end="11371" title="Edward Gierek" label="Edward Gierek"/>
<link wikidata="Q253384" start="11421" end="11434" title="Loretta Young" label="Loretta Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="11464" end="11468" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q89479" start="11471" end="11492" title="Godfrey Edward Arnold" label="Godfrey Edward Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="11546" end="11550" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239102" start="11553" end="11564" title="Don Edwards" label="Don Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q961640" start="11626" end="11639" title="John C. Lilly" label="John C. Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q354867" start="11711" end="11721" title="Alan Watts" label="Alan Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="11774" end="11778" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137910" start="11781" end="11793" title="Park Mok-wol" label="Park Mok-wol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="11843" end="11847" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q697695" start="11850" end="11861" title="Koo Chen-fu" label="Koo Chen-fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="11909" end="11913" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q707717" start="11916" end="11928" title="Henry Corden" label="Henry Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q323207" start="11978" end="11996" title="John Maynard Smith" label="John Maynard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="12050" end="12064" title="Sun Myung Moon" label="Sun Myung Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="12106" end="12124" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q713760" start="12144" end="12154" title="Early Wynn" label="Early Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="12217" end="12221" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291309" start="12224" end="12248" title="Marianne Grunberg-Manago" label="Marianne Grunberg-Manago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171235" start="12308" end="12323" title="Cary Middlecoff" label="Cary Middlecoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="12369" end="12373" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q978720" start="12376" end="12394" title="Vladimir Kazantsev (athlete)" label="Vladimir Kazantsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237120" start="12430" end="12441" title="Norman Kirk" label="Norman Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="12485" end="12514" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q954329" start="12534" end="12549" title="Jacobo Timerman" label="Jacobo Timerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="12596" end="12600" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q45785" start="12603" end="12615" title="Kim Dae-jung" label="Kim Dae-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296418" start="12658" end="12682" title="President of South Korea" label="President of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="12684" end="12695" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="12724" end="12736" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="12771" end="12775" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q558510" start="12778" end="12791" title="John DeLorean" label="John DeLorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241608" start="12840" end="12862" title="DeLorean Motor Company" label="DeLorean Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="12874" end="12878" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418235" start="12881" end="12893" title="Ralph Branca" label="Ralph Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q172630" start="12939" end="12951" title="Pat Flaherty (racing driver)" label="Pat Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q724707" start="12997" end="13012" title="Mickey Hargitay" label="Mickey Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="13066" end="13070" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186592" start="13073" end="13096" title="Jesse Leonard Steinfeld" label="Jesse Leonard Steinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434880" start="13136" end="13172" title="Surgeon General of the United States" label="Surgeon General of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="13184" end="13188" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q256466" start="13191" end="13199" title="Capucine" label="Capucine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="13237" end="13241" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424403" start="13244" end="13255" title="Vic Tayback" label="Vic Tayback"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="13283" end="13287" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q335232" start="13290" end="13304" title="E. L. Doctorow" label="E. L. Doctorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="13371" end="13375" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519459" start="13378" end="13389" title="Simon Oates" label="Simon Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q715584" start="13424" end="13438" title="Stuart A. Rice" label="Stuart A. Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="13481" end="13485" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450882" start="13488" end="13498" title="John Clive" label="John Clive"/>
<link wikidata="Q467623" start="13544" end="13569" title="Oleg Grigoryevich Makarov" label="Oleg Grigoryevich Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="13613" end="13617" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670803" start="13620" end="13635" title="Harry M. Miller" label="Harry M. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q291443" start="13706" end="13717" title="Sylvia Syms" label="Sylvia Syms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="13746" end="13750" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982387" start="13753" end="13764" title="Ian Meckiff" label="Ian Meckiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q615713" start="13796" end="13806" title="Nino Tempo" label="Nino Tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="13846" end="13850" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q53562" start="13853" end="13865" title="Darlene Hard" label="Darlene Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q311428" start="13909" end="13932" title="Julio María Sanguinetti" label="Julio María Sanguinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524807" start="13985" end="14005" title="President of Uruguay" label="President of Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="14007" end="14011" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q533148" start="14014" end="14026" title="Ludvík Daněk" label="Ludvík Daněk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538280" start="14068" end="14077" title="Lou Holtz" label="Lou Holtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q451326" start="14138" end="14148" title="Doris Troy" label="Doris Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="14188" end="14192" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q199943" start="14195" end="14212" title="Adriano Celentano" label="Adriano Celentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685688" start="14270" end="14285" title="Adrienne Clarke" label="Adrienne Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q138477" start="14329" end="14344" title="Larisa Shepitko" label="Larisa Shepitko"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="14405" end="14409" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q324484" start="14412" end="14431" title="Valeriy Lobanovskyi" label="Valeriy Lobanovskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362362" start="14485" end="14496" title="Murray Rose" label="Murray Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="14553" end="14557" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886750" start="14560" end="14569" title="Van McCoy" label="Van McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14622" end="14626" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q314039" start="14629" end="14643" title="Terry Venables" label="Terry Venables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="14687" end="14691" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550354" start="14694" end="14709" title="Bonnie Franklin" label="Bonnie Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10681" start="14758" end="14770" title="Alan Stivell" label="Alan Stivell"/>
<link wikidata="Q116064" start="14822" end="14841" title="Rolf M. Zinkernagel" label="Rolf M. Zinkernagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="14876" end="14887" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="14898" end="14902" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q775742" start="14905" end="14915" title="Barry John" label="Barry John"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="14947" end="14951" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q173061" start="14954" end="14965" title="Syd Barrett" label="Syd Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="15018" end="15022" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q236638" start="15025" end="15036" title="Sandy Denny" label="Sandy Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15085" end="15089" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376909" start="15092" end="15103" title="Guy Gardner (astronaut)" label="Guy Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243166" start="15145" end="15157" title="Dayle Hadlee" label="Dayle Hadlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15182" end="15186" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357236" start="15189" end="15198" title="Mike Boit" label="Mike Boit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045339" start="15236" end="15253" title="Carolyn D. Wright" label="Carolyn D. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="15293" end="15297" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110029" start="15300" end="15311" title="Louis Freeh" label="Louis Freeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057168" start="15346" end="15393" title="Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="15395" end="15399" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292717" start="15402" end="15413" title="Don Gullett" label="Don Gullett"/>
<link wikidata="Q122881" start="15469" end="15479" title="Kim Wilson" label="Kim Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="15530" end="15534" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q44653" start="15537" end="15550" title="Malcolm Young" label="Malcolm Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="15626" end="15630" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q188726" start="15633" end="15650" title="Anthony Minghella" label="Anthony Minghella"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="15697" end="15701" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760" start="15704" end="15718" title="Rowan Atkinson" label="Rowan Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47108853" start="15770" end="15784" title="Debbie Mathers" label="Debbie Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="15814" end="15818" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q262712" start="15821" end="15837" title="Elizabeth Strout" label="Elizabeth Strout"/>
<link wikidata="Q26419" start="15889" end="15901" title="Justin Welby" label="Justin Welby"/>
<link wikidata="Q921680" start="15931" end="15945" title="Clive Woodward" label="Clive Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="15979" end="15983" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q540379" start="15986" end="15999" title="Michael Foale" label="Michael Foale"/>
<link wikidata="Q438933" start="16056" end="16067" title="Nancy Lopez" label="Nancy Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16103" end="16107" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587010" start="16110" end="16127" title="Shlomo Glickstein" label="Shlomo Glickstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="16152" end="16156" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q558189" start="16159" end="16168" title="Kapil Dev" label="Kapil Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16188" end="16192" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q949615" start="16195" end="16207" title="Paul Azinger" label="Paul Azinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729332" start="16251" end="16263" title="Kari Jalonen" label="Kari Jalonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q264724" start="16310" end="16324" title="Nigella Lawson" label="Nigella Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q962794" start="16359" end="16369" title="Howie Long" label="Howie Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="16420" end="16424" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443918" start="16427" end="16439" title="Georges Jobé" label="Georges Jobé"/>
<link wikidata="Q766509" start="16484" end="16498" title="Nigel Melville" label="Nigel Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734441" start="16530" end="16543" title="Peter Whittle (politician)" label="Peter Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="16602" end="16606" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026411" start="16609" end="16622" title="Norm Charlton" label="Norm Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q944823" start="16668" end="16681" title="Paul Kipkoech" label="Paul Kipkoech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="16708" end="16712" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q551136" start="16715" end="16728" title="Charles Haley" label="Charles Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903411" start="16764" end="16775" title="Jyrki Kasvi" label="Jyrki Kasvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407078" start="16830" end="16846" title="Jacqueline Moore" label="Jacqueline Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="16879" end="16883" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q318511" start="16886" end="16899" title="Bjørn Lomborg" label="Bjørn Lomborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="16929" end="16933" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q466942" start="16936" end="16949" title="Sharon Cuneta" label="Sharon Cuneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q758145" start="16988" end="17004" title="Attilio Lombardo" label="Attilio Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17038" end="17042" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="17045" end="17057" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="17141" end="17145" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q363005" start="17148" end="17162" title="John Singleton" label="John Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="17221" end="17225" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q503545" start="17228" end="17241" title="Norman Reedus" label="Norman Reedus"/>
<link wikidata="Q322750" start="17276" end="17290" title="Aron Eisenberg" label="Aron Eisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="17332" end="17336" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559545" start="17339" end="17349" title="Julie Chen" label="Julie Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344549" start="17416" end="17430" title="Radoslav Látal" label="Radoslav Látal"/>
<link wikidata="Q546910" start="17470" end="17485" title="Gabrielle Reece" label="Gabrielle Reece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="17542" end="17546" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075137" start="17549" end="17561" title="Irwin Thomas" label="Irwin Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="17616" end="17620" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q520785" start="17623" end="17640" title="Vasso Karantasiou" label="Vasso Karantasiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="17673" end="17677" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150216" start="17680" end="17695" title="Marlon Anderson" label="Marlon Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543170" start="17748" end="17762" title="Daniel Cordone" label="Daniel Cordone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749594" start="17796" end="17806" title="Paul Grant (basketball)" label="Paul Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="17846" end="17850" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161073" start="17853" end="17866" title="James Farrior" label="James Farrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="17894" end="17898" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q187836" start="17901" end="17916" title="Johan Davidsson" label="Johan Davidsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q663121" start="17953" end="17967" title="Danny Pintauro" label="Danny Pintauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q722066" start="17993" end="18007" title="Richard Zedník" label="Richard Zedník"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="18035" end="18039" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048509" start="18042" end="18054" title="Casey Fossum" label="Casey Fossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927384" start="18091" end="18103" title="Bubba Franks" label="Bubba Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="18131" end="18135" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q232499" start="18138" end="18151" title="Rinko Kikuchi" label="Rinko Kikuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q641569" start="18180" end="18193" title="Asante Samuel" label="Asante Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="18221" end="18225" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q310108" start="18228" end="18242" title="Gilbert Arenas" label="Gilbert Arenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372531" start="18280" end="18291" title="Roy Asotasi" label="Roy Asotasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q530355" start="18334" end="18349" title="Tiffany Pollard" label="Tiffany Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28288" start="18392" end="18406" title="Eddie Redmayne" label="Eddie Redmayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="18433" end="18437" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q348930" start="18440" end="18451" title="Adam Burish" label="Adam Burish"/>
<link wikidata="Q715431" start="18489" end="18497" title="Chen Nan" label="Chen Nan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="18526" end="18530" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067741" start="18533" end="18543" title="A. J. Hawk" label="A. J. Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q723057" start="18591" end="18604" title="Kate McKinnon" label="Kate McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731533" start="18645" end="18655" title="Eric Trump" label="Eric Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="18679" end="18683" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q316935" start="18686" end="18698" title="Paul McShane (footballer)" label="Paul McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q180749" start="18726" end="18740" title="Petter Northug" label="Petter Northug"/>
<link wikidata="Q315643" start="18767" end="18778" title="Alex Turner" label="Alex Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="18822" end="18826" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231693" start="18829" end="18840" title="Arin Hanson" label="Arin Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214891" start="18869" end="18884" title="Bongani Khumalo" label="Bongani Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38678" start="18920" end="18933" title="Ndamukong Suh" label="Ndamukong Suh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="18961" end="18965" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q159159" start="18968" end="18980" title="Andy Carroll" label="Andy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454301" start="19010" end="19021" title="Sergio León" label="Sergio León"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705892" start="19051" end="19065" title="Derrick Morgan (American football)" label="Derrick Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="19093" end="19097" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233299" start="19100" end="19115" title="Sean Kilpatrick" label="Sean Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q515938" start="19153" end="19166" title="Alex Teixeira" label="Alex Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="19190" end="19194" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q103819821" start="19197" end="19209" title="Duarte Alves" label="Duarte Alves"/>
<link wikidata="Q386736" start="19242" end="19253" title="Will Barton" label="Will Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396355" start="19291" end="19304" title="Kevin Gausman" label="Kevin Gausman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="19332" end="19336" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q29452436" start="19339" end="19352" title="Corey Conners" label="Corey Conners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="19384" end="19388" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180552" start="19391" end="19406" title="Pat Connaughton" label="Pat Connaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q607790" start="19444" end="19463" title="Jesús Manuel Corona" label="Jesús Manuel Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="19485" end="19489" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q27107016" start="19492" end="19505" title="Catriona Gray" label="Catriona Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q42964984" start="19559" end="19577" title="Miss Universe 2018" label="Miss Universe 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092171" start="19587" end="19599" title="Denis Suárez" label="Denis Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127917" start="19629" end="19643" title="Jameis Winston" label="Jameis Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q491048" start="19679" end="19684" title="Jay B" label="Jay B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="19707" end="19711" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q62953486" start="19714" end="19720" title="Polo G" label="Polo G"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272609" start="19747" end="19758" title="Mac McClung" label="Mac McClung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="19788" end="19792" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q38572171" start="19795" end="19807" title="Kwon Eun-bin" label="Kwon Eun-bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110876482" start="19850" end="19861" title="Jack McBain" label="Jack McBain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="19891" end="19895" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q90327686" start="19898" end="19915" title="Kenyon Martin Jr." label="Kenyon Martin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="19945" end="19949" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649714" start="19952" end="19963" title="Roméo Lavia" label="Roméo Lavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30307" start="20012" end="20015" title="786" label="786"/>
<link wikidata="Q322614" start="20018" end="20031" title="Abo of Tiflis" label="Abo of Tiflis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19463" start="20066" end="20070" title="1088" label="1088"/>
<link wikidata="Q435006" start="20073" end="20090" title="Berengar of Tours" label="Berengar of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q19633" start="20132" end="20136" title="1148" label="1148"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331448" start="20139" end="20177" title="Gilbert de Clare, 1st Earl of Pembroke" label="Gilbert de Clare, 1st Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421" start="20189" end="20193" title="1233" label="1233"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787527" start="20196" end="20238" title="Matilda of Chester, Countess of Huntingdon" label="Matilda of Chester, Countess of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="20275" end="20279" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q318980" start="20282" end="20302" title="Raymond of Penyafort" label="Raymond of Penyafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="20344" end="20348" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768425" start="20351" end="20370" title="Giovanni I di Murta" label="Giovanni I di Murta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140" start="20410" end="20414" title="1358" label="1358"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553421" start="20417" end="20440" title="Gertrude van der Oosten" label="Gertrude van der Oosten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129" start="20458" end="20462" title="1406" label="1406"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517150" start="20465" end="20477" title="Roger Walden" label="Roger Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6439" start="20495" end="20499" title="1448" label="1448"/>
<link wikidata="Q58056" start="20502" end="20524" title="Christopher of Bavaria" label="Christopher of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="20526" end="20541" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614" start="20572" end="20576" title="1477" label="1477"/>
<link wikidata="Q556917" start="20579" end="20606" title="Jean VIII, Count of Vendôme" label="Jean VIII, Count of Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617" start="20618" end="20622" title="1478" label="1478"/>
<link wikidata="Q374468" start="20625" end="20635" title="Uzun Hasan" label="Uzun Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q555994" start="20668" end="20678" title="Aq Qoyunlu" label="Aq Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631" start="20698" end="20702" title="1481" label="1481"/>
<link wikidata="Q417715" start="20705" end="20726" title="Ahmed Khan bin Küchük" label="Ahmed Khan bin Küchük"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461" start="20745" end="20749" title="1537" label="1537"/>
<link wikidata="Q378232" start="20752" end="20796" title="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Florence" label="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q177213" start="20816" end="20834" title="Baldassare Peruzzi" label="Baldassare Peruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521924" start="20880" end="20908" title="Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne" label="Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788" start="20937" end="20941" title="1616" label="1616"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349498" start="20944" end="20959" title="Philip Henslowe" label="Philip Henslowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930" start="20991" end="20995" title="1646" label="1646"/>
<link wikidata="Q66894" start="20998" end="21008" title="Elias Holl" label="Elias Holl"/>
<link wikidata="Q695117" start="21041" end="21059" title="Augsburg Town Hall" label="Augsburg Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674" start="21071" end="21075" title="1689" label="1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q326763" start="21078" end="21087" title="Seth Ward (bishop of Salisbury)" label="Seth Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689" start="21146" end="21150" title="1693" label="1693"/>
<link wikidata="Q170514" start="21153" end="21162" title="Mehmed IV" label="Mehmed IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866" start="21190" end="21194" title="1711" label="1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q547419" start="21197" end="21216" title="Philips van Almonde" label="Philips van Almonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899" start="21243" end="21247" title="1718" label="1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q727363" start="21250" end="21275" title="Giovanni Vincenzo Gravina" label="Giovanni Vincenzo Gravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932" start="21314" end="21318" title="1725" label="1725"/>
<link wikidata="Q324986" start="21321" end="21341" title="Chikamatsu Monzaemon" label="Chikamatsu Monzaemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963" start="21384" end="21388" title="1731" label="1731"/>
<link wikidata="Q289655" start="21391" end="21416" title="Étienne François Geoffroy" label="Étienne François Geoffroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977" start="21458" end="21462" title="1734" label="1734"/>
<link wikidata="Q326716" start="21465" end="21476" title="John Dennis (dramatist)" label="John Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="21519" end="21523" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871547" start="21526" end="21556" title="Louis Baraguey d&amp;#x27;Hilliers" label="Louis Baraguey d&amp;#x27;Hilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572" start="21584" end="21588" title="1829" label="1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q283121" start="21591" end="21606" title="Josef Dobrovský" label="Josef Dobrovský"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="21651" end="21655" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q336692" start="21658" end="21675" title="Rodolphe Kreutzer" label="Rodolphe Kreutzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="21730" end="21734" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q259530" start="21737" end="21751" title="Frances Burney" label="Frances Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="21794" end="21798" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q93182" start="21801" end="21814" title="Louis Braille" label="Louis Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="21842" end="21849" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673" start="21861" end="21865" title="1855" label="1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246091" start="21868" end="21884" title="Giacomo Beltrami" label="Giacomo Beltrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="21934" end="21938" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q527981" start="21941" end="21963" title="Richard Henry Dana Jr." label="Richard Henry Dana Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="22007" end="22011" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="22014" end="22027" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="22070" end="22074" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628981" start="22077" end="22101" title="Bharatendu Harishchandra" label="Bharatendu Harishchandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="22170" end="22174" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346539" start="22177" end="22191" title="Lars Hertervig" label="Lars Hertervig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="22222" end="22226" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629919" start="22229" end="22258" title="Hendrick Peter Godfried Quack" label="Hendrick Peter Godfried Quack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="22301" end="22305" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="22308" end="22320" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="22370" end="22374" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="22377" end="22395" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="22435" end="22465" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="22477" end="22481" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748690" start="22484" end="22503" title="Devil Anse Hatfield" label="Devil Anse Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="22514" end="22523" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="22542" end="22546" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q72988" start="22549" end="22562" title="Jakob Rosanes" label="Jakob Rosanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="22623" end="22627" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q312863" start="22630" end="22646" title="Alvin Kraenzlein" label="Alvin Kraenzlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q983185" start="22700" end="22714" title="Wilhelm Ramsay" label="Wilhelm Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="22759" end="22763" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q674861" start="22766" end="22786" title="Vladimir de Pachmann" label="Vladimir de Pachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="22824" end="22828" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q313784" start="22831" end="22846" title="Herbert Chapman" label="Herbert Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="22890" end="22894" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q517066" start="22897" end="22911" title="André Bessette" label="André Bessette"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="22939" end="22943" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q366054" start="22946" end="22961" title="Gustavs Zemgals" label="Gustavs Zemgals"/>
<link wikidata="Q218014" start="23002" end="23021" title="President of Latvia" label="President of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="23033" end="23037" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084334" start="23040" end="23060" title="Charley O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Charley O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="23108" end="23112" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q452065" start="23115" end="23125" title="Emma Calvé" label="Emma Calvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q314193" start="23173" end="23196" title="Henri de Baillet-Latour" label="Henri de Baillet-Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241513" start="23223" end="23271" title="President of the International Olympic Committee" label="President of the International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="23283" end="23287" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120836" start="23290" end="23307" title="Jacques Rosenbaum" label="Jacques Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271712" start="23354" end="23365" title="Ida Tarbell" label="Ida Tarbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="23422" end="23426" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q316371" start="23429" end="23447" title="Vladimir Vernadsky" label="Vladimir Vernadsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="23493" end="23497" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q62503" start="23500" end="23514" title="Victor Fleming" label="Victor Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="23576" end="23580" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q468453" start="23583" end="23594" title="Jean Lurçat" label="Jean Lurçat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="23622" end="23626" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q188408" start="23629" end="23636" title="Chen Yi (general)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664362" start="23674" end="23729" title="Foreign Minister of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Foreign Minister of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="23741" end="23745" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="23748" end="23770" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="23799" end="23803" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q443607" start="23806" end="23816" title="Burt Munro" label="Burt Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="23858" end="23862" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q179059" start="23865" end="23877" title="A. J. Cronin" label="A. J. Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="23920" end="23924" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356226" start="23927" end="23940" title="Ernest Laszlo" label="Ernest Laszlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="23988" end="23992" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q981993" start="23995" end="24008" title="Ian Charleson" label="Ian Charleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76970" start="24052" end="24067" title="Pavel Cherenkov" label="Pavel Cherenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="24101" end="24112" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="24133" end="24137" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708050" start="24140" end="24152" title="Alan Wiggins" label="Alan Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="24190" end="24194" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612663" start="24197" end="24209" title="Steve Gilpin" label="Steve Gilpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="24258" end="24262" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="24265" end="24280" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q84217" start="24347" end="24361" title="Rudolf Nureyev" label="Rudolf Nureyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="24414" end="24418" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q561520" start="24421" end="24430" title="Joe Slovo" label="Joe Slovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="24490" end="24494" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q317155" start="24497" end="24515" title="Michel Petrucciani" label="Michel Petrucciani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="24552" end="24556" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293269" start="24559" end="24573" title="Pierre Charles (Dominican politician)" label="Pierre Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756747" start="24614" end="24640" title="Prime Minister of Dominica" label="Prime Minister of Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="24652" end="24656" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q435867" start="24659" end="24673" title="Eileen Desmond" label="Eileen Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865864" start="24716" end="24741" title="Minister for Health (Ireland)" label="Irish Minister for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q299936" start="24761" end="24770" title="Lois Hole" label="Lois Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176422" start="24811" end="24841" title="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta" label="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q738498" start="24861" end="24878" title="Tarquinio Provini" label="Tarquinio Provini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="24916" end="24920" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q455821" start="24923" end="24932" title="Lou Rawls" label="Lou Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="24972" end="24976" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436808" start="24979" end="24998" title="Roberta Wohlstetter" label="Roberta Wohlstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="25065" end="25069" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142454" start="25072" end="25088" title="Shmuel Berenbaum" label="Shmuel Berenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706973" start="25099" end="25121" title="Mir Yeshiva (Brooklyn)" label="Mir Yeshiva (Brooklyn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="25133" end="25137" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q335807" start="25140" end="25151" title="Ron Asheton" label="Ron Asheton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="25216" end="25220" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133131" start="25223" end="25234" title="Uche Okafor" label="Uche Okafor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="25292" end="25296" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244570" start="25299" end="25310" title="Bob Holness" label="Bob Holness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577211" start="25379" end="25389" title="Spike Pola" label="Spike Pola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="25436" end="25440" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382917" start="25443" end="25464" title="Ruth Carter Stevenson" label="Ruth Carter Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q255559" start="25502" end="25536" title="Amon Carter Museum of American Art" label="Amon Carter Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="25548" end="25552" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q15585779" start="25555" end="25569" title="Marina Ginestà" label="Marina Ginestà"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004244" start="25633" end="25643" title="Nelson Ned" label="Nelson Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372204" start="25692" end="25705" title="Julian Rotter" label="Julian Rotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="25753" end="25757" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799216" start="25760" end="25774" title="Arthur Jackson (sport shooter)" label="Arthur Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q555606" start="25834" end="25850" title="Basil John Mason" label="Basil John Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="25898" end="25902" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268679" start="25905" end="25924" title="Pat Harrington, Jr." label="Pat Harrington, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5460668" start="25977" end="25990" title="Florence King" label="Florence King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483775" start="26042" end="26067" title="Christy O&amp;#x27;Connor Jnr" label="Christy O&amp;#x27;Connor Jnr"/>
<link wikidata="Q437189" start="26115" end="26132" title="Silvana Pampanini" label="Silvana Pampanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189350" start="26172" end="26187" title="Miss Italia" label="Miss Italy 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="26199" end="26203" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064011" start="26206" end="26220" title="Octavio Lepage" label="Octavio Lepage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942698" start="26245" end="26267" title="President of Venezuela" label="President of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q80309" start="26287" end="26294" title="Om Puri" label="Om Puri"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="26320" end="26324" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q959399" start="26327" end="26347" title="José Ramón Fernández" label="José Ramón Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481881" start="26392" end="26404" title="Lamin Sanneh" label="Lamin Sanneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q604485" start="26457" end="26475" title="W. Morgan Sheppard" label="W. Morgan Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q90054" start="26510" end="26523" title="Paul Streeten" label="Paul Streeten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="26578" end="26582" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327626" start="26585" end="26600" title="Richard Maponya" label="Richard Maponya"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="26640" end="26644" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584625" start="26647" end="26661" title="Gord Renwick" label="Gordon Renwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625817" start="26731" end="26742" title="James Cross" label="James Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q27702" start="26787" end="26801" title="October crisis" label="October crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="26823" end="26827" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="26830" end="26847" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="26920" end="26934" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q558252" start="27003" end="27024" title="F. Sionil José" label="Francisco Sionil Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="27058" end="27062" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q125397363" start="27065" end="27082" title="Mary Lou Kownacki" label="Mary Lou Kownacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070656" start="27171" end="27194" title="Armed Forces Day (Iraq)" label="Armed Forces Day (Iraq)"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="27207" end="27216" title="Calendar of saints" label="Feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q517066" start="27221" end="27235" title="André Bessette" label="André Bessette"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27237" end="27258" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849542" start="27263" end="27301" title="January 6 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="January 6 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="27304" end="27313" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27318" end="27327" title="Christmas#Using the Julian calendar" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="27329" end="27354" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396247" start="27359" end="27372" title="Christmas in Russia" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="27374" end="27380" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q632639" start="27385" end="27398" title="Christmas in Ukraine" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="27400" end="27407" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376339" start="27412" end="27425" title="Public holidays in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="27427" end="27449" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657680" start="27454" end="27467" title="Public holidays in North Macedonia" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="27469" end="27484" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="27488" end="27496" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="27523" end="27543" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q899918" start="27548" end="27557" title="Theophany" label="Theophany"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="27559" end="27579" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q814168" start="27614" end="27624" title="Befana" label="Befana Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="27626" end="27631" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q616345" start="27636" end="27652" title="Little Christmas" label="Little Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278773" start="27654" end="27661" title="Gaelic calendar" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252585" start="27666" end="27677" title="Þrettándinn" label="Þrettándinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="27679" end="27686" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15987" wikidata="Q2228" url="?curid=15987" title="January 7">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*49 BC – The Senate of Rome says that Caesar will be declared a public enemy unless he disbands his army, prompting the tribunes who support him to flee to where Caesar is waiting in Ravenna. 
*1325 – Afonso IV becomes King of Portugal.
*1558 – French troops, led by Francis, Duke of Guise, take Calais, the last continental possession of England.

===1601–1900===
*1608 – Fire destroys Jamestown, Virginia.
*1610 – Galileo Galilei makes his first observation of the four Galilean moons: Ganymede, Callisto, Io and Europa, although he is not able to distinguish the last two until the following night.
*1708 – Battle of Zlatoust: Battle between Bashkir and Tatar rebels and the government troops of the Tsardom of Russia. It is one of the events of the Bashkir rebellion of 1704–1711.
*1708 – Bashkir rebels besiege Yelabuga.
*1738 – A peace treaty is signed between Peshwa Bajirao and Jai Singh II following Maratha victory in the Battle of Bhopal.
*1782 – The first American commercial bank, the Bank of North America, opens.
*1785 – Frenchman Jean-Pierre Blanchard and American John Jeffries travel from Dover, England, to Calais, France, in a gas balloon.
*1835 – , with Charles Darwin on board, drops anchor off the Chonos Archipelago.
*1867 – The Kingstree jail fire kills 22 freedmen in Reconstruction-era South Carolina.
*1894 – Thomas Edison makes a kinetoscopic film of someone sneezing. On the same day, his employee, William Kennedy Dickson, receives a patent for motion picture film.

===1901–present===
*1904 – The distress signal &quot;CQD&quot; is established only to be replaced two years later by &quot;SOS&quot;.
*1919 – Montenegrin guerrilla fighters rebel against the planned annexation of Montenegro by Serbia, but fail.
*1920 – The New York State Assembly refuses to seat five duly elected Socialist assemblymen.
*1922 – Dáil Éireann ratifies the Anglo-Irish Treaty by a 64–57 vote.
*1927 – The first transatlantic commercial telephone service is established from New York City to London.
*1928 – A disastrous flood of the River Thames kills 14 people and causes extensive damage to much of riverside London.
*1931 – Guy Menzies flies the first solo non-stop trans-Tasman flight (from Australia to New Zealand) in 11 hours and 45 minutes, crash-landing on New Zealand&#x27;s west coast.
*1935 – Benito Mussolini and French Foreign Minister Pierre Laval sign the Franco-Italian Agreement.
*1940 – Winter War: Battle of Raate Road: The Finnish 9th Division finally defeat the numerically superior Soviet forces on the Raate-Suomussalmi road.
*1948 – Kentucky Air National Guard pilot Thomas Mantell crashes while in pursuit of a supposed UFO.
*1950 – In the Sverdlovsk air disaster, all 19 of those on board are killed, including almost the entire national ice hockey team (VVS Moscow) of the Soviet Air Force – 11 players, as well as a team doctor and a masseur.
*1954 – Georgetown–IBM experiment: The first public demonstration of a machine translation system is held in New York at the head office of IBM.
*1955 – Contralto Marian Anderson becomes the first person of color to perform at the Metropolitan Opera in Giuseppe Verdi&#x27;s &quot;Un ballo in maschera&quot;. 
*1959 – The United States recognizes the new Cuban government of Fidel Castro.
*1968 – Surveyor program: &quot;Surveyor 7&quot;, the last spacecraft in the Surveyor series, lifts off from Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 36A.
*1972 – Iberia Flight 602 crashes near Ibiza Airport, killing all 104 people on board.
*1973 – In his second shooting spree of the week, Mark Essex fatally shoots seven people and wounds five others at Howard Johnson&#x27;s Hotel in New Orleans, before being shot to death by police officers. 
*1979 – Third Indochina War: Cambodian–Vietnamese War: Phnom Penh falls to the advancing Vietnamese troops, driving out Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge.
*1980 – U.S. President Jimmy Carter authorizes legislation giving $1.5 billion in loans to bail out the Chrysler Corporation.
*1984 – Brunei becomes the sixth member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
*1985 – Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency launches &quot;Sakigake&quot;, Japan&#x27;s first interplanetary spacecraft and the first deep space probe to be launched by any country other than the United States or the Soviet Union.
*1989 – Sutton United, a team in the fifth tier of English league football, defeated top-tier Coventry City in one of the biggest upsets in FA Cup history.
*1991 – Roger Lafontant, former leader of the Tonton Macoute in Haiti under François Duvalier, attempts a coup d&#x27;état, which ends in his arrest.
*1993 – The Fourth Republic of Ghana is inaugurated with Jerry Rawlings as president.
* 1993 – Bosnian War: The Bosnian Army executes a surprise attack at the village of Kravica in Srebrenica.
*1994 – A British Aerospace Jetstream 41 operating as United Express Flight 6291 crashes in Gahanna, Ohio, killing five of the eight people on board.
*1999 – The Senate trial in the impeachment of U.S. President Bill Clinton begins.
*2012 – A hot air balloon crashes near Carterton, New Zealand, killing all 11 people on board.
*2015 – Two gunmen commit mass murder at the offices of &quot;Charlie Hebdo&quot; in Paris, executing twelve people and wounding eleven others.
* 2015 – A car bomb explodes outside a police college in the Yemeni capital Sana&#x27;a with at least 38 people reported dead and more than 63 injured.
*2020 – The 6.4 2019–20 Puerto Rico earthquakes kill four and injure nine in southern Puerto Rico.
*2023 – The longest U.S. House of Representatives speaker election since the December 1859 – February 1860 U.S. speaker election concludes and Kevin McCarthy is elected 55th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives.
*2025 – A series of wildfires ravage the Greater Los Angeles area, resulting in at least 16 deaths and 13,401 structures destroyed.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
* 889 – Li Bian, emperor of Southern Tang (d. 943)
*1355 – Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, English politician, Lord High Constable of England (d. 1397)
*1414 – Henry II, Count of Nassau-Siegen (d. 1451)
*1502 – Pope Gregory XIII (d. 1585)

===1601–1900===
*1634 – Adam Krieger, German organist and composer (d. 1666)
*1647 – William Louis, Duke of Württemberg (d. 1677)
*1685 – Jonas Alströmer, Swedish agronomist and businessman (d. 1761)
*1706 – Johann Heinrich Zedler, German publisher (d. 1751)
*1713 – Giovanni Battista Locatelli, Italian opera director and manager (d. 1785)
*1718 – Israel Putnam, American general (d. 1790)
*1746 – George Elphinstone, 1st Viscount Keith, Scottish admiral and politician (d. 1823)
*1768 – Joseph Bonaparte, Italian king (d. 1844)
*1797 – Mariano Paredes, Mexican general and 16th president (1845–1846) (d. 1849)
*1800 – Millard Fillmore, American politician, 13th President of the United States (d. 1874)
*1814 – Robert Nicoll, Scottish poet (d. 1837)
*1815 – Elizabeth Louisa Foster Mather, American writer (d. 1882)
*1827 – Sandford Fleming, Scottish-Canadian engineer, created Universal Standard Time (d. 1915)
*1830 – Albert Bierstadt, American painter (d. 1902)
*1831 – Heinrich von Stephan, German postman, founded the Universal Postal Union (d. 1897)
*1832 – James Munro, Scottish-Australian publisher and politician, 15th Premier of Victoria (d. 1908)
*1834 – Johann Philipp Reis, German physicist and academic, invented the Reis telephone (d. 1874)
*1837 – Thomas Henry Ismay, English businessman, founded the White Star Line Shipping Company (d. 1899)
*1844 – Bernadette Soubirous, French nun and saint (d. 1879)
*1852 – Quianu Robinson, New Mexican Congressman and political ally of Conrad Hilton (d. 1919)
*1858 – Eliezer Ben-Yehuda, Belarusian lexicographer and journalist (d. 1922)
*1863 – Anna Murray Vail, American botanist and first librarian of the New York Botanical Garden (d. 1955)
*1871 – Émile Borel, French mathematician and politician (d. 1956)
*1873 – Charles Péguy, French poet and journalist (d. 1914)
* 1873 – Adolph Zukor, Hungarian-American film producer, co-founded Paramount Pictures (d. 1976)
*1875 – Gustav Flatow, German gymnast (d. 1945)
*1876 – William Hurlstone, English pianist and composer (d. 1906)
*1877 – William Clarence Matthews, American baseball player, coach, and lawyer (d. 1928)
*1889 – Vera de Bosset, Russian-American ballerina (d. 1982)
*1890 – Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson, American soldier, pulp magazine writer, and pioneer of the American comic book (d. 1965)
*1891 – Zora Neale Hurston, American novelist, short story writer, and folklorist (d. 1960)
*1895 – Hudson Fysh, Australian pilot and businessman, co-founded Qantas Airways Limited (d. 1974)
*1898 – Al Bowlly, Mozambican-English singer-songwriter (disputed; d. 1941)
*1899 – Francis Poulenc, French pianist and composer (d. 1963)
* 1899 – F. Orlin Tremaine, American magazine executive, writer, and magazine editor (&quot;Astounding Stories&quot;) (d. 1956)
*1900 – John Brownlee, Australian actor and singer (d. 1969)

===1901–present===
*1903 – Alan Napier, English actor (d. 1988)
* 1903 – Hooley Smith, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 1963)
*1904 – Joseph Whitty, Irish Republican died while on hunger strike at Curragh Internment camp (d.1923).
*1908 – Red Allen, American trumpet player (d. 1967)
*1910 – Orval Faubus, American soldier and politician, 36th Governor of Arkansas (d. 1994)
*1912 – Charles Addams, American cartoonist, created The Addams Family (d. 1988)
*1913 – Francis de Wolff, English actor (d. 1984)
* 1913 – Johnny Mize, American baseball player, coach, and sportscaster (d. 1993)
*1916 – W. L. Jeyasingham, Sri Lankan geographer and academic (d. 1989)
* 1916 – Babe Pratt, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 1988)
*1920 – Vincent Gardenia, Italian-American actor (d. 1992)
*1921 – Esmeralda Arboleda Cadavid, Colombian politician (d. 1997)
* 1921 – Chester Kallman, American poet and translator (d. 1975)
*1922 – Alvin Dark, American baseball player and manager (d. 2014)
* 1922 – Jean-Pierre Rampal, French flute player (d. 2000)
*1923 – Hugh Kenner, Canadian scholar and critic (d. 2003)
* 1923 – Vaklush Tolev, Bulgarian theologian, educator, public figure and lecturer (d. 2013)
*1924 – Geoffrey Bayldon, English actor (d. 2017)
*1925 – Gerald Durrell, Indian-English zookeeper, conservationist and author, founded Durrell Wildlife Park (d. 1995)
*1926 – Kim Jong-pil, South Korean lieutenant and politician, 11th Prime Minister of South Korea (d. 2018)
*1928 – William Peter Blatty, American author and screenwriter (d. 2017)
*1929 – Robert Juniper, Australian painter and sculptor (d. 2012)
* 1929 – Terry Moore, American actress
*1931 – Mirja Hietamies, Finnish skier (d. 2013)
*1933 – Elliott Kastner, American-English film producer (d. 2010)
*1934 – Jean Corbeil, Canadian lawyer and politician, 29th Canadian Minister of Labour (d. 2002)
* 1934 – Tassos Papadopoulos, Cypriot lawyer and politician, 5th President of Cyprus (d. 2008)
*1935 – Kenny Davern, American clarinet player and saxophonist (d. 2006)
* 1935 – Valery Kubasov, Russian engineer and astronaut (d. 2014)
* 1935 – Li Shengjiao, Chinese diplomat and international jurist (d. 2017) 
*1936 – Hunter Davies, Scottish author and journalist
*1938 – Bob Boland, Australian rugby league player and coach
* 1938 – Lou Graham, American golfer
* 1938 – Rory Storm, English singer-songwriter (d. 1972)
*1941 – Iona Brown, English violinist and conductor (d. 2004)
* 1941 – John Steiner, English actor (d. 2022)
* 1941 – John E. Walker, English chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
*1942 – Vasily Alekseyev, Russian-German weightlifter and coach (d. 2011)
*1943 – Sadako Sasaki, Japanese survivor of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, known for one thousand origami cranes (d. 1955)
*1944 – Mike McGear, British performing artist and rock photographer
* 1944 – Kotaro Suzumura, Japanese economist and academic (d. 2020)
*1945 – Tony Conigliaro, American baseball player (d. 1990)
* 1945 – Raila Odinga, Kenyan engineer and politician, 2nd Prime Minister of Kenya
*1946 – Michele Elliott, author, psychologist and founder of child protection charity Kidscape
* 1946 – Jann Wenner, American publisher, co-founded &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;
*1947 – Tony Elliott, English publisher, founded &quot;Time Out&quot; (d. 2020)
*1948 – Kenny Loggins, American singer-songwriter 
*1950 – Juan Gabriel, Mexican singer-songwriter (d. 2016)
* 1950 – Erin Gray, American actress and model
*1952 – Sammo Hung, Hong Kong actor, director, producer, and martial artist
*1953 – Robert Longo, American painter and sculptor
*1954 – Alan Butcher, English cricketer and coach
*1955 – Mamata Shankar, Indian-Bengali actress
*1956 – David Caruso, American actor
*1957 – Nicholson Baker, American novelist and essayist 
* 1957 – Katie Couric, American television journalist, anchor, and author
*1959 – Angela Smith, Baroness Smith of Basildon, English accountant and politician
* 1959 – Kathy Valentine, American bass player and songwriter
*1960 – David Marciano, American actor
* 1960 – Loretta Sanchez, American politician
*1961 – John Thune, American lawyer and politician
*1962 – Aleksandr Dugin, Russian political analyst and strategist known for his fascist views
* 1962 – Ron Rivera, American football player and coach
* 1962 – Hallie Todd, American actress
*1963 – Rand Paul, American politician and physician
*1964 – Nicolas Cage, American actor
*1965 – Five for Fighting, American singer-songwriter and pianist
* 1965 – Alessandro Lambruschini, Italian runner
*1967 – Nick Clegg, English academic and politician, Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
* 1967 – Irrfan Khan, Indian actor (d. 2020)
* 1967 – Ricky Stuart, Australian rugby league player, coach, and sportscaster
*1969 – Rex Lee, American actor
* 1969 – Marco Simone, Italian footballer and manager
*1970 – Andy Burnham, English politician
* 1970 – Doug E. Doug, American actor
*1971 – Kevin Rahm, American actor
* 1971 – Jeremy Renner, American actor
*1972 – Donald Brashear, American-Canadian ice hockey player and mixed martial artist
*1974 – Alenka Bikar, Slovenian sprinter and politician
*1976 – Vic Darchinyan, Armenian-Australian boxer
* 1976 – Éric Gagné, Canadian baseball player
* 1976 – Alfonso Soriano, Dominican baseball player
*1977 – Dustin Diamond, American actor and comedian (d. 2021)
* 1977 – Sofi Oksanen, Finnish author and playwright
* 1977 – Brent Sopel, Canadian ice hockey player
*1978 – Dean Cosker, English cricketer and umpire
*1979 – Reggie Austin, American actor 
* 1979 – Aloe Blacc, American musician, singer, songwriter, record producer, actor, businessman and philanthropist
*1980 – Reece Simmonds, Australian rugby league player
*1981 – Alex Auld, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1981 – Marquis Daniels, American basketball player
* 1981 – Travis Friend, Zimbabwean cricketer
*1982 – Lauren Cohan, American-English actress
* 1982 – Francisco Rodríguez, Venezuelan baseball player
* 1982 – Hannah Stockbauer, German swimmer
*1983 – Brett Dalton, American actor 
* 1983 – Edwin Encarnación, Dominican baseball player
* 1983 – Cappie Pondexter, American basketball player
* 1983 – Robert Ri&#x27;chard, American actor
*1984 – Jon Lester, American baseball player
*1985 – Lewis Hamilton, English racing driver
* 1985 – Wayne Routledge, English footballer
*1987 – Davide Astori, Italian footballer (d. 2018)
* 1987 – Stefan Babović, Serbian footballer
* 1987 – Lyndsy Fonseca, American actress
*1988 – Scott Pendlebury, Australian footballer
* 1988 – Robert Sheehan, Irish actor
*1990 – Liam Aiken, American actor 
* 1990 – Gentleman Jack Gallagher, English mixed martial artist and wrestler
* 1990 – Camryn Grimes, American actress
* 1990 – Gregor Schlierenzauer, Austrian ski jumper
*1991 – Tucker Barnhart, American baseball player
* 1991 – Eden Hazard, Belgian footballer
* 1991 – Caster Semenya, South African sprinter
* 1991 – Michael Walters, Australian footballer
*1992 – Erik Gudbranson, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1992 – Tohu Harris, New Zealand rugby league player
*1994 – Jarnell Stokes, American basketball player
* 1994 – Lee Sun-bin, South Korean actress and singer
* 1994 – MacKenzie Weegar, Canadian ice hockey player
*1995 – Jordan Bell, American basketball player
* 1995 – Yulia Putintseva, Kazakhstani tennis player
*1996 – Alex Nedeljkovic, American ice hockey player
*1997 – Ozzie Albies, Curaçaoan baseball player
* 1997 – Lamar Jackson, American football player
*2000 – Marcus Scribner, American actor
*2003 – Ryan Dunn, American basketball player
*2004 – Sofia Wylie, American actress, singer, and dancer
*2012 – Blue Ivy Carter, American singer and actress
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 312 – Lucian of Antioch, Christian martyr, saint, and theologian (b. 240)
* 838 – Babak Khorramdin, Iranian leader of the Khurramite uprising against the Abbasid Caliphate
* 856 – Aldric, bishop of Le Mans
*1131 – Canute Lavard, Danish prince and saint (b. 1096)
*1285 – Charles I of Naples (b. 1226)
*1325 – Denis of Portugal (b. 1261)
*1355 – Inês de Castro, Castilian noblewoman (b. 1325)
*1400 – John Montagu, 3rd Earl of Salisbury, English Earl (b. 1350)
*1451 – Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy a.k.a. Antipope Felix V (b. 1383)
*1529 – Peter Vischer the Elder, German sculptor (b. 1455)
*1536 – Catherine of Aragon (b. 1485)
*1566 – Louis de Blois, Flemish monk and author (b. 1506)

===1601–1900===
*1619 – Nicholas Hilliard, English painter and goldsmith (b. 1547)
*1625 – Ruggiero Giovannelli, Italian composer and author (b. 1560)
*1655 – Pope Innocent X (b. 1574)
*1658 – Theophilus Eaton, American farmer and politician, 1st Governor of the New Haven Colony (b. 1590)
*1694 – Charles Gerard, 1st Earl of Macclesfield, English general and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Gloucestershire (b. 1618)
*1700 – Raffaello Fabretti, Italian scholar and author (b. 1618)
*1715 – François Fénelon, French archbishop, theologian, and poet (b. 1651)
*1758 – Allan Ramsay, Scottish poet and playwright (b. 1686)
*1767 – Thomas Clap, American minister and academic (b. 1703)
*1770 – Carl Gustaf Tessin, Swedish politician and diplomat (b. 1695)
*1812 – Joseph Dennie, American journalist and author (b. 1768)
*1830 – John Thomas Campbell, Irish-Australian public servant and politician (b. 1770)
* 1830 – Thomas Lawrence, English painter and educator (b. 1769)
*1858 – Mustafa Reşid Pasha, Ottoman politician, Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire (b. 1800)
*1864 – Caleb Blood Smith, American journalist and politician, 6th U.S. Secretary of the Interior (b. 1808)
*1888 – Golam Ali Chowdhury, Bengali landlord and philanthropist (b. 1824)
*1892 – Tewfik Pasha, Egyptian ruler (b. 1852)
*1893 – Josef Stefan, Slovenian physicist and mathematician (b. 1835)

===1901–present===
*1912 – Sophia Jex-Blake, English physician and feminist (b. 1840)
*1919 – Henry Ware Eliot, American businessman and philanthropist, co-founded Washington University in St. Louis (b. 1843)
*1920 – Edmund Barton, Australian judge and politician, 1st Prime Minister of Australia (b. 1849)
*1927 – Nikolaos Kalogeropoulos, Greek politician, 99th Prime Minister of Greece (b. 1851)
*1931 – Edward Channing, American historian and author (b. 1856)
*1932 – André Maginot, French sergeant and politician (b. 1877)
*1936 – Guy d&#x27;Hardelot, French pianist and composer (b. 1858)
*1941 – Charles Finger, English journalist and author (b. 1869)
*1943 – Nikola Tesla, Serbian-American inventor and engineer (b. 1856)
*1951 – René Guénon, French-Egyptian philosopher and author (b. 1886)
*1960 – Dorothea Douglass Lambert Chambers, English tennis player and coach (b. 1878)
*1963 – Arthur Edward Moore, New Zealand-Australian farmer and politician, 23rd Premier of Queensland (b. 1876)
*1964 – Reg Parnell, English racing driver and manager (b. 1911)
*1967 – David Goodis, American author and screenwriter (b. 1917)
* 1967 – Carl Schuricht, German-Swiss conductor (b. 1880)
*1968 – J. L. B. Smith, South African chemist and academic (b. 1897)
*1972 – John Berryman, American poet and scholar (b. 1914)
*1981 – Alvar Lidell, English journalist and radio announcer (b. 1908)
* 1981 – Eric Robinson, Australian businessman and politician, 2nd Australian Minister for Finance (b. 1926)
*1984 – Alfred Kastler, German-French physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1902)
*1986 – Juan Rulfo, Mexican author, screenwriter, and photographer (b. 1917)
*1988 – Zara Cisco Brough, American Nipmuc Indian chief and fashion designer (b. 1919)
* 1988 – Trevor Howard, English actor (b. 1913)
*1989 – Hirohito, Japanese emperor (b. 1901)
*1990 – Bronko Nagurski, Canadian-American football player and wrestler (b. 1908)
*1992 – Richard Hunt, American puppeteer and voice actor (b. 1951)
*1995 – Murray Rothbard, American economist, historian, and theorist (b. 1926)
*1996 – Károly Grósz, Hungarian politician, 51st Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1930)
*1998 – Owen Bradley, American record producer (b. 1915)
* 1998 – Vladimir Prelog, Croatian-Swiss chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906)
*2000 – Gary Albright, American wrestler (b. 1963)
*2001 – James Carr, American singer (b. 1942)
*2002 – Avery Schreiber, American comedian and actor (b. 1935)
*2004 – Ingrid Thulin, Swedish actress (b. 1926)
*2005 – Pierre Daninos, French author (b. 1913)
*2006 – Heinrich Harrer, Austrian mountaineer, geographer, and author (b. 1912)
*2007 – Bobby Hamilton, American race car driver and businessman (b. 1957)
* 2007 – Magnus Magnusson, Icelandic journalist, author, and academic (b. 1929)
*2008 – Alwyn Schlebusch, South African academic and politician, Vice State President of South Africa (b. 1917)
*2012 – Tony Blankley, British-born American child actor, journalist and pundit (b. 1948)
*2014 – Run Run Shaw, Chinese-Hong Kong businessman and philanthropist, founded Shaw Brothers Studio and TVB (b. 1907)
*2015 – Mompati Merafhe, Botswana general and politician, Vice-President of Botswana (b. 1936)
* 2015 – Rod Taylor, Australian-American actor and screenwriter (b. 1930)
* 2015 – Georges Wolinski, Tunisian-French cartoonist (b. 1934)
*2016 – Bill Foster, American basketball player and coach (b. 1929)
* 2016 – John Johnson, American basketball player (b. 1947)
* 2016 – Kitty Kallen, American singer (b. 1921)
* 2016 – Judith Kaye, American lawyer and jurist (b. 1938)
* 2016 – Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, Indian lawyer and politician, Indian Minister of Home Affairs (b. 1936)
*2017 – Mário Soares, Portuguese politician; 16th President of Portugal (b. 1924) 
*2018 – Jim Anderton, Former New Zealand Deputy Prime Minister (b. 1938)
* 2018 – France Gall, French singer (b. 1947)
*2020 – Neil Peart, Canadian drummer, songwriter, and producer (b. 1952)
* 2020 – Silvio Horta, American screenwriter and television producer (b. 1974)
* 2020 – Elizabeth Wurtzel, author and feminist (b. 1967)
*2021 – Michael Apted, English filmmaker (b. 1941)
* 2021 – Tommy Lasorda, American baseball player, coach, and manager (b. 1927)
* 2021 – Henri Schwery, Swiss cardinal (b. 1932)
*2024 – Franz Beckenbauer, German footballer and manager (b. 1945) 
*2025 – Jean-Marie Le Pen, French intelligence officer and politician (b. 1928)
*2025 – Peter Yarrow, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1938)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian Feast Day:
** André Bessette (Canada) 
** Canute Lavard
** Charles of Sezze
** Felix and Januarius
** Lucian of Antioch
** Raymond of Penyafort
** Synaxis of John the Forerunner &amp; Baptist (Julian calendar)
** January 7 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Christmas (Eastern Orthodox Churches and Oriental Orthodox Churches using the Julian calendar, Rastafari)
** Christmas in Russia
** Christmas in Ukraine
** Christmas in Serbia 
** Ethiopian Christmas
** Remembrance Day of the Dead (Armenia)
* Distaff Day (medieval Europe)
* Nanakusa-no sekku (Japan)
* Pioneer&#x27;s Day (Liberia)
* Tricolour Day or &quot;Festa del Tricolore&quot; (Italy)
* Victory from Genocide Day (Cambodia)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on January 7</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4196" start="27" end="32" title="49 BC" label="49 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510895" start="39" end="53" title="Senate of the Roman Republic" label="Senate of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="64" end="70" title="Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="209" end="216" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774" start="220" end="224" title="1325" label="1325"/>
<link wikidata="Q272903" start="227" end="236" title="Afonso IV of Portugal" label="Afonso IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="245" end="261" title="List of Portuguese monarchs" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601" start="264" end="268" title="1558" label="1558"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="293" end="315" title="Francis, Duke of Guise" label="Francis, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701253" start="317" end="328" title="Siege of Calais (1558)" label="take Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="365" end="372" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758" start="392" end="396" title="1608" label="1608"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="413" end="432" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765" start="435" end="439" title="1610" label="1610"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="442" end="457" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="498" end="512" title="Galilean moons" label="Galilean moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169" start="514" end="522" title="Ganymede (moon)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134" start="524" end="532" title="Callisto (moon)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="534" end="536" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="541" end="547" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846" start="629" end="633" title="1708" label="1708"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="729" end="746" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsardom of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019589" start="779" end="809" title="Bashkir rebellion of 1704–1711" label="Bashkir rebellion of 1704–1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846" start="812" end="816" title="1708" label="1708"/>
<link wikidata="Q122199155" start="834" end="841" title="Siege of Yelabuga (1708)" label="besiege"/>
<link wikidata="Q135650" start="842" end="850" title="Yelabuga" label="Yelabuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996" start="853" end="857" title="1738" label="1738"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514706" start="893" end="907" title="Baji Rao I" label="Peshwa Bajirao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392864" start="912" end="924" title="Jai Singh II" label="Jai Singh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="935" end="942" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870477" start="958" end="974" title="Battle of Bhopal" label="Battle of Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740" start="977" end="981" title="1782" label="1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q806690" start="1024" end="1045" title="Bank of North America" label="Bank of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756" start="1055" end="1059" title="1785" label="1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q366649" start="1072" end="1093" title="Jean-Pierre Blanchard" label="Jean-Pierre Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387374" start="1107" end="1120" title="John Jeffries" label="John Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="1133" end="1147" title="Dover" label="Dover, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="1152" end="1166" title="Calais" label="Calais, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9706" start="1177" end="1184" title="balloon" label="balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597" start="1187" end="1191" title="1835" label="1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="1201" end="1215" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076210" start="1247" end="1265" title="Chonos Archipelago" label="Chonos Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="1268" end="1272" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q121667971" start="1279" end="1298" title="Kingstree jail fire" label="Kingstree jail fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="1320" end="1334" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="1339" end="1353" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="1356" end="1360" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="1363" end="1376" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q465350" start="1455" end="1478" title="William Kennedy Dickson" label="William Kennedy Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1491" end="1497" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="1502" end="1521" title="film" label="motion picture film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="1544" end="1548" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="1555" end="1570" title="distress signal" label="distress signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163144" start="1577" end="1580" title="CQD" label="CQD"/>
<link wikidata="Q214266" start="1647" end="1650" title="SOS" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="1659" end="1663" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="1666" end="1677" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656382" start="1697" end="1702" title="Christmas Uprising" label="rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="1751" end="1757" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="1770" end="1774" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="1781" end="1804" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="1839" end="1848" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="1863" end="1867" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="1870" end="1882" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="1896" end="1914" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="1933" end="1937" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870934" start="1950" end="1992" title="history of the telephone" label="transatlantic commercial telephone service"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="2039" end="2043" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562290" start="2059" end="2084" title="1928 Thames flood" label="flood of the River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="2159" end="2163" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622461" start="2166" end="2177" title="Guy Menzies" label="Guy Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833571" start="2208" end="2220" title="trans-Tasman" label="trans-Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119644" start="2324" end="2334" title="Westland District" label="west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="2337" end="2341" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="2344" end="2360" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="2372" end="2388" title="Foreign Minister" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q151983" start="2389" end="2401" title="Pierre Laval" label="Pierre Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392596" start="2411" end="2435" title="Franco-Italian Agreement" label="Franco-Italian Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="2438" end="2442" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="2445" end="2455" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446643" start="2457" end="2477" title="Battle of Raate Road" label="Battle of Raate Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="2590" end="2594" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392167" start="2597" end="2624" title="Kentucky Air National Guard" label="Kentucky Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423283" start="2660" end="2673" title="Mantell UFO incident" label="in pursuit of"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="2685" end="2688" title="unidentified flying object" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="2691" end="2695" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055779" start="2705" end="2728" title="1950 Sverdlovsk air disaster" label="Sverdlovsk air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041004" start="2821" end="2831" title="VVS Moscow" label="VVS Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="2840" end="2856" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="2912" end="2916" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160483" start="2919" end="2944" title="Georgetown–IBM experiment" label="Georgetown–IBM experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="2982" end="3001" title="machine translation" label="machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3051" end="3054" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="3057" end="3061" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q231923" start="3074" end="3089" title="Marian Anderson" label="Marian Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="3142" end="3160" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="3164" end="3178" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221757" start="3192" end="3212" title="Un ballo in maschera" label="Un ballo in maschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="3222" end="3226" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="3266" end="3270" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="3286" end="3298" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="3301" end="3305" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q339963" start="3308" end="3324" title="Surveyor program" label="Surveyor program"/>
<link wikidata="Q774594" start="3332" end="3342" title="Surveyor 7" label="Surveyor 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q672830" start="3409" end="3442" title="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 36A" label="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 36A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="3445" end="3449" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600902" start="3452" end="3469" title="Iberia Flight 602" label="Iberia Flight 602"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431549" start="3483" end="3496" title="Ibiza Airport" label="Ibiza Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="3532" end="3536" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767537" start="3581" end="3591" title="Mark Essex" label="Mark Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919997" start="3646" end="3667" title="Howard Johnson&amp;#x27;s" label="Howard Johnson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="3677" end="3688" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="3739" end="3743" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="3746" end="3765" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Third Indochina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="3767" end="3791" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Cambodian–Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="3793" end="3803" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="3827" end="3834" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="3858" end="3865" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="3874" end="3885" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="3888" end="3892" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="3910" end="3922" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="3991" end="3999" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="4014" end="4018" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="4021" end="4027" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="4060" end="4098" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="4109" end="4113" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q179103" start="4116" end="4150" title="Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency" label="Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065268" start="4166" end="4174" title="Sakigake" label="Sakigake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="4201" end="4226" title="Robotic spacecraft" label="interplanetary spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="4246" end="4257" title="space probe" label="space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="4339" end="4343" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454929" start="4346" end="4359" title="Sutton United F.C." label="Sutton United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="4389" end="4412" title="English football league system" label="English league football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650334" start="4414" end="4422" title="Sutton United 2–1 Coventry City (1989)" label="defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="4432" end="4445" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="4478" end="4484" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="4495" end="4499" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439151" start="4502" end="4517" title="Roger Lafontant" label="Roger Lafontant"/>
<link wikidata="Q923766" start="4540" end="4554" title="Tonton Macoute" label="Tonton Macoute"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="4558" end="4563" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q187697" start="4570" end="4587" title="François Duvalier" label="François Duvalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="4600" end="4616" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="4645" end="4649" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4656" end="4680" title="History of Ghana#Fourth Republic (1993–present)" label="Fourth Republic of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="4701" end="4715" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="4739" end="4750" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q276294" start="4756" end="4768" title="Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379845" start="4780" end="4795" title="Kravica attack (1993)" label="surprise attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="4825" end="4835" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="4838" end="4842" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441974" start="4847" end="4877" title="British Aerospace Jetstream 41" label="British Aerospace Jetstream 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816365" start="4891" end="4917" title="United Express Flight 6291" label="United Express Flight 6291"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924937" start="4929" end="4942" title="Gahanna, Ohio" label="Gahanna, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="4988" end="4992" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="5019" end="5030" title="Impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5049" end="5061" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="5071" end="5075" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="5080" end="5095" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625098" start="5096" end="5103" title="2012 Carterton hot air balloon crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045948" start="5109" end="5131" title="Carterton, New Zealand" label="Carterton, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="5166" end="5170" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q18718876" start="5191" end="5202" title="Charlie Hebdo shooting" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043104" start="5227" end="5240" title="Charlie Hebdo" label="Charlie Hebdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720403" start="5329" end="5337" title="January 2015 Sana&amp;#x27;a bombing" label="explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="5370" end="5375" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="5385" end="5396" title="Sana&amp;#x27;a" label="Sana&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="5462" end="5466" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307590" start="5477" end="5508" title="2019–20 Puerto Rico earthquakes" label="2019–20 Puerto Rico earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="5547" end="5558" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="5561" end="5565" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822001" start="5580" end="5626" title="January 2023 Speaker of the United States House of Representatives election" label="U.S. House of Representatives speaker election"/>
<link wikidata="Q766866" start="5703" end="5717" title="Kevin McCarthy" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="5734" end="5741" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="5749" end="5787" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q49616" start="5790" end="5794" title="2025" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q131704535" start="5809" end="5818" title="January 2025 Southern California wildfires" label="wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="5830" end="5849" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23833" start="5950" end="5953" title="889" label="889"/>
<link wikidata="Q711844" start="5956" end="5963" title="Li Bian" label="Li Bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326742" start="5976" end="5989" title="Southern Tang" label="Southern Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="6000" end="6004" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q432771" start="6007" end="6046" title="Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester" label="Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q955642" start="6068" end="6098" title="Lord High Constable of England" label="Lord High Constable of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179" start="6110" end="6114" title="1414" label="1414"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889821" start="6117" end="6149" title="Henry II, Count of Nassau-Siegen" label="Henry II, Count of Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137" start="6161" end="6165" title="1502" label="1502"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="6168" end="6185" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872" start="6214" end="6218" title="1634" label="1634"/>
<link wikidata="Q350221" start="6221" end="6233" title="Adam Krieger" label="Adam Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935" start="6275" end="6279" title="1647" label="1647"/>
<link wikidata="Q61212" start="6282" end="6316" title="William Louis, Duke of Württemberg" label="William Louis, Duke of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660" start="6328" end="6332" title="1685" label="1685"/>
<link wikidata="Q632219" start="6335" end="6350" title="Jonas Alströmer" label="Jonas Alströmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835" start="6398" end="6402" title="1706" label="1706"/>
<link wikidata="Q65866" start="6405" end="6427" title="Johann Heinrich Zedler" label="Johann Heinrich Zedler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="6457" end="6461" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172891" start="6464" end="6491" title="Giovanni Battista Locatelli (opera director)" label="Giovanni Battista Locatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899" start="6539" end="6543" title="1718" label="1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q622130" start="6546" end="6559" title="Israel Putnam" label="Israel Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589" start="6589" end="6593" title="1746" label="1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q337525" start="6596" end="6634" title="George Elphinstone, 1st Viscount Keith" label="George Elphinstone, 1st Viscount Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675" start="6679" end="6683" title="1768" label="1768"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726" start="6686" end="6702" title="Joseph Bonaparte" label="Joseph Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="6728" end="6732" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q440461" start="6735" end="6750" title="Mariano Paredes (President of Mexico)" label="Mariano Paredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875" start="6810" end="6814" title="1800" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="6817" end="6833" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="6861" end="6891" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943" start="6903" end="6907" title="1814" label="1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348039" start="6910" end="6923" title="Robert Nicoll" label="Robert Nicoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948" start="6950" end="6954" title="1815" label="1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q40166835" start="6957" end="6987" title="Elizabeth Louisa Foster Mather" label="Elizabeth Louisa Foster Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008" start="7016" end="7020" title="1827" label="1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q41411" start="7023" end="7039" title="Sandford Fleming" label="Sandford Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q874572" start="7077" end="7100" title="Universal Standard Time" label="Universal Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576" start="7112" end="7116" title="1830" label="1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q77132" start="7119" end="7135" title="Albert Bierstadt" label="Albert Bierstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="7165" end="7169" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q215482" start="7172" end="7192" title="Heinrich von Stephan" label="Heinrich von Stephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="7222" end="7244" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="7256" end="7260" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680865" start="7263" end="7274" title="James Munro (Australian politician)" label="James Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="7327" end="7346" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591" start="7358" end="7362" title="1834" label="1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q77124" start="7365" end="7384" title="Johann Philipp Reis" label="Johann Philipp Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144492" start="7430" end="7444" title="Reis telephone" label="Reis telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="7456" end="7460" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q981455" start="7463" end="7481" title="Thomas Henry Ismay" label="Thomas Henry Ismay"/>
<link wikidata="Q320466" start="7516" end="7548" title="White Star Line" label="White Star Line Shipping Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633" start="7560" end="7564" title="1844" label="1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q55398" start="7567" end="7587" title="Bernadette Soubirous" label="Bernadette Soubirous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="7621" end="7625" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q110700878" start="7628" end="7643" title="Quianu Robinson" label="Quianu Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q324956" start="7691" end="7704" title="Conrad Hilton" label="Conrad Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="7716" end="7720" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q181728" start="7723" end="7741" title="Eliezer Ben-Yehuda" label="Eliezer Ben-Yehuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="7794" end="7798" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377797" start="7801" end="7817" title="Anna Murray Vail" label="Anna Murray Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q636275" start="7864" end="7889" title="New York Botanical Garden" label="New York Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="7901" end="7905" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q154356" start="7908" end="7919" title="Émile Borel" label="Émile Borel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="7968" end="7972" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q334965" start="7975" end="7988" title="Charles Péguy" label="Charles Péguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361208" start="8036" end="8048" title="Adolph Zukor" label="Adolph Zukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="8095" end="8113" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="8125" end="8129" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q213620" start="8132" end="8145" title="Gustav Flatow" label="Gustav Flatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766" start="8173" end="8177" title="1876" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q662770" start="8180" end="8197" title="William Hurlstone" label="William Hurlstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="8239" end="8243" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126662" start="8246" end="8271" title="William Clarence Matthews" label="William Clarence Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="8328" end="8332" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445403" start="8335" end="8349" title="Vera de Bosset" label="Vera de Bosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="8389" end="8393" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281731" start="8396" end="8421" title="Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson" label="Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8513" end="8517" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="8520" end="8538" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="8605" end="8609" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q524932" start="8612" end="8623" title="Hudson Fysh" label="Hudson Fysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="8670" end="8692" title="Qantas" label="Qantas Airways Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="8704" end="8708" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q923647" start="8711" end="8720" title="Al Bowlly" label="Al Bowlly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="8780" end="8784" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="8787" end="8802" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062960" start="8851" end="8868" title="F. Orlin Tremaine" label="F. Orlin Tremaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="8934" end="8952" title="Astounding Stories" label="Astounding Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="8971" end="8975" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809116" start="8978" end="8991" title="John Brownlee (baritone)" label="John Brownlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="9052" end="9056" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q373306" start="9059" end="9070" title="Alan Napier" label="Alan Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379470" start="9105" end="9117" title="Hooley Smith" label="Hooley Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="9157" end="9161" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429368" start="9164" end="9177" title="Joseph Whitty" label="Joseph Whitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="9179" end="9195" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="9210" end="9223" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935258" start="9227" end="9250" title="Curragh Camp" label="Curragh Internment camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="9262" end="9266" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383538" start="9269" end="9278" title="Red Allen" label="Red Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="9315" end="9319" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q887484" start="9322" end="9334" title="Orval Faubus" label="Orval Faubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="9374" end="9394" title="Governor of Arkansas" label="Governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="9406" end="9410" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q361106" start="9413" end="9427" title="Charles Addams" label="Charles Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817916" start="9458" end="9475" title="The Addams Family" label="The Addams Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="9487" end="9491" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482921" start="9494" end="9510" title="Francis de Wolff" label="Francis de Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q918889" start="9545" end="9556" title="Johnny Mize" label="Johnny Mize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="9619" end="9623" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012266" start="9626" end="9643" title="W. L. Jeyasingham" label="W. L. Jeyasingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q325966" start="9699" end="9709" title="Babe Pratt" label="Babe Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="9749" end="9753" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q555590" start="9756" end="9772" title="Vincent Gardenia" label="Vincent Gardenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="9808" end="9812" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398525" start="9815" end="9841" title="Esmeralda Arboleda Cadavid" label="Esmeralda Arboleda Cadavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093626" start="9883" end="9898" title="Chester Kallman" label="Chester Kallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="9940" end="9944" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840597" start="9947" end="9957" title="Alvin Dark" label="Alvin Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q186359" start="10015" end="10033" title="Jean-Pierre Rampal" label="Jean-Pierre Rampal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="10066" end="10070" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="10073" end="10084" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Hugh Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409993" start="10133" end="10146" title="Vaklush Tolev" label="Vaklush Tolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="10218" end="10222" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q563232" start="10225" end="10241" title="Geoffrey Bayldon" label="Geoffrey Bayldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="10268" end="10272" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q310400" start="10275" end="10289" title="Gerald Durrell" label="Gerald Durrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345284" start="10353" end="10374" title="Durrell Wildlife Park" label="Durrell Wildlife Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="10386" end="10390" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q246167" start="10393" end="10405" title="Kim Jong-pil" label="Kim Jong-pil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407843" start="10452" end="10481" title="Prime Minister of South Korea" label="Prime Minister of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="10493" end="10497" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q540784" start="10500" end="10520" title="William Peter Blatty" label="William Peter Blatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="10566" end="10570" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346204" start="10573" end="10587" title="Robert Juniper" label="Robert Juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q271865" start="10640" end="10651" title="Terry Moore (actress)" label="Terry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="10671" end="10675" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q265553" start="10678" end="10693" title="Mirja Hietamies" label="Mirja Hietamies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="10720" end="10724" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q475223" start="10727" end="10742" title="Elliott Kastner" label="Elliott Kastner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="10786" end="10790" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171417" start="10793" end="10805" title="Jean Corbeil" label="Jean Corbeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842279" start="10844" end="10871" title="Minister of Labour (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q200776" start="10891" end="10910" title="Tassos Papadopoulos" label="Tassos Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q841760" start="10947" end="10966" title="President of Cyprus" label="President of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="10978" end="10982" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650743" start="10985" end="10997" title="Kenny Davern" label="Kenny Davern"/>
<link wikidata="Q432752" start="11059" end="11073" title="Valery Kubasov" label="Valery Kubasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q20678686" start="11125" end="11137" title="Li Shengjiao" label="Li Shengjiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="11193" end="11197" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333094" start="11200" end="11213" title="Hunter Davies" label="Hunter Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="11247" end="11251" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q59781915" start="11254" end="11264" title="Bob Boland" label="Bob Boland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767336" start="11316" end="11326" title="Lou Graham" label="Lou Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509396" start="11353" end="11363" title="Rory Storm" label="Rory Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="11402" end="11406" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q434489" start="11409" end="11419" title="Iona Brown" label="Iona Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701816" start="11472" end="11484" title="John Steiner" label="John Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q235184" start="11519" end="11533" title="John E. Walker" label="John E. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="11565" end="11576" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="11587" end="11591" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q225193" start="11594" end="11610" title="Vasily Alekseyev" label="Vasily Alekseyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="11661" end="11665" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q231997" start="11668" end="11681" title="Sadako Sasaki" label="Sadako Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="11708" end="11735" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q926655" start="11747" end="11774" title="one thousand origami cranes" label="one thousand origami cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="11786" end="11790" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q556941" start="11793" end="11804" title="Mike McGear" label="Mike McGear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433884" start="11863" end="11878" title="Kotaro Suzumura" label="Kotaro Suzumura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="11923" end="11927" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531727" start="11930" end="11945" title="Tony Conigliaro" label="Tony Conigliaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q57657" start="11991" end="12003" title="Raila Odinga" label="Raila Odinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736951" start="12041" end="12064" title="Prime Minister of Kenya" label="Prime Minister of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="12066" end="12070" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836739" start="12073" end="12088" title="Michele Elliott" label="Michele Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405019" start="12151" end="12159" title="Kidscape" label="Kidscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q519143" start="12169" end="12180" title="Jann Wenner" label="Jann Wenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="12219" end="12232" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="12240" end="12244" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822287" start="12247" end="12259" title="Tony Elliott (publisher)" label="Tony Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="12294" end="12302" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="12320" end="12324" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q435965" start="12327" end="12340" title="Kenny Loggins" label="Kenny Loggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="12371" end="12375" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q738404" start="12378" end="12390" title="Juan Gabriel" label="Juan Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q264377" start="12437" end="12446" title="Erin Gray" label="Erin Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="12476" end="12480" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q311219" start="12483" end="12493" title="Sammo Hung" label="Sammo Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="12552" end="12556" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250139" start="12559" end="12571" title="Robert Longo" label="Robert Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="12604" end="12608" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530550" start="12611" end="12623" title="Alan Butcher" label="Alan Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="12654" end="12658" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745457" start="12661" end="12675" title="Mamata Shankar" label="Mamata Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="12701" end="12705" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q294901" start="12708" end="12720" title="David Caruso" label="David Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="12738" end="12742" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929421" start="12745" end="12760" title="Nicholson Baker" label="Nicholson Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q230739" start="12803" end="12815" title="Katie Couric" label="Katie Couric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="12869" end="12873" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q168606" start="12876" end="12916" title="Angela Smith, Baroness Smith of Basildon" label="Angela Smith, Baroness Smith of Basildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377326" start="12961" end="12976" title="Kathy Valentine" label="Kathy Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="13015" end="13019" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q206440" start="13022" end="13036" title="David Marciano" label="David Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q469094" start="13062" end="13077" title="Loretta Sanchez" label="Loretta Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="13100" end="13104" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q462981" start="13107" end="13117" title="John Thune" label="John Thune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="13151" end="13155" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q438839" start="13158" end="13173" title="Aleksandr Dugin" label="Aleksandr Dugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="13230" end="13237" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991889" start="13253" end="13263" title="Ron Rivera" label="Ron Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q437222" start="13309" end="13320" title="Hallie Todd" label="Hallie Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="13340" end="13344" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q463557" start="13347" end="13356" title="Rand Paul" label="Rand Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="13393" end="13397" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="13400" end="13412" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="13430" end="13434" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q337844" start="13437" end="13454" title="Five for Fighting" label="Five for Fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q174578" start="13504" end="13527" title="Alessandro Lambruschini" label="Alessandro Lambruschini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="13545" end="13549" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q189947" start="13552" end="13562" title="Nick Clegg" label="Nick Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507619" start="13597" end="13640" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q360927" start="13650" end="13661" title="Irrfan Khan" label="Irrfan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332205" start="13695" end="13707" title="Ricky Stuart" label="Ricky Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="13766" end="13770" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q902365" start="13773" end="13780" title="Rex Lee (actor)" label="Rex Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q439332" start="13806" end="13818" title="Marco Simone" label="Marco Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="13852" end="13856" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="13859" end="13871" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q713640" start="13901" end="13913" title="Doug E. Doug" label="Doug E. Doug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="13931" end="13935" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q725867" start="13938" end="13948" title="Kevin Rahm" label="Kevin Rahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23365" start="13974" end="13987" title="Jeremy Renner" label="Jeremy Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="14005" end="14009" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q283795" start="14012" end="14027" title="Donald Brashear" label="Donald Brashear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="14091" end="14095" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q439708" start="14098" end="14110" title="Alenka Bikar" label="Alenka Bikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="14147" end="14151" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q718378" start="14154" end="14168" title="Vic Darchinyan" label="Vic Darchinyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082828" start="14205" end="14215" title="Éric Gagné" label="Éric Gagné"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363352" start="14251" end="14266" title="Alfonso Soriano" label="Alfonso Soriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="14295" end="14299" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q973475" start="14302" end="14316" title="Dustin Diamond" label="Dustin Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q233953" start="14365" end="14377" title="Sofi Oksanen" label="Sofi Oksanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q909829" start="14418" end="14429" title="Brent Sopel" label="Brent Sopel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="14459" end="14463" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246097" start="14466" end="14477" title="Dean Cosker" label="Dean Cosker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="14509" end="14513" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934903" start="14516" end="14529" title="Reggie Austin (actor)" label="Reggie Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49319" start="14556" end="14566" title="Aloe Blacc" label="Aloe Blacc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="14663" end="14667" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306586" start="14670" end="14684" title="Reece Simmonds" label="Reece Simmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="14718" end="14722" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q954930" start="14725" end="14734" title="Alex Auld" label="Alex Auld"/>
<link wikidata="Q555374" start="14772" end="14787" title="Marquis Daniels" label="Marquis Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836251" start="14825" end="14838" title="Travis Friend" label="Travis Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="14862" end="14866" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q128507" start="14869" end="14881" title="Lauren Cohan" label="Lauren Cohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151895" start="14917" end="14936" title="Francisco Rodríguez (baseball, born 1982)" label="Francisco Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q62448" start="14974" end="14991" title="Hannah Stockbauer" label="Hannah Stockbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="15009" end="15013" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144287" start="15016" end="15028" title="Brett Dalton" label="Brett Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q633736" start="15055" end="15072" title="Edwin Encarnación" label="Edwin Encarnación"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="15109" end="15125" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="Cappie Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158643" start="15163" end="15183" title="Robert Ri&amp;#x27;chard" label="Robert Ri&amp;#x27;chard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="15201" end="15205" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q928223" start="15208" end="15218" title="Jon Lester" label="Jon Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="15246" end="15250" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="15253" end="15267" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q370688" start="15300" end="15315" title="Wayne Routledge" label="Wayne Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="15337" end="15341" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q456164" start="15344" end="15357" title="Davide Astori" label="Davide Astori"/>
<link wikidata="Q27719" start="15397" end="15411" title="Stefan Babović" label="Stefan Babović"/>
<link wikidata="Q229914" start="15441" end="15455" title="Lyndsy Fonseca" label="Lyndsy Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="15475" end="15479" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437027" start="15482" end="15498" title="Scott Pendlebury" label="Scott Pendlebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q315855" start="15531" end="15545" title="Robert Sheehan" label="Robert Sheehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="15560" end="15564" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q212224" start="15567" end="15577" title="Liam Aiken" label="Liam Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112649" start="15604" end="15628" title="Gentleman Jack Gallagher" label="Gentleman Jack Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q466091" start="15681" end="15694" title="Camryn Grimes" label="Camryn Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217522" start="15722" end="15743" title="Gregor Schlierenzauer" label="Gregor Schlierenzauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="15766" end="15770" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225969" start="15773" end="15788" title="Tucker Barnhart" label="Tucker Barnhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q214204" start="15824" end="15835" title="Eden Hazard" label="Eden Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5834" start="15865" end="15879" title="Caster Semenya" label="Caster Semenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835209" start="15913" end="15928" title="Michael Walters" label="Michael Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="15953" end="15957" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353957" start="15960" end="15975" title="Erik Gudbranson" label="Erik Gudbranson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813310" start="16013" end="16024" title="Tohu Harris" label="Tohu Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="16059" end="16063" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160398" start="16066" end="16080" title="Jarnell Stokes" label="Jarnell Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22974707" start="16118" end="16129" title="Lee Sun-bin" label="Lee Sun-bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29246743" start="16172" end="16188" title="MacKenzie Weegar" label="MacKenzie Weegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="16218" end="16222" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q29109873" start="16225" end="16236" title="Jordan Bell" label="Jordan Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429984" start="16274" end="16290" title="Yulia Putintseva" label="Yulia Putintseva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="16319" end="16323" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q16224356" start="16326" end="16342" title="Alex Nedeljkovic" label="Alex Nedeljkovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="16372" end="16376" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q23901572" start="16379" end="16391" title="Ozzie Albies" label="Ozzie Albies"/>
<link wikidata="Q24809702" start="16428" end="16441" title="Lamar Jackson" label="Lamar Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="16469" end="16473" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831178" start="16476" end="16491" title="Marcus Scribner" label="Marcus Scribner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="16509" end="16513" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q123266149" start="16516" end="16525" title="Ryan Dunn (basketball)" label="Ryan Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="16555" end="16559" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993260" start="16562" end="16573" title="Sofia Wylie" label="Sofia Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="16613" end="16617" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q18913048" start="16620" end="16635" title="Blue Ivy Carter" label="Blue Ivy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q32042" start="16693" end="16696" title="312" label="312"/>
<link wikidata="Q510737" start="16699" end="16716" title="Lucian of Antioch" label="Lucian of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23838" start="16769" end="16772" title="838" label="838"/>
<link wikidata="Q379997" start="16775" end="16791" title="Babak Khorramdin" label="Babak Khorramdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089961" start="16815" end="16825" title="Khurramite" label="Khurramite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="16847" end="16864" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30370" start="16867" end="16870" title="856" label="856"/>
<link wikidata="Q592129" start="16873" end="16879" title="Aldric of Le Mans" label="Aldric"/>
<link wikidata="Q603125" start="16891" end="16898" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19579" start="16900" end="16904" title="1131" label="1131"/>
<link wikidata="Q434760" start="16907" end="16920" title="Canute Lavard" label="Canute Lavard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546" start="16957" end="16961" title="1285" label="1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="16964" end="16983" title="Charles I of Naples" label="Charles I of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774" start="16995" end="16999" title="1325" label="1325"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="17002" end="17019" title="Denis of Portugal" label="Denis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="17031" end="17035" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q234022" start="17038" end="17052" title="Inês de Castro" label="Inês de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108" start="17086" end="17090" title="1400" label="1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020313" start="17093" end="17128" title="John Montagu, 3rd Earl of Salisbury" label="John Montagu, 3rd Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455" start="17154" end="17158" title="1451" label="1451"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="17161" end="17188" title="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy" label="Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421" start="17224" end="17228" title="1529" label="1529"/>
<link wikidata="Q644278" start="17231" end="17254" title="Peter Vischer the Elder" label="Peter Vischer the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457" start="17283" end="17287" title="1536" label="1536"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="17290" end="17309" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638" start="17321" end="17325" title="1566" label="1566"/>
<link wikidata="Q598917" start="17328" end="17342" title="Louis de Blois" label="Louis de Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804" start="17396" end="17400" title="1619" label="1619"/>
<link wikidata="Q318114" start="17403" end="17420" title="Nicholas Hilliard" label="Nicholas Hilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826" start="17463" end="17467" title="1625" label="1625"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369480" start="17470" end="17490" title="Ruggiero Giovannelli" label="Ruggiero Giovannelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975" start="17531" end="17535" title="1655" label="1655"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="17538" end="17553" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991" start="17565" end="17569" title="1658" label="1658"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419126" start="17572" end="17588" title="Theophilus Eaton" label="Theophilus Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611699" start="17626" end="17658" title="List of colonial governors of Connecticut" label="Governor of the New Haven Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694" start="17670" end="17674" title="1694" label="1694"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078011" start="17677" end="17717" title="Charles Gerard, 1st Earl of Macclesfield" label="Charles Gerard, 1st Earl of Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11798033" start="17751" end="17785" title="Lord Lieutenant of Gloucestershire" label="Lord Lieutenant of Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813" start="17797" end="17801" title="1700" label="1700"/>
<link wikidata="Q788614" start="17804" end="17822" title="Raffaello Fabretti" label="Raffaello Fabretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884" start="17862" end="17866" title="1715" label="1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q310002" start="17869" end="17885" title="François Fénelon" label="François Fénelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639" start="17938" end="17942" title="1758" label="1758"/>
<link wikidata="Q654775" start="17945" end="17957" title="Allan Ramsay (poet)" label="Allan Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672" start="17999" end="18003" title="1767" label="1767"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788426" start="18006" end="18017" title="Thomas Clap" label="Thomas Clap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683" start="18061" end="18065" title="1770" label="1770"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038496" start="18068" end="18086" title="Carl Gustaf Tessin" label="Carl Gustaf Tessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="18131" end="18135" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282594" start="18138" end="18151" title="Joseph Dennie" label="Joseph Dennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576" start="18195" end="18199" title="1830" label="1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260535" start="18202" end="18222" title="John Thomas Campbell" label="John Thomas Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q312096" start="18290" end="18305" title="Thomas Lawrence" label="Thomas Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="18347" end="18351" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330145" start="18354" end="18373" title="Mustafa Reşid Pasha" label="Mustafa Reşid Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142289" start="18395" end="18429" title="List of Ottoman grand viziers" label="Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="18441" end="18445" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026525" start="18448" end="18465" title="Caleb Blood Smith" label="Caleb Blood Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="18507" end="18537" title="U.S. Secretary of the Interior" label="U.S. Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="18549" end="18553" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q97497464" start="18556" end="18575" title="Golam Ali Chowdhury" label="Golam Ali Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="18624" end="18628" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q374306" start="18631" end="18643" title="Tewfik Pasha" label="Tewfik Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="18671" end="18675" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581" start="18678" end="18690" title="Josef Stefan" label="Josef Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="18761" end="18765" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q452029" start="18768" end="18784" title="Sophia Jex-Blake" label="Sophia Jex-Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="18828" end="18832" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729871" start="18835" end="18851" title="Henry Ware Eliot" label="Henry Ware Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="18905" end="18939" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="18951" end="18955" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="18958" end="18971" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="19010" end="19037" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="19049" end="19053" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q548724" start="19056" end="19079" title="Nikolaos Kalogeropoulos" label="Nikolaos Kalogeropoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="19104" end="19128" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="19140" end="19144" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q982865" start="19147" end="19162" title="Edward Channing" label="Edward Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="19205" end="19209" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q318617" start="19212" end="19225" title="André Maginot" label="André Maginot"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="19269" end="19273" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622702" start="19276" end="19295" title="Guy d&amp;#x27;Hardelot" label="Guy d&amp;#x27;Hardelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="19336" end="19340" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077663" start="19343" end="19357" title="Charles Finger" label="Charles Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="19400" end="19404" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="19407" end="19419" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="19471" end="19475" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="19478" end="19489" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="19541" end="19545" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q53369" start="19548" end="19582" title="Dorothea Douglass Lambert Chambers" label="Dorothea Douglass Lambert Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="19627" end="19631" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798574" start="19634" end="19653" title="Arthur Edward Moore" label="Arthur Edward Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="19706" end="19727" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="19739" end="19743" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q172057" start="19746" end="19757" title="Reg Parnell" label="Reg Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="19804" end="19808" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174564" start="19811" end="19823" title="David Goodis" label="David Goodis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215798" start="19877" end="19891" title="Carl Schuricht" label="Carl Schuricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="19927" end="19931" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q901165" start="19934" end="19948" title="J. L. B. Smith" label="J. L. B. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="19996" end="20000" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q522192" start="20003" end="20016" title="John Berryman" label="John Berryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="20055" end="20059" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490819" start="20062" end="20074" title="Alvar Lidell" label="Alvar Lidell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387380" start="20134" end="20147" title="Eric Robinson (Australian politician)" label="Eric Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865833" start="20192" end="20223" title="Minister for Finance (Australia)" label="Australian Minister for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="20235" end="20239" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q71023" start="20242" end="20256" title="Alfred Kastler" label="Alfred Kastler"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="20296" end="20307" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="20328" end="20332" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q200661" start="20335" end="20345" title="Juan Rulfo" label="Juan Rulfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="20405" end="20409" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874150" start="20412" end="20429" title="Zara Cisco Brough" label="Zara Cisco Brough"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="20440" end="20446" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q343037" start="20500" end="20513" title="Trevor Howard" label="Trevor Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="20540" end="20544" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="20547" end="20555" title="Hirohito" label="Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="20585" end="20589" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q927663" start="20592" end="20607" title="Bronko Nagurski" label="Bronko Nagurski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="20667" end="20671" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q561809" start="20674" end="20686" title="Richard Hunt (puppeteer)" label="Richard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="20734" end="20738" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="20741" end="20756" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="20813" end="20817" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028400" start="20820" end="20832" title="Károly Grósz" label="Károly Grósz"/>
<link wikidata="Q651024" start="20861" end="20886" title="List of Prime Ministers of Hungary" label="Prime Minister of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="20898" end="20902" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042598" start="20905" end="20917" title="Owen Bradley" label="Owen Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83501" start="20963" end="20978" title="Vladimir Prelog" label="Vladimir Prelog"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="21017" end="21028" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="21049" end="21053" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340711" start="21056" end="21069" title="Gary Albright" label="Gary Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="21100" end="21104" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525271" start="21107" end="21117" title="James Carr (singer)" label="James Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="21146" end="21150" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874245" start="21153" end="21168" title="Avery Schreiber" label="Avery Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="21209" end="21213" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q233732" start="21216" end="21229" title="Ingrid Thulin" label="Ingrid Thulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="21258" end="21262" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q560315" start="21265" end="21279" title="Pierre Daninos" label="Pierre Daninos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="21306" end="21310" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q84211" start="21313" end="21328" title="Heinrich Harrer" label="Heinrich Harrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="21386" end="21390" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905500" start="21393" end="21407" title="Bobby Hamilton" label="Bobby Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045098" start="21469" end="21485" title="Magnus Magnusson" label="Magnus Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="21541" end="21545" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q449929" start="21548" end="21564" title="Alwyn Schlebusch" label="Alwyn Schlebusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925081" start="21605" end="21641" title="Vice State President of South Africa" label="Vice State President of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="21653" end="21657" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618480" start="21660" end="21673" title="Tony Blankley" label="Tony Blankley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="21743" end="21747" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q444591" start="21750" end="21762" title="Run Run Shaw" label="Run Run Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q947354" start="21822" end="21842" title="Shaw Brothers Studio" label="Shaw Brothers Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195543" start="21847" end="21850" title="TVB" label="TVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="21862" end="21866" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436517" start="21869" end="21884" title="Mompati Merafhe" label="Mompati Merafhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q859757" start="21919" end="21945" title="Vice-President of Botswana" label="Vice-President of Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q308459" start="21965" end="21975" title="Rod Taylor" label="Rod Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375265" start="22039" end="22055" title="Georges Wolinski" label="Georges Wolinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="22095" end="22099" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909020" start="22102" end="22113" title="Bill Foster (basketball, born 1929)" label="Bill Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334585" start="22171" end="22183" title="John Johnson (basketball, born 1947)" label="John Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q508305" start="22231" end="22243" title="Kitty Kallen" label="Kitty Kallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303501" start="22280" end="22291" title="Judith Kaye" label="Judith Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095720" start="22339" end="22360" title="Mufti Mohammad Sayeed" label="Mufti Mohammad Sayeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440901" start="22392" end="22423" title="Minister of Home Affairs (India)" label="Indian Minister of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="22435" end="22439" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q156781" start="22442" end="22454" title="Mário Soares" label="Mário Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q322459" start="22484" end="22505" title="President of Portugal" label="President of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="22518" end="22522" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036723" start="22525" end="22537" title="Jim Anderton" label="Jim Anderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208258" start="22599" end="22610" title="France Gall" label="France Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="22637" end="22641" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q313668" start="22644" end="22654" title="Neil Peart" label="Neil Peart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975651" start="22718" end="22730" title="Silvio Horta" label="Silvio Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q442854" start="22797" end="22814" title="Elizabeth Wurtzel" label="Elizabeth Wurtzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="22847" end="22851" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q350717" start="22854" end="22867" title="Michael Apted" label="Michael Apted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="22906" end="22919" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q115681" start="22985" end="22998" title="Henri Schwery" label="Henri Schwery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="23026" end="23030" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457" start="23033" end="23050" title="Franz Beckenbauer" label="Franz Beckenbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49616" start="23094" end="23098" title="2025" label="2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177" start="23101" end="23118" title="Jean-Marie Le Pen" label="Jean-Marie Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033344" start="23181" end="23193" title="Peter Yarrow" label="Peter Yarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="23298" end="23307" title="Feast Day" label="Feast Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q517066" start="23312" end="23326" title="André Bessette" label="André Bessette"/>
<link wikidata="Q434760" start="23340" end="23353" title="Canute Lavard" label="Canute Lavard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733698" start="23357" end="23373" title="Charles of Sezze" label="Charles of Sezze"/>
<link wikidata="Q24932390" start="23377" end="23396" title="Felix and Januarius" label="Felix and Januarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q510737" start="23400" end="23417" title="Lucian of Antioch" label="Lucian of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q318980" start="23421" end="23441" title="Raymond of Penyafort" label="Raymond of Penyafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478895" start="23445" end="23452" title="Synaxis" label="Synaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="23456" end="23489" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Forerunner &amp;amp; Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="23491" end="23506" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155873" start="23511" end="23549" title="January 7 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="January 7 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="23552" end="23561" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="23563" end="23588" title="Eastern Orthodox Churches" label="Eastern Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="23593" end="23619" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="23630" end="23645" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23647" end="23656" title="Rastafari#Grounding" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396247" start="23661" end="23680" title="Christmas in Russia" label="Christmas in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q632639" start="23684" end="23704" title="Christmas in Ukraine" label="Christmas in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252562" start="23708" end="23727" title="Christmas in Serbia" label="Christmas in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114658295" start="23732" end="23751" title="Ethiopian Christmas" label="Ethiopian Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q744481" start="23755" end="23782" title="Public holidays in Armenia" label="Remembrance Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="23784" end="23791" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83214080" start="23795" end="23806" title="Distaff Day" label="Distaff Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="23808" end="23823" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23827" end="23844" title="Nanakusa-no sekku" label="Nanakusa-no sekku"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257803" start="23855" end="23873" title="Public holidays in Liberia" label="Pioneer&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="23875" end="23882" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743904" start="23886" end="23899" title="Tricolour Day" label="Tricolour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109002" start="23945" end="23970" title="Victory from Genocide Day" label="Victory from Genocide Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="23972" end="23980" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15988" wikidata="Q2234" url="?curid=15988" title="January 8">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 307 – Sima Chi becomes emperor of the Jin dynasty in succession to his brother, Sima Zhong, despite a challenge from his other brother, Sima Ying.
* 871 – Æthelred I and Alfred the Great lead a West Saxon army to repel an invasion by Danelaw Vikings.
*1297 – François Grimaldi, disguised as a monk, leads his men to capture the fortress protecting the Rock of Monaco, establishing his family as the rulers of Monaco.
*1454 – The papal bull &quot;Romanus Pontifex&quot; awards the Kingdom of Portugal exclusive trade and colonization rights to all of Africa south of Cape Bojador.
*1499 – Louis XII of France marries Anne of Brittany in accordance with a law set by his predecessor, Charles VIII.
*1547 – The first Lithuanian-language book, the &quot;Catechism of Martynas Mažvydas&quot;, is published in Königsberg.

===1601–1900===
*1735 – The premiere of George Frideric Handel&#x27;s &quot;Ariodante&quot; takes place at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden.
*1746 – Second Jacobite rising: Bonnie Prince Charlie occupies Stirling.
*1790 – George Washington delivers the first State of the Union address in New York City.
*1806 – The Dutch Cape Colony in southern Africa becomes the British Cape Colony as a result of the Battle of Blaauwberg.
*1811 – Charles Deslondes leads an unsuccessful slave revolt in the North American settlements of St. Charles and St. James, Louisiana.
*1815 – War of 1812: Battle of New Orleans: Andrew Jackson leads American forces in victory over the British.
*1828 – The Democratic Party of the United States is organized.
*1835 – US President Andrew Jackson announces a celebratory dinner after having reduced the United States national debt to zero for the only time.
*1863 – American Civil War: Second Battle of Springfield.
*1867 – The United States Congress passes the bill to allow African American men the right to vote in Washington, D.C.
*1877 – Crazy Horse and his warriors fight their last battle against the United States Cavalry at Wolf Mountain, Montana Territory.
*1889 – Herman Hollerith is issued US patent #395,791 for the &#x27;Art of Applying Statistics&#x27; — his punched card calculator.
*1900 – President William McKinley places Alaska under military rule.

===1901–present===
*1912 – The African National Congress is founded, under the name South African Native National Congress (SANNC). 
*1918 – U.S. President Woodrow Wilson announces his &quot;Fourteen Points&quot; as conditions for ending World War I.
*1920 – The steel strike of 1919 ends in failure for the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers labor union.
*1926 – Crown Prince Nguyễn Phúc Vĩnh Thuỵ is crowned emperor of Vietnam, the country&#x27;s last monarch.
* 1926 – Abdul-Aziz ibn Saud is crowned King of Hejaz.
*1933 – Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 breaks out in Barcelona, Spain.
*1936 – Kashf-e hijab decree is made and immediately enforced by Reza Shah, Iran&#x27;s head of state, banning the wearing of Islamic veils in public.
*1940 – World War II: Britain introduces food rationing.
*1945 – World War II: Philippine Commonwealth troops under the Philippine Commonwealth Army units enter the province of Ilocos Sur in Northern Luzon and attack invading Japanese Imperial forces.
*1946 – Andrei Zhdanov, Chairman of the Finnish Allied Commission, submitted to the Finnish War Criminal Court an interrogation report by General Erich Buschenhagen, a German prisoner of war, on the contacts between Finnish and German military personnel before the Continuation War and a copy of Hitler&#x27;s Barbarossa plan.
*1956 – Operation Auca: Five U.S. missionaries are killed by the Waorani of Ecuador shortly after making first contact.
*1959 – Charles de Gaulle is proclaimed as the first President of the French Fifth Republic.
*1961 – In France a referendum supports Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s policies in Algeria.
*1964 – President Lyndon B. Johnson declares a &quot;War on Poverty&quot; in the United States.
*1972 – Bowing to international pressure, President of Pakistan Zulfikar Ali Bhutto releases Bengali leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman from prison, who had been arrested after declaring the independence of Bangladesh.
*1973 – Soviet space mission &quot;Luna 21&quot; is launched.
* 1973 – Watergate scandal: The trial of seven men accused of illegal entry into Democratic Party headquarters at Watergate begins.
*1975 – Ella T. Grasso becomes Governor of Connecticut, the first woman to serve as a Governor in the United States other than by succeeding her husband.
*1977 – Three bombs explode in Moscow, Russia, Soviet Union, within 37 minutes, killing seven. The bombings are attributed to an Armenian separatist group. 
*1981 – A local farmer reports a UFO sighting in Trans-en-Provence, France, claimed to be &quot;perhaps the most completely and carefully documented sighting of all time&quot;.
*1982 – Breakup of the Bell System: In the United States, AT&amp;T agrees to divest itself of twenty-two subdivisions.
*1989 – Kegworth air disaster: British Midland Flight 92, a Boeing 737-400, crashes into the M1 motorway, killing 47 of the 126 people on board.
*1994 – Russian cosmonaut Valeri Polyakov on &quot;Soyuz TM-18&quot; leaves for Mir. He would stay on the space station until March 22, 1995, for a record 437 days in space.
*1996 – An Antonov An-32 cargo aircraft crashes into a crowded market in Kinshasa, Zaire, killing up to 223 people on the ground; two of six crew members are also killed.
*2002 – President of the United States George W. Bush signs into law the No Child Left Behind Act.
*2003 – Turkish Airlines Flight 634 crashes near Diyarbakır Airport, Turkey, killing the entire crew and 70 of the 75 passengers.
* 2003 – Air Midwest Flight 5481 crashes at Charlotte-Douglas Airport, in Charlotte, North Carolina, killing all 21 people on board.
*2004 – The , then the largest ocean liner ever built, is christened by her namesake&#x27;s granddaughter, Queen Elizabeth II.
*2005 – The nuclear sub collides at full speed with an undersea mountain south of Guam. One man is killed, but the sub surfaces and is repaired.
*2009 – A 6.1-magnitude earthquake in northern Costa Rica kills 15 people and injures 32.
*2010 – Gunmen from an offshoot of the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda attack a bus carrying the Togo national football team on its way to the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations, killing three people and injuring another nine.
*2011 – Sitting US Congresswoman Gabby Giffords is shot in the head along with 18 others in a mass shooting in Tucson, Arizona. Giffords survived the assassination attempt, but six others died, including John Roll, a federal judge.
*2016 – Joaquín Guzmán, widely regarded as the world&#x27;s most powerful drug trafficker, is recaptured following his escape from a maximum security prison in Mexico.
* 2016 – West Air Sweden Flight 294 crashes near the Swedish reservoir of Akkajaure; both pilots, the only people on board, are killed.
*2020 – Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 crashes immediately after takeoff at Tehran Imam Khomeini International Airport; all 176 on board are killed. The plane was shot down by an Iranian anti-aircraft missile.
*2021 – Twenty-three people are killed in what is described as a police ″massacre″ in La Vega, Caracas, Venezuela.
*2023 – Supporters of former Brazil president Jair Bolsonaro storm the Brazilian Congress.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1037 – Su Dongpo, Chinese calligrapher and poet (d. 1101)
*1345 – Kadi Burhan al-Din, poet, kadi, and ruler of Sivas (d. 1398) 
*1529 – John Frederick II, duke of Saxony (d. 1595)
*1583 – Simon Episcopius, Dutch theologian and academic (d. 1643)
*1587 – Johannes Fabricius, German astronomer and academic (d. 1616)
* 1587 – Jan Pieterszoon Coen, Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies (d. 1629)
*1589 – Ivan Gundulić, Croatian poet and playwright (d. 1638)

===1601–1900===
*1601 – Baltasar Gracián, Spanish priest and author (d. 1658)
*1626 – Jean Talon, first Intendant of New France (d. 1694)
*1628 – François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg, French general (d. 1695)
*1632 – Samuel von Pufendorf, German economist and jurist (d. 1694)
*1635 – Luis Manuel Fernández de Portocarrero, Spanish cardinal (d. 1709)
*1638 – Elisabetta Sirani, Italian painter (d. 1665)
*1735 – John Carroll, American archbishop, founder of Georgetown University (d. 1815)
*1763 – Edmond-Charles Genêt, French-American translator and diplomat (d. 1834)
*1786 – Nicholas Biddle, American banker and financier (d. 1844)
*1788 – Rudolf of Austria, Austrian archduke and archbishop (d. 1831)
*1792 – Lowell Mason, American composer and educator (d. 1872)
*1805 – John Bigler, American lawyer, politician, and diplomat, 3rd Governor of California (d. 1871)
* 1805 – Orson Hyde, American religious leader, 3rd President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (d. 1878)
*1812 – Sigismond Thalberg, Swiss pianist and composer (d. 1871)
*1817 – Theophilus Shepstone, English-South African politician (d. 1893)
*1821 – James Longstreet, American general and diplomat, United States Ambassador to Turkey (d. 1904)
*1823 – Alfred Russel Wallace, Welsh geographer, biologist, and explorer (d. 1913)
*1824 – Wilkie Collins, English novelist, playwright, and short story writer (d. 1889)
* 1824 – Francisco González Bocanegra, Mexican poet and composer (d. 1861)
*1830 – Hans von Bülow, German pianist and composer (d. 1894)
*1836 – Lawrence Alma-Tadema, Dutch-English painter and academic (d. 1912)
*1843 – Frederick Abberline, English police officer (d. 1929)
*1852 – James Milton Carroll, American pastor and author (d. 1931)
*1859 – Fanny Bullock Workman, American mountaineer, geographer, and cartographer (d. 1925)
*1860 – Emma Booth-Tucker, English author (d. 1903)
*1862 – Frank Nelson Doubleday, American publisher, founded the Doubleday Publishing Company (d. 1934)
*1864 – Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale (d. 1892)
*1865 – Winnaretta Singer, American philanthropist (d. 1943)
*1866 – William G. Conley, American educator and politician, 18th Governor of West Virginia (d. 1940)
*1867 – Emily Greene Balch, American economist and author, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1961)
*1870 – Miguel Primo de Rivera, Spanish general and politician, Prime Minister of Spain (d. 1930)
*1871 – James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon, Irish captain and politician, 1st Prime Minister of Northern Ireland (d. 1940)
*1873 – Iuliu Maniu, Romanian lawyer and politician, 32nd Prime Minister of Romania (d. 1953)
*1881 – Henrik Shipstead, American dentist and politician (d. 1960)
* 1881 – Linnie Marsh Wolfe, American librarian and author (d. 1945)
*1883 – Pavel Filonov, Russian painter and poet (d. 1941)
* 1883 – Patrick J. Hurley, American general, politician, and diplomat, 51st United States Secretary of War (d. 1963)
*1885 – John Curtin, Australian journalist and politician, 14th Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1945)
* 1885 – Mór Kóczán, Hungarian javelin thrower and pastor (d. 1972)
* 1885 – A. J. Muste, Dutch-American pastor and activist (d. 1967)
*1888 – Richard Courant, German-American mathematician and academic (d. 1972)
*1891 – Walther Bothe, German physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1957)
* 1891 – Storm Jameson, English journalist and author (d. 1986)
* 1891 – Bronislava Nijinska, Russian dancer and choreographer (d. 1972)
*1896 – Jaromír Weinberger, Czech-American composer and academic (d. 1967)
*1897 – Dennis Wheatley, English soldier and author (d. 1977)
*1899 – S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike, Sri Lankan lawyer and politician, 4th Prime Minister of Sri Lanka (d. 1959)
*1900 – Dorothy Adams, American character actress (d. 1988)
* 1900 – Serge Poliakoff, Russian-French painter (d. 1969)

===1901–present===
*1902 – Carl Rogers, American psychologist and academic (d. 1987)
*1904 – Karl Brandt, German physician and SS officer (d. 1948)
*1905 – Carl Gustav Hempel, German philosopher from the Vienna and the Berlin Circle (d. 1997)
*1908 – William Hartnell, English actor (d. 1975)
* 1908 – Fearless Nadia, Australian-Indian actress and stuntwoman (d. 1996)
*1909 – Ashapoorna Devi, Indian author and poet (d. 1995)
* 1909 – Bruce Mitchell, South African cricketer (d. 1995)
* 1909 – Evelyn Wood, American author and educator (d. 1995) 
*1910 – Galina Ulanova, Russian actress and ballerina (d. 1998)
*1911 – Gypsy Rose Lee, American actress, dancer, and author (d. 1970)
*1912 – José Ferrer, Puerto Rican-American actor and director (d. 1992)
* 1912 – Lawrence Walsh, Canadian-American lawyer, judge, and politician, 4th United States Deputy Attorney General (d. 2014)
*1915 – Walker Cooper, American baseball player and manager (d. 1991)
*1917 – Peter Matthew Hillsman Taylor, American novelist, short story writer, and playwright (d. 1994)
*1920 – Douglas Wilmer, English actor (d. 2016)
*1922 – Dale D. Myers, American engineer (d. 2015)
*1923 – Larry Storch, American actor and comedian(d. 2022)
* 1923 – Giorgio Tozzi, American opera singer and actor (d. 2011)
* 1923 – Johnny Wardle, English cricketer (d. 1985)
* 1923 – Joseph Weizenbaum, German-American computer scientist and author (d. 2008)
*1924 – Benjamin Lees, Chinese-American soldier and composer (d. 2010)
* 1924 – Ron Moody, English actor and singer (d. 2015)
*1925 – Mohan Rakesh, Indian author and playwright (d. 1972)
*1926 – Evelyn Lear, American operatic soprano (d. 2012)
* 1926 – Kerwin Mathews, American actor (d. 2007)
* 1926 – Kelucharan Mohapatra, Indian dancer and choreographer (d. 2004)
* 1926 – Hanae Mori, Japanese fashion designer (d. 2022)
* 1926 – Soupy Sales, American comedian and actor (d. 2009)
*1927 – Charles Tomlinson, English poet and academic (d. 2015)
*1928 – Slade Gorton, American colonel, lawyer, and politician, 14th Attorney General of Washington (d. 2020)
*1929 – Saeed Jaffrey, Indian-British actor (d. 2015)
*1931 – Bill Graham, German-American businessman (d. 1991)
* 1931 – Clarence Benjamin Jones, American lawyer and scholar
*1933 – Charles Osgood, American soldier and journalist (d. 2024)
* 1933 – Jean-Marie Straub, French director and screenwriter (d. 2022)
*1934 – Jacques Anquetil, French cyclist (d. 1987)
* 1934 – Roy Kinnear, British actor (d. 1988)
*1935 – Elvis Presley, American singer, guitarist, and actor (d. 1977)
*1936 – Robert May, Baron May of Oxford, Australian-English zoologist, ecologist, and academic (d. 2020)
*1937 – Shirley Bassey, Welsh singer
*1938 – Bob Eubanks, American game show host and producer
*1939 – Carolina Herrera, Venezuelan-American fashion designer
*1940 – Cristy Lane, American country and gospel singer
*1941 – Graham Chapman, English actor and screenwriter (d. 1989)
* 1941 – Boris Vallejo, Peruvian-American painter
*1942 – Stephen Hawking, English physicist and author (d. 2018)
* 1942 – Junichirō Koizumi, Japanese politician, 56th Prime Minister of Japan
* 1942 – Yvette Mimieux, American actress (d. 2022)
*1944 – Terry Brooks, American lawyer and author
*1945 – Phil Beal, English footballer
* 1945 – Nancy Bond, American author and academic
* 1945 – Kathleen Noone, American actress
*1946 – Robby Krieger, American guitarist and songwriter 
* 1946 – Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo, Mexican drug lord
*1947 – David Bowie, English singer-songwriter, producer, and actor (d. 2016)
* 1947 – Antti Kalliomäki, Finnish pole vaulter and politician
*1948 – Gillies MacKinnon, Scottish director and screenwriter
*1949 – Lawrence Rowe, Jamaican cricketer
*1951 – Kenny Anthony, Saint Lucian politician, 5th Prime Minister of Saint Lucia
*1952 – Vladimir Feltsman, Russian-American pianist and educator
* 1952 – Peter McCullagh, Irish mathematician and academic
*1953 – Marián Šťastný, Slovak ice hockey player
* 1953 – Bruce Sutter, American baseball pitcher (d. 2022)
*1955 – Harriet Sansom Harris, American actress
* 1955 – Mike Reno, Canadian singer and drummer
*1957 – Dwight Clark, American football player (d. 2018)
* 1957 – Nacho Duato, Spanish dancer and choreographer
* 1957 – Ron Cephas Jones, American actor (d. 2023)
* 1957 – Calvin Natt, American basketball player
*1958 – Betsy DeVos, American businesswoman and politician, 11th Secretary of Education
* 1958 – Rey Misterio, Mexican wrestler, trainer, and actor. (d. 2024)
*1959 – Paul Hester, Australian drummer (d. 2005)
*1960 – Dave Weckl, American drummer
*1961 – Calvin Smith, American sprinter
*1964 – Ron Sexsmith, Canadian singer-songwriter
*1965 – Michelle Forbes, American actress
*1966 – Maria Pitillo, American actress
* 1966 – Igor Vyazmikin, Russian ice hockey player (d. 2009)
* 1966 – Andrew Wood, American singer-songwriter (d. 1990)
*1967 – Willie Anderson, American basketball player
* 1967 – R. Kelly, American singer-songwriter, producer, and sex offender
* 1967 – Tom Watson, English politician
*1971 – Jason Giambi, American baseball player
* 1971 – Andreas Kollross, Austrian politician
* 1971 – Pascal Zuberbühler, Swiss footballer and coach
*1972 – Paul Clement, English footballer, coach, and manager
*1973 – Mike Cameron, American baseball player
*1976 – Jenny Lewis, American singer-songwriter, musician, and actress
*1977 – Amber Benson, American actress, writer, director, and producer
*1978 – Marco Fu, Hong Kongese snooker player
*1979 – Seol Ki-hyeon, South Korean footballer and manager
* 1979 – Windell Middlebrooks, American actor (d. 2015)
* 1979 – Adrian Mutu, Romanian footballer
* 1979 – Stipe Pletikosa, Croatian footballer
* 1979 – Sarah Polley, Canadian actress and director
*1980 – Sam Riley, English actor and singer
*1981 – Genevieve Cortese, American actress
* 1981 – Jeff Francis, Canadian baseball player
*1982 – Gaby Hoffmann, American actress
* 1982 (or 1983, 1984) – Kim Jong Un, North Korean soldier and politician, 3rd Supreme Leader of North Korea
*1983 – Chris Masters, American wrestler
*1984 – Jeff Francoeur, American baseball player and broadcaster
*1987 – Chris Douglas-Roberts, American basketball player
* 1987 – Cynthia Erivo, English actress and singer-songwriter
* 1987 – Freddie Stroma, English actor
*1988 – Adrián López, Spanish footballer
* 1988 – Michael Mancienne, English footballer
* 1988 – Alex Tyus, American-Israeli basketball player
*1989 – Aaron Cruden, New Zealand rugby player
*1990 – Blair Walsh, American football player
*1991 – Josh Hazlewood, Australian cricketer
* 1991 – Stefan Johansen, Norwegian footballer
* 1991 – Stefan Savić, Montenegrin footballer
* 1991 – Greg Smith, American basketball player
*1992 – Stefanie Dolson, American basketball player
* 1992 – Koke, Spanish footballer
* 1992 – Valkyrae, American online streamer
*1993 – William Karlsson, Swedish ice hockey player
* 1993 – Sophie Pascoe, New Zealand swimmer
*1994 – Glenn Robinson III, American basketball player
*1995 – Ryan Destiny, American actress and singer
*1998 – Tony Bradley, American basketball player
* 1998 – Jhoan Durán, Dominican baseball player
*1999 – Ignas Brazdeikis, Lithuanian-Canadian basketball player
* 1999 – Damiano David, Italian singer-songwriter
*2000 – Noah Cyrus, American singer, songwriter, and actress
*2001 – Zach Charbonnet, American football player
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 307 – Hui of Jin, Chinese emperor (b. 259)
* 482 – Severinus of Noricum, Italian apostle and saint
* 871 – Bagsecg, Viking warrior and leader
* 926 – Athelm, archbishop of Canterbury
*1079 – Adèle of France, countess of Flanders (b. 1009)
*1107 – Edgar, King of Scotland (b. 1074)
*1198 – Celestine III, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1106)
*1337 – Giotto, Italian painter and architect, designed Scrovegni Chapel and Giotto&#x27;s Campanile (b. 1266)
*1354 – Charles de la Cerda, French nobleman (b. 1327)
*1424 – Stephen Zaccaria, archbishop of Patras
*1456 – Lawrence Giustiniani, Italian bishop and saint (b. 1381)
*1538 – Beatrice of Portugal, duchess of Savoy (b. 1504)
*1557 – Albert Alcibiades, margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach (b. 1522)
*1570 – Philibert de l&#x27;Orme, French sculptor and architect, designed the Château d&#x27;Anet (b. 1510)
*1598 – John George, Elector of Brandenburg (b. 1525)

===1601–1900===
*1642 – Galileo Galilei, Italian physicist, mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher (b. 1564)
*1707 – John Dalrymple, 1st Earl of Stair, Scottish soldier and politician, Scottish Secretary of State (b. 1648)
*1713 – Arcangelo Corelli, Italian violinist and composer (b. 1653)
*1775 – John Baskerville, English printer and type designer (b. 1706)
*1789 – Jack Broughton, English boxer (b. 1703)
*1794 – Justus Möser, German lawyer and jurist (b. 1720)
*1815 – Edward Pakenham, Anglo-Irish general and politician (b. 1778)
*1825 – Eli Whitney, American engineer and theorist, invented the cotton gin (b. 1765)
*1854 – William Beresford, 1st Viscount Beresford, English field marshal and politician, Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance (b. 1768)
*1865 – Aimé, duc de Clermont-Tonnerre, French general and politician, French Minister of Defence (b. 1779)
*1874 – Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg, French historian and archaeologist (b. 1814)
*1878 – Nikolay Nekrasov, Russian poet and critic (b. 1821)
*1880 – Emperor Norton, English-American businessman (b. 1811)
*1883 – Miska Magyarics, Slovene-Hungarian poet (b. 1825)
*1896 – William Rainey Marshall, American banker and politician, 5th Governor of Minnesota (b. 1825)
* 1896 – Paul Verlaine, French poet and writer (b. 1844)

===1901–present===
*1914 – Simon Bolivar Buckner, American general and 30th Governor of Kentucky (b. 1823)
*1916 – Rembrandt Bugatti, Italian sculptor (b. 1884)
* 1916 – Ada Rehan, Irish-American actress (b. 1860)
*1918 – Ellis H. Roberts, American journalist and politician, 20th Treasurer of the United States (b. 1827)
*1920 – Josef Josephi, Polish-born singer and actor (b. 1852)
*1925 – George Bellows, American painter (b. 1882)
*1934 – Andrei Bely, Russian novelist, poet, and critic (b. 1880)
* 1934 – Alexandre Stavisky, Ukrainian-French financier (b. 1886)
*1938 – Johnny Gruelle, American author and illustrator (b. 1880)
*1941 – Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell, English general and founder of the Scout movement (b. 1857)
* 1941 – Vladimír Mandl, Czechoslovak lawyer (b. 1899)
*1942 – Joseph Franklin Rutherford, American lawyer and religious leader (b. 1869)
*1943 – Andres Larka, Estonian general and politician, 1st Estonian Minister of War (b. 1879)
*1944 – William Kissam Vanderbilt II, American lieutenant and sailor (b. 1878)
*1945 – Karl Ernst Krafft, Swiss astrologer and author (b. 1900)
*1948 – Kurt Schwitters, German painter and graphic designer (b. 1887)
*1950 – Joseph Schumpeter, Czech-American economist and academic (b. 1883)
*1952 – Antonia Maury, American astronomer and astrophysicist (b. 1866)
*1953 – Hugh Binney, English admiral and politician, 16th Governor of Tasmania (b. 1883)
*1954 – Eduard Wiiralt, Estonian-French painter and illustrator (b. 1898)
*1958 – Mary Colter, American architect, designed the Desert View Watchtower (b. 1869)
*1961 – Schoolboy Rowe, American baseball player and coach (b. 1910)
*1963 – Kay Sage, American painter (b. 1898)
*1975 – Richard Tucker, American operatic tenor (b. 1913)
*1976 – Zhou Enlai, Chinese soldier and politician, 1st Premier of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (b. 1898)
*1980 – John Mauchly, American physicist and academic (b. 1907)
*1982 – Grégoire Aslan, Swiss-English actor and screenwriter (b. 1908)
*1983 – Gerhard Barkhorn, German general and pilot (b. 1919)
*1986 – Pierre Fournier, French cellist and educator (b. 1906)
*1990 – Bernard Krigstein, American illustrator (b. 1919)
* 1990 – Terry-Thomas, English actor and comedian (b. 1911)
*1991 – Steve Clark, English singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1960)
*1994 – Pat Buttram, American actor and comedian (b. 1915)
* 1994 – Harvey Haddix, American baseball player and coach (b. 1925)
*1996 – Metin Göktepe, Turkish photographer and journalist (b. 1968)
* 1996 – François Mitterrand, French sergeant and politician, 21st President of France (b. 1916)
*1997 – Melvin Calvin, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1911)
*1998 – Michael Tippett, English composer and conductor (b. 1905)
*2000 – Hilary Smart, American sailor (b. 1925)
*2002 – Alexander Prokhorov, Australian-Russian physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1916)
* 2002 – Dave Thomas, American businessman and philanthropist, founded Wendy&#x27;s (b. 1932)
*2003 – Ron Goodwin, English composer and conductor (b. 1925)
*2006 – Tony Banks, Baron Stratford, Northern Irish broadcaster and politician, Minister for Sport and the Olympics (b. 1943)
*2007 – Jane Bolin, American lawyer and judge (b. 1908)
* 2007 – Arthur Cockfield, Baron Cockfield, English lawyer and politician, Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills (b. 1916)
* 2007 – Yvonne De Carlo, Canadian-American actress and singer (b. 1922)
* 2007 – David Ervine, Northern Irish politician and activist (b. 1953)
* 2007 – Iwao Takamoto, American animator, director, and producer (b. 1925)
*2008 – George Moore, Australian jockey and trainer (b. 1923)
*2009 – Lasantha Wickrematunge, Sri Lankan journalist (b. 1958)
*2010 – Art Clokey, American animator, director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1921)
*2011 – Jiří Dienstbier, Czech journalist and politician (b. 1937)
* 2011 – Thorbjørn Svenssen, Norwegian footballer (b. 1924)
*2012 – Dave Alexander, American singer and pianist (b. 1938)
* 2012 – T. J. Hamblin, English haematologist and academic (b. 1943)
* 2012 – Alexis Weissenberg, Bulgarian-French pianist and educator (b. 1929) 
*2013 – Kenojuak Ashevak, Canadian sculptor and illustrator (b. 1927)
* 2013 – Jeanne Manford, American educator and activist, co-founded PFLAG (b. 1920)
* 2013 – Alasdair Milne, Indian-English director and producer (b. 1930)
*2014 – Irma Heijting-Schuhmacher, Dutch-Australian swimmer (b. 1925)
* 2014 – Antonino P. Roman, Filipino lawyer and politician (b. 1939)
*2015 – Andraé Crouch, American singer-songwriter, producer, and pastor (b. 1942)
* 2015 – Kep Enderby, Australian lawyer, judge, and politician, 23rd Attorney-General for Australia (b. 1926)
* 2015 – Patsy Garrett, American actress and singer (b. 1921)
*2016 – Maria Teresa de Filippis, Italian racing driver (b. 1926)
* 2016 – German Moreno, Filipino television host, actor, comedian and talent manager (b. 1933)
*2017 – Nicolai Gedda, Swedish operatic tenor (b. 1925)
* 2017 – James Mancham, Seychellois politician, President 1976-77 (b. 1939)
* 2017 – Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Iranian politician (b. 1934) 
* 2017 – Peter Sarstedt, Indian-British singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1941)
*2020 – Pat Dalton, Australian footballer (b. 1942)
* 2020 – Buck Henry, American actor, screenwriter, and director (b. 1930)
*2021 – Iancu Țucărman, Romanian Holocaust survivor (b. 1922)
*2022 – Michael Lang, American concert promoter and producer (b. 1944)
*2024 – Adan Canto, Mexican actor (b. 1981)
==Holidays and observances==
*Babinden (Belarus, Russia)
*Christian feast day:
**Abo of Tiflis
**Apollinaris Claudius
**Blessed Eurosia Fabris
**Gauchito Gil (Folk Catholicism) 
**Gudula
**Harriet Bedell (Episcopal Church (USA))
**Lawrence Giustiniani
**Lucian of Beauvais
**Maximus of Pavia
**Our Lady of Prompt Succor (Roman Catholic Church)
**Pega (Anglican and Roman Catholic churches)
**Severinus of Noricum
**Thorfinn of Hamar
**January 8 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Commonwealth Day (Northern Mariana Islands)
*Earliest day on which Children&#x27;s Day can fall, while January 14 is the latest; celebrated on the second Saturday in January. (Thailand)
*Typing Day (International observance)

== References ==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on January 8</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33724" start="28" end="31" title="307" label="307"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361" start="34" end="42" title="Emperor Huai of Jin" label="Sima Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="66" end="77" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357" start="108" end="118" title="Emperor Hui of Jin" label="Sima Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q985721" start="164" end="173" title="Sima Ying" label="Sima Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q24754" start="177" end="180" title="871" label="871"/>
<link wikidata="Q272233" start="183" end="193" title="Æthelred I, King of Wessex" label="Æthelred I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="198" end="214" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="222" end="232" title="Wessex" label="West Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237365" start="241" end="258" title="Battle of Ashdown" label="repel an invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="262" end="269" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="270" end="276" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562" start="280" end="284" title="1297" label="1297"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943431" start="287" end="304" title="François Grimaldi" label="François Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351922" start="380" end="394" title="Rock of Monaco" label="Rock of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="409" end="419" title="House of Grimaldi" label="his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="437" end="443" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476" start="446" end="450" title="1454" label="1454"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="457" end="467" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q542429" start="474" end="490" title="Romanus Pontifex" label="Romanus Pontifex"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="508" end="527" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185222" start="594" end="606" title="Cape Bojador" label="Cape Bojador"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708" start="609" end="613" title="1499" label="1499"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="616" end="635" title="Louis XII of France" label="Louis XII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q201143" start="644" end="660" title="Anne of Brittany" label="Anne of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="710" end="722" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547" start="725" end="729" title="1547" label="1547"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="742" end="761" title="Lithuanian-language" label="Lithuanian-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12664663" start="778" end="808" title="Catechism of Martynas Mažvydas" label="Catechism of Martynas Mažvydas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="832" end="842" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984" start="862" end="866" title="1735" label="1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="885" end="907" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q662514" start="921" end="930" title="Ariodante" label="Ariodante"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="956" end="973" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="975" end="988" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589" start="991" end="995" title="1746" label="1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="998" end="1020" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Second Jacobite rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="1022" end="1043" title="Charles Edward Stuart" label="Bonnie Prince Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="1053" end="1061" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775" start="1064" end="1068" title="1790" label="1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1071" end="1088" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="1108" end="1134" title="State of the Union address" label="State of the Union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="1154" end="1158" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807130" start="1165" end="1182" title="Dutch Cape Colony" label="Dutch Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="1222" end="1233" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786767" start="1253" end="1273" title="Battle of Blaauwberg" label="Battle of Blaauwberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928" start="1276" end="1280" title="1811" label="1811"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958902" start="1283" end="1300" title="Charles Deslondes" label="Charles Deslondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553950" start="1307" end="1335" title="1811 German Coast uprising" label="an unsuccessful slave revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q507153" start="1373" end="1384" title="St. Charles Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q507016" start="1389" end="1409" title="St. James Parish, Louisiana" label="St. James, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948" start="1412" end="1416" title="1815" label="1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1419" end="1430" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="1432" end="1453" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="1455" end="1469" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570" start="1522" end="1526" title="1828" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1533" end="1570" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597" start="1586" end="1590" title="1835" label="1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="1606" end="1620" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1677" end="1712" title="National debt of the United States#History" label="United States national debt to zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="1733" end="1737" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1740" end="1758" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941587" start="1760" end="1788" title="Second Battle of Springfield" label="Second Battle of Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="1791" end="1795" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1850" end="1866" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="1910" end="1914" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="1917" end="1928" title="Crazy Horse" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q861477" start="1982" end="2003" title="United States Cavalry" label="United States Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872751" start="2007" end="2020" title="Battle of Wolf Mountain" label="Wolf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810689" start="2022" end="2039" title="Montana Territory" label="Montana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="2042" end="2046" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="2049" end="2065" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="2079" end="2085" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="2148" end="2160" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="2174" end="2178" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="2191" end="2207" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="2215" end="2221" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="2264" end="2268" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="2275" end="2300" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="2378" end="2382" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="2400" end="2414" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="2435" end="2450" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2482" end="2493" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="2496" end="2500" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605761" start="2507" end="2527" title="steel strike of 1919" label="steel strike of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739338" start="2552" end="2606" title="Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers" label="Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="2621" end="2625" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="2641" end="2662" title="Bảo Đại" label="Nguyễn Phúc Vĩnh Thuỵ"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="2736" end="2755" title="Abdul-Aziz ibn Saud" label="Abdul-Aziz ibn Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="2775" end="2780" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="2783" end="2787" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773859" start="2790" end="2828" title="Anarchist insurrection of January 1933" label="Anarchist insurrection of January 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="2843" end="2852" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="2854" end="2859" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="2862" end="2866" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958275" start="2869" end="2882" title="Kashf-e hijab" label="Kashf-e hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="2926" end="2935" title="Reza Shah" label="Reza Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="3013" end="3017" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3020" end="3032" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q535297" start="3042" end="3067" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom" label="introduces food rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="3070" end="3074" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="3091" end="3114" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="Philippine Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="3238" end="3262" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese Imperial forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="3265" end="3269" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q207879" start="3272" end="3286" title="Andrei Zhdanov" label="Andrei Zhdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116400" start="3348" end="3374" title="War-responsibility trials in Finland" label="Finnish War Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579871" start="3410" end="3428" title="Erich Buschenhagen" label="Erich Buschenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="3529" end="3545" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3560" end="3566" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="3574" end="3589" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="3592" end="3596" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683146" start="3599" end="3613" title="Operation Auca" label="Operation Auca"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="3625" end="3637" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572622" start="3656" end="3663" title="Huaorani people" label="Waorani"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="3667" end="3674" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="3712" end="3716" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="3719" end="3736" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="3781" end="3802" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="3805" end="3809" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318597" start="3824" end="3834" title="French referendum on Algerian self-determination, 1961" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3881" end="3888" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="3891" end="3895" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3908" end="3925" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118976" start="3943" end="3957" title="War on Poverty" label="War on Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="3987" end="3991" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q473984" start="4028" end="4049" title="President of Pakistan" label="President of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="4050" end="4069" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="4079" end="4086" title="Bengali people" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="4094" end="4115" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="4187" end="4197" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="4200" end="4204" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4207" end="4213" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q684044" start="4234" end="4241" title="Luna 21" label="Luna 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="4270" end="4287" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4342" end="4358" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419538" start="4375" end="4384" title="Watergate complex" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="4394" end="4398" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q451912" start="4401" end="4415" title="Ella T. Grasso" label="Ella T. Grasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q29529315" start="4424" end="4447" title="List of Governors of Connecticut" label="Governor of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="4548" end="4552" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975512" start="4555" end="4566" title="1977 Moscow bombings" label="Three bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="4676" end="4684" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="4705" end="4709" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q375409" start="4737" end="4749" title="Trans-en-Provence Case" label="UFO sighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q817939" start="4753" end="4778" title="Trans-en-Provence" label="Trans-en-Provence, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="4882" end="4886" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959692" start="4889" end="4915" title="Breakup of the Bell System" label="Breakup of the Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="4939" end="4947" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="5001" end="5005" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062178" start="5008" end="5029" title="Kegworth air disaster" label="Kegworth air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q157205" start="5031" end="5046" title="British Midland International" label="British Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="5060" end="5074" title="Boeing 737 Classic" label="Boeing 737-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="5093" end="5104" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="5146" end="5150" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="5161" end="5170" title="cosmonaut" label="cosmonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q317792" start="5171" end="5186" title="Valeri Polyakov" label="Valeri Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q645825" start="5196" end="5207" title="Soyuz TM-18" label="Soyuz TM-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="5225" end="5228" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="5251" end="5264" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="5320" end="5324" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q579939" start="5330" end="5343" title="Antonov An-32" label="Antonov An-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q741398" start="5359" end="5388" title="1996 Air Africa crash" label="crashes into a crowded market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="5392" end="5400" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="5402" end="5407" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="5491" end="5495" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="5529" end="5543" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329394" start="5563" end="5587" title="No Child Left Behind Act" label="No Child Left Behind Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="5590" end="5594" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037884" start="5597" end="5624" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 634" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 634"/>
<link wikidata="Q525377" start="5638" end="5656" title="Diyarbakır Airport" label="Diyarbakır Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5658" end="5664" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q553492" start="5728" end="5751" title="Air Midwest Flight 5481" label="Air Midwest Flight 5481"/>
<link wikidata="Q597649" start="5763" end="5788" title="Charlotte Douglas International Airport" label="Charlotte-Douglas Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="5793" end="5818" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="5853" end="5857" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="5883" end="5894" title="ocean liner" label="ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="5965" end="5977" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="5980" end="5984" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="6061" end="6065" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="6125" end="6129" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299278" start="6148" end="6158" title="2009 Costa Rica earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="6171" end="6181" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="6215" end="6219" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q608489" start="6253" end="6303" title="Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda" label="Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q472278" start="6304" end="6316" title="Togo national football team attack" label="attack a bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191595" start="6330" end="6357" title="Togo national football team" label="Togo national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q83157" start="6376" end="6402" title="2010 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2010 Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="6453" end="6457" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q193703" start="6485" end="6499" title="Gabby Giffords" label="Gabby Giffords"/>
<link wikidata="Q757986" start="6546" end="6578" title="2011 Tucson shooting" label="mass shooting in Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q609493" start="6656" end="6665" title="John Roll" label="John Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="6685" end="6689" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q456321" start="6692" end="6706" title="Joaquín Guzmán" label="Joaquín Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q21995232" start="6861" end="6887" title="West Air Sweden Flight 294" label="West Air Sweden Flight 294"/>
<link wikidata="Q419614" start="6926" end="6935" title="Akkajaure" label="Akkajaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="6989" end="6993" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q81360866" start="6996" end="7037" title="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752" label="Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752"/>
<link wikidata="Q734729" start="7075" end="7117" title="Tehran Imam Khomeini International Airport" label="Tehran Imam Khomeini International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="7210" end="7214" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q104787285" start="7274" end="7291" title="La Vega raid" label="police ″massacre″"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056085" start="7295" end="7302" title="La Vega Parish" label="La Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="7304" end="7311" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="7325" end="7329" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304982" start="7370" end="7384" title="Jair Bolsonaro" label="Jair Bolsonaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q116142348" start="7385" end="7390" title="2023 Praça dos Três Poderes attack" label="storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q949699" start="7395" end="7413" title="National Congress of Brazil" label="Brazilian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19335" start="7443" end="7447" title="1037" label="1037"/>
<link wikidata="Q36020" start="7450" end="7459" title="Su Shi" label="Su Dongpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077" start="7502" end="7506" title="1345" label="1345"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392586" start="7509" end="7527" title="Kadi Burhan al-Din" label="Kadi Burhan al-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q217029" start="7535" end="7539" title="qadi" label="kadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="7554" end="7559" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421" start="7572" end="7576" title="1529" label="1529"/>
<link wikidata="Q563316" start="7579" end="7596" title="John Frederick II, Duke of Saxony" label="John Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726" start="7624" end="7628" title="1583" label="1583"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004448" start="7631" end="7647" title="Simon Episcopius" label="Simon Episcopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744" start="7690" end="7694" title="1587" label="1587"/>
<link wikidata="Q62534" start="7697" end="7715" title="Johannes Fabricius" label="Johannes Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q470856" start="7767" end="7787" title="Jan Pieterszoon Coen" label="Jan Pieterszoon Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759" start="7842" end="7846" title="1589" label="1589"/>
<link wikidata="Q317588" start="7849" end="7862" title="Ivan Gundulić" label="Ivan Gundulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725" start="7921" end="7925" title="1601" label="1601"/>
<link wikidata="Q360512" start="7928" end="7944" title="Baltasar Gracián" label="Baltasar Gracián"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831" start="7983" end="7987" title="1626" label="1626"/>
<link wikidata="Q368806" start="7990" end="8000" title="Jean Talon" label="Jean Talon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840" start="8043" end="8047" title="1628" label="1628"/>
<link wikidata="Q357136" start="8050" end="8098" title="François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg" label="François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865" start="8126" end="8130" title="1632" label="1632"/>
<link wikidata="Q57186" start="8133" end="8153" title="Samuel von Pufendorf" label="Samuel von Pufendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879" start="8194" end="8198" title="1635" label="1635"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604692" start="8201" end="8238" title="Luis Manuel Fernández de Portocarrero" label="Luis Manuel Fernández de Portocarrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893" start="8268" end="8272" title="1638" label="1638"/>
<link wikidata="Q271475" start="8275" end="8292" title="Elisabetta Sirani" label="Elisabetta Sirani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984" start="8321" end="8325" title="1735" label="1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q39459" start="8328" end="8340" title="John Carroll (bishop)" label="John Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="8374" end="8395" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655" start="8407" end="8411" title="1763" label="1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q713749" start="8414" end="8434" title="Edmond-Charles Genêt" label="Edmond-Charles Genêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760" start="8487" end="8491" title="1786" label="1786"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580098" start="8494" end="8509" title="Nicholas Biddle (banker)" label="Nicholas Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765" start="8552" end="8556" title="1788" label="1788"/>
<link wikidata="Q93373" start="8559" end="8576" title="Archduke Rudolf of Austria (1788–1831)" label="Rudolf of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805" start="8622" end="8626" title="1792" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349257" start="8629" end="8641" title="Lowell Mason" label="Lowell Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898" start="8685" end="8689" title="1805" label="1805"/>
<link wikidata="Q862580" start="8692" end="8703" title="John Bigler" label="John Bigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="8752" end="8774" title="Governor of California" label="Governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849171" start="8794" end="8804" title="Orson Hyde" label="Orson Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911009" start="8837" end="8883" title="President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)" label="President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="8895" end="8899" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q347871" start="8902" end="8920" title="Sigismond Thalberg" label="Sigismond Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958" start="8960" end="8964" title="1817" label="1817"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120160" start="8967" end="8987" title="Theophilus Shepstone" label="Theophilus Shepstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976" start="9033" end="9037" title="1821" label="1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="9040" end="9056" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889393" start="9089" end="9123" title="United States Ambassador to Turkey" label="United States Ambassador to Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988" start="9135" end="9139" title="1823" label="1823"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="9142" end="9163" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994" start="9218" end="9222" title="1824" label="1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q210740" start="9225" end="9239" title="Wilkie Collins" label="Wilkie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051533" start="9313" end="9341" title="Francisco González Bocanegra" label="Francisco González Bocanegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576" start="9380" end="9384" title="1830" label="1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q155540" start="9387" end="9401" title="Hans von Bülow" label="Hans von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="9442" end="9446" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q240526" start="9449" end="9469" title="Lawrence Alma-Tadema" label="Lawrence Alma-Tadema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629" start="9517" end="9521" title="1843" label="1843"/>
<link wikidata="Q691133" start="9524" end="9543" title="Frederick Abberline" label="Frederick Abberline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="9579" end="9583" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410272" start="9586" end="9606" title="James Milton Carroll" label="James Milton Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687" start="9646" end="9650" title="1859" label="1859"/>
<link wikidata="Q522167" start="9653" end="9674" title="Fanny Bullock Workman" label="Fanny Bullock Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="9738" end="9742" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940053" start="9745" end="9762" title="Emma Booth-Tucker" label="Emma Booth-Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="9790" end="9794" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q720355" start="9797" end="9819" title="Frank Nelson Doubleday" label="Frank Nelson Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="9853" end="9881" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="9893" end="9897" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q159670" start="9900" end="9951" title="Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale" label="Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="9963" end="9967" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q451099" start="9970" end="9987" title="Winnaretta Singer" label="Winnaretta Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="10024" end="10028" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q364045" start="10031" end="10048" title="William G. Conley" label="William G. Conley"/>
<link wikidata="Q878590" start="10089" end="10114" title="Governor of West Virginia" label="Governor of West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="10126" end="10130" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q215139" start="10133" end="10151" title="Emily Greene Balch" label="Emily Greene Balch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="10184" end="10195" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="10216" end="10220" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q192894" start="10223" end="10245" title="Miguel Primo de Rivera" label="Miguel Primo de Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="10279" end="10302" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="Prime Minister of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="10314" end="10318" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q336809" start="10321" end="10356" title="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon" label="James Craig, 1st Viscount Craigavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q684914" start="10392" end="10426" title="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland" label="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="10438" end="10442" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="10445" end="10456" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="10495" end="10520" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="10532" end="10536" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q289751" start="10539" end="10555" title="Henrik Shipstead" label="Henrik Shipstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554626" start="10608" end="10626" title="Linnie Marsh Wolfe" label="Linnie Marsh Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="10669" end="10673" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q466187" start="10676" end="10689" title="Pavel Filonov" label="Pavel Filonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q708797" start="10735" end="10752" title="Patrick J. Hurley" label="Patrick J. Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="10803" end="10833" title="United States Secretary of War" label="United States Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="10845" end="10849" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="10852" end="10863" title="John Curtin" label="John Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="10908" end="10935" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253022" start="10955" end="10965" title="Mór Kóczán" label="Mór Kóczán"/>
<link wikidata="Q330100" start="11023" end="11034" title="A. J. Muste" label="A. J. Muste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="11082" end="11086" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q61046" start="11089" end="11104" title="Richard Courant" label="Richard Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="11160" end="11164" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q76474" start="11167" end="11180" title="Walther Bothe" label="Walther Bothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="11213" end="11224" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q541812" start="11253" end="11266" title="Storm Jameson" label="Storm Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q235209" start="11317" end="11336" title="Bronislava Nijinska" label="Bronislava Nijinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="11382" end="11386" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q215828" start="11389" end="11407" title="Jaromír Weinberger" label="Jaromír Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="11457" end="11461" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189595" start="11464" end="11479" title="Dennis Wheatley" label="Dennis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="11519" end="11523" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q313997" start="11526" end="11550" title="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike" label="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758894" start="11590" end="11617" title="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka" label="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="11629" end="11633" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037157" start="11636" end="11649" title="Dorothy Adams" label="Dorothy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q384860" start="11697" end="11712" title="Serge Poliakoff" label="Serge Poliakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="11768" end="11772" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q191004" start="11775" end="11786" title="Carl Rogers" label="Carl Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="11834" end="11838" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q77094" start="11841" end="11852" title="Karl Brandt" label="Karl Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="11875" end="11877" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="11897" end="11901" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q61885" start="11904" end="11922" title="Carl Gustav Hempel" label="Carl Gustav Hempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="11992" end="11996" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q361996" start="11999" end="12015" title="William Hartnell" label="William Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439490" start="12050" end="12064" title="Fearless Nadia" label="Fearless Nadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="12118" end="12122" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347897" start="12125" end="12140" title="Ashapoorna Devi" label="Ashapoorna Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525514" start="12184" end="12198" title="Bruce Mitchell (cricketer)" label="Bruce Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416470" start="12243" end="12254" title="Evelyn Wood (teacher)" label="Evelyn Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="12297" end="12301" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q28885" start="12304" end="12318" title="Galina Ulanova" label="Galina Ulanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="12361" end="12365" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q267186" start="12368" end="12382" title="Gypsy Rose Lee" label="Gypsy Rose Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="12432" end="12436" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="12439" end="12450" title="José Ferrer" label="José Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q521032" start="12512" end="12526" title="Lawrence Walsh" label="Lawrence Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364289" start="12581" end="12618" title="United States Deputy Attorney General" label="United States Deputy Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="12630" end="12634" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962239" start="12637" end="12650" title="Walker Cooper" label="Walker Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="12700" end="12704" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q979076" start="12707" end="12736" title="Peter Matthew Hillsman Taylor" label="Peter Matthew Hillsman Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="12803" end="12807" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q361461" start="12810" end="12824" title="Douglas Wilmer" label="Douglas Wilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="12851" end="12855" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210397" start="12858" end="12871" title="Dale D. Myers" label="Dale D. Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="12902" end="12906" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399557" start="12909" end="12921" title="Larry Storch" label="Larry Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q979700" start="12969" end="12982" title="Giorgio Tozzi" label="Giorgio Tozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527057" start="13035" end="13048" title="Johnny Wardle" label="Johnny Wardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q75778" start="13087" end="13104" title="Joseph Weizenbaum" label="Joseph Weizenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="13163" end="13167" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q711596" start="13170" end="13183" title="Benjamin Lees" label="Benjamin Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q366910" start="13242" end="13251" title="Ron Moody" label="Ron Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="13289" end="13293" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631800" start="13296" end="13308" title="Mohan Rakesh" label="Mohan Rakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="13350" end="13354" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q509102" start="13357" end="13368" title="Evelyn Lear" label="Evelyn Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739736" start="13415" end="13429" title="Kerwin Mathews" label="Kerwin Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503124" start="13465" end="13485" title="Kelucharan Mohapatra" label="Kelucharan Mohapatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q755465" start="13538" end="13548" title="Hanae Mori" label="Hanae Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915318" start="13595" end="13606" title="Soupy Sales" label="Soupy Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="13647" end="13651" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666606" start="13654" end="13671" title="Charles Tomlinson" label="Charles Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="13710" end="13714" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q742210" start="13717" end="13729" title="Slade Gorton" label="Slade Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372759" start="13778" end="13808" title="Attorney General of Washington" label="Attorney General of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="13820" end="13824" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q979990" start="13827" end="13840" title="Saeed Jaffrey" label="Saeed Jaffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="13874" end="13878" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q862152" start="13881" end="13892" title="Bill Graham (promoter)" label="Bill Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126400" start="13941" end="13964" title="Clarence Benjamin Jones" label="Clarence Benjamin Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="13995" end="13999" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081387" start="14002" end="14016" title="Charles Osgood" label="Charles Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276411" start="14069" end="14086" title="Jean-Marie Straub" label="Jean-Marie Straub"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="14132" end="14136" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q221001" start="14139" end="14155" title="Jacques Anquetil" label="Jacques Anquetil"/>
<link wikidata="Q715642" start="14191" end="14202" title="Roy Kinnear" label="Roy Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="14229" end="14233" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="14236" end="14249" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="14300" end="14304" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q336397" start="14307" end="14338" title="Robert May, Baron May of Oxford" label="Robert May, Baron May of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="14405" end="14409" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q234754" start="14412" end="14426" title="Shirley Bassey" label="Shirley Bassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="14442" end="14446" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932380" start="14449" end="14460" title="Bob Eubanks" label="Bob Eubanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="14500" end="14504" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q264589" start="14507" end="14523" title="Carolina Herrera (fashion designer)" label="Carolina Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="14563" end="14567" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186503" start="14570" end="14581" title="Cristy Lane" label="Cristy Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="14619" end="14623" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962" start="14626" end="14640" title="Graham Chapman" label="Graham Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q377997" start="14692" end="14705" title="Boris Vallejo" label="Boris Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="14734" end="14738" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="14741" end="14756" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q130852" start="14806" end="14823" title="Junichirō Koizumi" label="Junichirō Koizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="14851" end="14874" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q465709" start="14884" end="14898" title="Yvette Mimieux" label="Yvette Mimieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="14928" end="14932" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q318845" start="14935" end="14947" title="Terry Brooks" label="Terry Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="14977" end="14981" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181693" start="14984" end="14993" title="Phil Beal" label="Phil Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962567" start="15023" end="15033" title="Nancy Bond" label="Nancy Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547220" start="15073" end="15087" title="Kathleen Noone" label="Kathleen Noone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="15107" end="15111" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="15114" end="15127" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621643" start="15173" end="15200" title="Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo" label="Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="15221" end="15225" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="15228" end="15239" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q609682" start="15307" end="15323" title="Antti Kalliomäki" label="Antti Kalliomäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15362" end="15366" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106623" start="15369" end="15386" title="Gillies MacKinnon" label="Gillies MacKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15424" end="15428" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219919" start="15431" end="15444" title="Lawrence Rowe" label="Lawrence Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="15466" end="15470" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q57750" start="15473" end="15486" title="Kenny Anthony" label="Kenny Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q934245" start="15517" end="15546" title="Prime Minister of Saint Lucia" label="Prime Minister of Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="15548" end="15552" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482551" start="15555" end="15572" title="Vladimir Feltsman" label="Vladimir Feltsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175762" start="15621" end="15636" title="Peter McCullagh" label="Peter McCullagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="15672" end="15676" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q538177" start="15679" end="15693" title="Marián Šťastný" label="Marián Šťastný"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926482" start="15729" end="15741" title="Bruce Sutter" label="Bruce Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="15780" end="15784" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q270622" start="15787" end="15808" title="Harriet Sansom Harris" label="Harriet Sansom Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q649413" start="15836" end="15845" title="Mike Reno" label="Mike Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="15876" end="15880" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268463" start="15883" end="15895" title="Dwight Clark" label="Dwight Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q931574" start="15941" end="15952" title="Nacho Duato" label="Nacho Duato"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202598" start="15996" end="16012" title="Ron Cephas Jones" label="Ron Cephas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q769722" start="16048" end="16059" title="Calvin Natt" label="Calvin Natt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16089" end="16093" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898286" start="16096" end="16107" title="Betsy DeVos" label="Betsy DeVos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831901" start="16185" end="16197" title="Rey Misterio" label="Rey Misterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="16248" end="16252" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142982" start="16255" end="16266" title="Paul Hester" label="Paul Hester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16298" end="16302" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q370577" start="16305" end="16315" title="Dave Weckl" label="Dave Weckl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="16335" end="16339" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q345354" start="16342" end="16354" title="Calvin Smith" label="Calvin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="16375" end="16379" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q133489" start="16382" end="16394" title="Ron Sexsmith" label="Ron Sexsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="16424" end="16428" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q239075" start="16431" end="16446" title="Michelle Forbes" label="Michelle Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="16466" end="16470" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q440841" start="16473" end="16486" title="Maria Pitillo" label="Maria Pitillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061865" start="16514" end="16528" title="Igor Vyazmikin" label="Igor Vyazmikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381777" start="16575" end="16586" title="Andrew Wood (singer)" label="Andrew Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="16626" end="16630" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032738" start="16633" end="16648" title="Willie Anderson (basketball)" label="Willie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q273055" start="16686" end="16694" title="R. Kelly" label="R. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q263802" start="16760" end="16770" title="Tom Watson (Labour politician)" label="Tom Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="16792" end="16796" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683912" start="16799" end="16811" title="Jason Giambi" label="Jason Giambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15783321" start="16847" end="16863" title="Andreas Kollross" label="Andreas Kollross"/>
<link wikidata="Q315324" start="16894" end="16912" title="Pascal Zuberbühler" label="Pascal Zuberbühler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="16942" end="16946" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708728" start="16949" end="16961" title="Paul Clement (football manager)" label="Paul Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="17003" end="17007" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111741" start="17010" end="17022" title="Mike Cameron" label="Mike Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="17050" end="17054" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q435968" start="17057" end="17068" title="Jenny Lewis" label="Jenny Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="17121" end="17125" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q456862" start="17128" end="17140" title="Amber Benson" label="Amber Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="17192" end="17196" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q380594" start="17199" end="17207" title="Marco Fu" label="Marco Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="17238" end="17242" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q359789" start="17245" end="17258" title="Seol Ki-hyeon" label="Seol Ki-hyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095732" start="17305" end="17325" title="Windell Middlebrooks" label="Windell Middlebrooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q202645" start="17361" end="17372" title="Adrian Mutu" label="Adrian Mutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208706" start="17403" end="17418" title="Stipe Pletikosa" label="Stipe Pletikosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q234212" start="17449" end="17461" title="Sarah Polley" label="Sarah Polley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="17494" end="17498" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q520001" start="17501" end="17510" title="Sam Riley" label="Sam Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="17538" end="17542" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q242647" start="17545" end="17562" title="Genevieve Cortese" label="Genevieve Cortese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176488" start="17590" end="17602" title="Jeff Francis" label="Jeff Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="17630" end="17634" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q292381" start="17637" end="17650" title="Gaby Hoffmann" label="Gaby Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="17694" end="17705" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876342" start="17748" end="17777" title="List of leaders of North Korea" label="Supreme Leader of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="17779" end="17783" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q314837" start="17786" end="17799" title="Chris Masters" label="Chris Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="17820" end="17824" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q861996" start="17827" end="17841" title="Jeff Francoeur" label="Jeff Francoeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="17885" end="17889" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077184" start="17892" end="17913" title="Chris Douglas-Roberts" label="Chris Douglas-Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592474" start="17951" end="17964" title="Cynthia Erivo" label="Cynthia Erivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320512" start="18013" end="18027" title="Freddie Stroma" label="Freddie Stroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="18044" end="18048" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q314113" start="18051" end="18063" title="Adrián López" label="Adrián López"/>
<link wikidata="Q315301" start="18093" end="18110" title="Michael Mancienne" label="Michael Mancienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q946205" start="18140" end="18149" title="Alex Tyus" label="Alex Tyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="18187" end="18191" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q193926" start="18194" end="18206" title="Aaron Cruden" label="Aaron Cruden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="18234" end="18238" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640832" start="18241" end="18252" title="Blair Walsh" label="Blair Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="18280" end="18284" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288970" start="18287" end="18301" title="Josh Hazlewood" label="Josh Hazlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972254" start="18333" end="18348" title="Stefan Johansen" label="Stefan Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q219884" start="18380" end="18392" title="Stefan Savić" label="Stefan Savić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778111" start="18426" end="18436" title="Greg Smith (basketball, born 1991)" label="Greg Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="18466" end="18470" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q16440418" start="18473" end="18488" title="Stefanie Dolson" label="Stefanie Dolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q276091" start="18526" end="18530" title="Koke (footballer, born 1992)" label="Koke"/>
<link wikidata="Q64747569" start="18560" end="18568" title="Valkyrae" label="Valkyrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="18596" end="18600" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577203" start="18603" end="18619" title="William Karlsson" label="William Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891436" start="18656" end="18669" title="Sophie Pascoe" label="Sophie Pascoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="18692" end="18696" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569077" start="18699" end="18717" title="Glenn Robinson III" label="Glenn Robinson III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="18747" end="18751" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q28465338" start="18754" end="18766" title="Ryan Destiny" label="Ryan Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="18797" end="18801" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q29438680" start="18804" end="18816" title="Tony Bradley (basketball)" label="Tony Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q111112152" start="18854" end="18865" title="Jhoan Durán" label="Jhoan Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="18894" end="18898" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q51247599" start="18901" end="18917" title="Ignas Brazdeikis" label="Ignas Brazdeikis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57415344" start="18966" end="18979" title="Damiano David" label="Damiano David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="19008" end="19012" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q54868" start="19015" end="19025" title="Noah Cyrus" label="Noah Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="19069" end="19073" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q66857114" start="19076" end="19091" title="Zach Charbonnet" label="Zach Charbonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33724" start="19146" end="19149" title="307" label="307"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357" start="19152" end="19162" title="Emperor Hui of Jin" label="Hui of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q32534" start="19191" end="19194" title="482" label="482"/>
<link wikidata="Q458643" start="19197" end="19217" title="Severinus of Noricum" label="Severinus of Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24754" start="19247" end="19250" title="871" label="871"/>
<link wikidata="Q922769" start="19253" end="19260" title="Bagsecg" label="Bagsecg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24369" start="19290" end="19293" title="926" label="926"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226130" start="19296" end="19302" title="Athelm" label="Athelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19445" start="19330" end="19334" title="1079" label="1079"/>
<link wikidata="Q353829" start="19337" end="19352" title="Adèle of France" label="Adèle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19511" start="19386" end="19390" title="1107" label="1107"/>
<link wikidata="Q332140" start="19393" end="19416" title="Edgar, King of Scotland" label="Edgar, King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19750" start="19428" end="19432" title="1198" label="1198"/>
<link wikidata="Q103437" start="19435" end="19448" title="Pope Celestine III" label="Celestine III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="19489" end="19493" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="19496" end="19502" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q963954" start="19544" end="19560" title="Scrovegni Chapel" label="Scrovegni Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140023" start="19565" end="19588" title="Giotto&amp;#x27;s Campanile" label="Giotto&amp;#x27;s Campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118" start="19600" end="19604" title="1354" label="1354"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066628" start="19607" end="19626" title="Charles de la Cerda" label="Charles de la Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276" start="19655" end="19659" title="1424" label="1424"/>
<link wikidata="Q12884727" start="19662" end="19678" title="Stephen Zaccaria" label="Stephen Zaccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517" start="19702" end="19706" title="1456" label="1456"/>
<link wikidata="Q203814" start="19709" end="19729" title="Lawrence Giustiniani" label="Lawrence Giustiniani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470" start="19767" end="19771" title="1538" label="1538"/>
<link wikidata="Q621453" start="19774" end="19794" title="Beatrice of Portugal, Duchess of Savoy" label="Beatrice of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595" start="19824" end="19828" title="1557" label="1557"/>
<link wikidata="Q64569" start="19831" end="19848" title="Albert Alcibiades, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach" label="Albert Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659" start="19894" end="19898" title="1570" label="1570"/>
<link wikidata="Q440053" start="19901" end="19925" title="Philibert de l&amp;#x27;Orme" label="Philibert de l&amp;#x27;Orme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032524" start="19971" end="19990" title="Château d&amp;#x27;Anet" label="Château d&amp;#x27;Anet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800" start="20002" end="20006" title="1598" label="1598"/>
<link wikidata="Q505918" start="20009" end="20044" title="John George, Elector of Brandenburg" label="John George, Elector of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912" start="20073" end="20077" title="1642" label="1642"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="20080" end="20095" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841" start="20170" end="20174" title="1707" label="1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931857" start="20177" end="20210" title="John Dalrymple, 1st Earl of Stair" label="John Dalrymple, 1st Earl of Stair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444326" start="20245" end="20272" title="Secretary of State, Scotland" label="Scottish Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="20284" end="20288" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q164475" start="20291" end="20308" title="Arcangelo Corelli" label="Arcangelo Corelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700" start="20352" end="20356" title="1775" label="1775"/>
<link wikidata="Q455265" start="20359" end="20375" title="John Baskerville" label="John Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772" start="20422" end="20426" title="1789" label="1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346464" start="20429" end="20443" title="Jack Broughton" label="Jack Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="20470" end="20474" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087" start="20477" end="20489" title="Justus Möser" label="Justus Möser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948" start="20527" end="20531" title="1815" label="1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293005" start="20534" end="20549" title="Edward Pakenham" label="Edward Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6997" start="20597" end="20601" title="1825" label="1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q280930" start="20604" end="20615" title="Eli Whitney" label="Eli Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="20662" end="20672" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670" start="20684" end="20688" title="1854" label="1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q332633" start="20691" end="20732" title="William Beresford, 1st Viscount Beresford" label="William Beresford, 1st Viscount Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544383" start="20772" end="20806" title="Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance" label="Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="20818" end="20822" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q405747" start="20825" end="20855" title="Aimé, duc de Clermont-Tonnerre" label="Aimé, duc de Clermont-Tonnerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215099" start="20888" end="20914" title="Minister of Defence (France)" label="French Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="20926" end="20930" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066666" start="20933" end="20970" title="Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg" label="Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="21018" end="21022" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q208003" start="21025" end="21041" title="Nikolay Nekrasov" label="Nikolay Nekrasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="21078" end="21082" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q299204" start="21085" end="21099" title="Emperor Norton" label="Emperor Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="21141" end="21145" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063078" start="21148" end="21163" title="Miska Magyarics" label="Miska Magyarics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="21199" end="21203" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q885094" start="21206" end="21229" title="William Rainey Marshall" label="William Rainey Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589682" start="21267" end="21288" title="Governor of Minnesota" label="Governor of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="21308" end="21321" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="21377" end="21381" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q638962" start="21384" end="21405" title="Simon Bolivar Buckner" label="Simon Bolivar Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151335" start="21433" end="21453" title="Governor of Kentucky" label="Governor of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="21465" end="21469" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300641" start="21472" end="21489" title="Rembrandt Bugatti" label="Rembrandt Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q346277" start="21527" end="21536" title="Ada Rehan" label="Ada Rehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="21572" end="21576" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365893" start="21579" end="21595" title="Ellis H. Roberts" label="Ellis H. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q369142" start="21638" end="21668" title="Treasurer of the United States" label="Treasurer of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="21680" end="21684" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704928" start="21687" end="21700" title="Josef Josephi" label="Josef Josephi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="21742" end="21746" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q167132" start="21749" end="21763" title="George Bellows" label="George Bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="21793" end="21797" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q212632" start="21800" end="21811" title="Andrei Bely" label="Andrei Bely"/>
<link wikidata="Q245802" start="21867" end="21885" title="Alexandre Stavisky" label="Alexandre Stavisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="21925" end="21929" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266817" start="21932" end="21946" title="Johnny Gruelle" label="Johnny Gruelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="21991" end="21995" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="21998" end="22041" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="22078" end="22092" title="Scouting" label="Scout movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853054" start="22112" end="22126" title="Vladimír Mandl" label="Vladimír Mandl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="22159" end="22163" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q334839" start="22166" end="22192" title="Joseph Franklin Rutherford" label="Joseph Franklin Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="22242" end="22246" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q503290" start="22249" end="22261" title="Andres Larka" label="Andres Larka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741249" start="22300" end="22324" title="Minister of Defence (Estonia)" label="Estonian Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="22336" end="22340" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299910" start="22343" end="22371" title="William Kissam Vanderbilt II" label="William Kissam Vanderbilt II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="22415" end="22419" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q124097" start="22422" end="22439" title="Karl Ernst Krafft" label="Karl Ernst Krafft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="22480" end="22484" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q155158" start="22487" end="22502" title="Kurt Schwitters" label="Kurt Schwitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="22551" end="22555" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="22558" end="22575" title="Joseph Schumpeter" label="Joseph Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="22626" end="22630" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q289010" start="22633" end="22646" title="Antonia Maury" label="Antonia Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="22698" end="22702" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634227" start="22705" end="22716" title="Hugh Binney" label="Hugh Binney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779581" start="22755" end="22775" title="Governor of Tasmania" label="Governor of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="22787" end="22791" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290386" start="22794" end="22808" title="Eduard Wiiralt" label="Eduard Wiiralt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="22861" end="22865" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q523888" start="22868" end="22879" title="Mary Colter" label="Mary Colter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062022" start="22914" end="22936" title="Desert View Watchtower" label="Desert View Watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="22948" end="22952" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432651" start="22955" end="22969" title="Schoolboy Rowe" label="Schoolboy Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="23017" end="23021" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q444567" start="23024" end="23032" title="Kay Sage" label="Kay Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="23062" end="23066" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q943463" start="23069" end="23083" title="Richard Tucker (tenor)" label="Richard Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="23120" end="23124" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="23127" end="23137" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="23175" end="23221" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="23233" end="23237" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q522162" start="23240" end="23252" title="John Mauchly" label="John Mauchly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="23297" end="23301" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551529" start="23304" end="23318" title="Grégoire Aslan" label="Grégoire Aslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="23368" end="23372" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q57268" start="23375" end="23391" title="Gerhard Barkhorn" label="Gerhard Barkhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="23429" end="23433" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q356517" start="23436" end="23451" title="Pierre Fournier" label="Pierre Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="23492" end="23496" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q567920" start="23499" end="23516" title="Bernard Krigstein" label="Bernard Krigstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q711129" start="23558" end="23570" title="Terry-Thomas" label="Terry-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="23610" end="23614" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q367617" start="23617" end="23628" title="Steve Clark" label="Steve Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="23681" end="23685" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451247" start="23688" end="23699" title="Pat Buttram" label="Pat Buttram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677252" start="23748" end="23761" title="Harvey Haddix" label="Harvey Haddix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="23809" end="23813" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395076" start="23816" end="23829" title="Metin Göktepe" label="Metin Göktepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="23886" end="23905" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="23944" end="23963" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="23975" end="23979" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q49347" start="23982" end="23995" title="Melvin Calvin" label="Melvin Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="24028" end="24039" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="24060" end="24064" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q356499" start="24067" end="24082" title="Michael Tippett" label="Michael Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="24126" end="24130" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975330" start="24133" end="24145" title="Hilary Smart" label="Hilary Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="24174" end="24178" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q83552" start="24181" end="24200" title="Alexander Prokhorov" label="Alexander Prokhorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="24245" end="24256" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017285" start="24285" end="24296" title="Dave Thomas (businessman)" label="Dave Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q550258" start="24347" end="24359" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="24371" end="24375" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737949" start="24378" end="24389" title="Ron Goodwin" label="Ron Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="24433" end="24437" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q333584" start="24440" end="24467" title="Tony Banks, Baron Stratford" label="Tony Banks, Baron Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865965" start="24512" end="24547" title="Minister for Sport and the Olympics" label="Minister for Sport and the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="24559" end="24563" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575186" start="24566" end="24576" title="Jane Bolin" label="Jane Bolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q336598" start="24623" end="24656" title="Arthur Cockfield, Baron Cockfield" label="Arthur Cockfield, Baron Cockfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="24689" end="24743" title="Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills" label="Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q286339" start="24763" end="24778" title="Yvonne De Carlo" label="Yvonne De Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q241830" start="24836" end="24848" title="David Ervine" label="David Ervine"/>
<link wikidata="Q445100" start="24908" end="24921" title="Iwao Takamoto" label="Iwao Takamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="24976" end="24980" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787527" start="24983" end="24995" title="George Moore (jockey)" label="George Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="25038" end="25042" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q687745" start="25045" end="25067" title="Lasantha Wickrematunge" label="Lasantha Wickrematunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="25102" end="25106" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q298537" start="25109" end="25119" title="Art Clokey" label="Art Clokey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="25188" end="25192" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q375208" start="25195" end="25210" title="Jiří Dienstbier" label="Jiří Dienstbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q675361" start="25263" end="25281" title="Thorbjørn Svenssen" label="Thorbjørn Svenssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="25315" end="25319" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q363286" start="25322" end="25336" title="Dave Alexander (blues musician)" label="Dave Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668340" start="25385" end="25398" title="T. J. Hamblin" label="T. J. Hamblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q712128" start="25454" end="25472" title="Alexis Weissenberg" label="Alexis Weissenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="25524" end="25528" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q122347" start="25531" end="25547" title="Kenojuak Ashevak" label="Kenojuak Ashevak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912556" start="25602" end="25616" title="Jeanne Manford" label="Jeanne Manford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706440" start="25661" end="25666" title="PFLAG" label="PFLAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812895" start="25686" end="25700" title="Alasdair Milne" label="Alasdair Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="25750" end="25754" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q446259" start="25757" end="25782" title="Irma Heijting-Schuhmacher" label="Irma Heijting-Schuhmacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614280" start="25828" end="25845" title="Antonino P. Roman" label="Antonino P. Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="25889" end="25893" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q493028" start="25896" end="25909" title="Andraé Crouch" label="Andraé Crouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20886" start="25979" end="25990" title="Kep Enderby" label="Kep Enderby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="26039" end="26069" title="Attorney-General for Australia" label="Attorney-General for Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148249" start="26089" end="26102" title="Patsy Garrett" label="Patsy Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="26143" end="26147" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q171572" start="26150" end="26174" title="Maria Teresa de Filippis" label="Maria Teresa de Filippis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543582" start="26217" end="26230" title="German Moreno" label="German Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="26304" end="26308" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q446635" start="26311" end="26324" title="Nicolai Gedda" label="Nicolai Gedda"/>
<link wikidata="Q362948" start="26368" end="26381" title="James Mancham" label="James Mancham"/>
<link wikidata="Q186111" start="26444" end="26468" title="Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani" label="Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350150" start="26509" end="26523" title="Peter Sarstedt" label="Peter Sarstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="26583" end="26587" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143349" start="26590" end="26600" title="Pat Dalton" label="Pat Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q999332" start="26643" end="26653" title="Buck Henry" label="Buck Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="26709" end="26713" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q104787172" start="26716" end="26730" title="Iancu Țucărman" label="Iancu Țucărman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="26771" end="26775" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q720768" start="26778" end="26790" title="Michael Lang (producer)" label="Michael Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="26842" end="26846" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984875" start="26849" end="26859" title="Adan Canto" label="Adan Canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792065" start="26915" end="26923" title="Babinden" label="Babinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="26925" end="26932" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="26934" end="26940" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="26953" end="26962" title="calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q322614" start="26966" end="26979" title="Abo of Tiflis" label="Abo of Tiflis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098296" start="26982" end="27002" title="Apollinaris Claudius" label="Apollinaris Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="27005" end="27012" title="Beatification" label="Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169452" start="27013" end="27027" title="Eurosia Fabris" label="Eurosia Fabris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372629" start="27030" end="27042" title="Gauchito Gil" label="Gauchito Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464420" start="27044" end="27060" title="Folk Catholicism" label="Folk Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q267660" start="27065" end="27071" title="Gudula" label="Gudula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664044" start="27074" end="27088" title="Harriet Bedell" label="Harriet Bedell"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="27090" end="27112" title="Episcopal Church (USA)" label="Episcopal Church (USA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q203814" start="27116" end="27136" title="Lawrence Giustiniani" label="Lawrence Giustiniani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262323" start="27139" end="27157" title="Lucian of Beauvais" label="Lucian of Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q4276099" start="27160" end="27176" title="Maximus of Pavia" label="Maximus of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110950" start="27179" end="27204" title="Our Lady of Prompt Succor" label="Our Lady of Prompt Succor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27206" end="27227" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798943" start="27231" end="27235" title="Pega" label="Pega"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="27237" end="27245" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27250" end="27264" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q458643" start="27277" end="27297" title="Severinus of Noricum" label="Severinus of Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664215" start="27300" end="27317" title="Thorfinn of Hamar" label="Thorfinn of Hamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155878" start="27320" end="27358" title="January 8 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="January 8 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="27378" end="27402" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401546" start="27427" end="27446" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Day (Thailand)" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="27536" end="27544" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861388" start="27547" end="27557" title="Typing Day" label="Typing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111813" start="27559" end="27583" title="International observance" label="International observance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15990" wikidata="Q2276" url="?curid=15990" title="January 23">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 393 – Roman emperor Theodosius I proclaims his eight-year-old son Honorius co-emperor. 
* 971 – Using crossbows, Song dynasty troops soundly defeat a war elephant corps of the Southern Han at Shao.
*1229 – The episcopal seat is moved from Nousiainen to Koroinen (located near the current centre of Turku) by the permission of Pope Gregory IX. The date is starting to be considered as the founding of Turku.
*1264 – In the conflict between King Henry III of England and his rebellious barons led by Simon de Montfort, King Louis IX of France issues the Mise of Amiens, a one-sided decision in favour of Henry that later leads to the Second Barons&#x27; War.
*1368 – Zhu Yuanzhang proclaims himself the Hongwu Emperor, beginning the Ming dynasty.
*1546 – Having published nothing for eleven years, François Rabelais publishes the &quot;Tiers Livre&quot;, his sequel to &quot;Gargantua and Pantagruel&quot;.
*1556 – The deadliest earthquake in history, the Shaanxi earthquake, hits Shaanxi province, China. The death toll may have been as high as 830,000.
*1565 – The Deccan Sultanates defeat Rama Raya of the Vijayanagara Empire at the Battle of Talikota, resulting in over 100,000 casualties and the destruction of the capital Vijayanagara. 
*1570 – James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray, regent for the infant King James VI of Scotland, is assassinated by firearm, the first recorded instance of such.
*1571 – The Royal Exchange opens in London.
*1579 – The Union of Utrecht forms a Protestant republic in the Netherlands.

===1601–1900===
*1656 – Blaise Pascal publishes the first of his &quot;Lettres provinciales&quot;.
*1719 – The Principality of Liechtenstein is created within the Holy Roman Empire.
*1755 – Moscow University is established (12 January 1755 O.S.).
*1789 – Georgetown College, the first Catholic university in the United States, is founded in Georgetown, Maryland (now a part of Washington, D.C.) when Bishop John Carroll, Rev. Robert Molyneux, and Rev. John Ashton purchase land for the proposed academy for the education of youth.
*1793 – Second Partition of Poland.
*1795 – After crossing the frozen Zuiderzee, the French cavalry captured 14 Dutch ships and 850 guns, in a rare occurrence of surrender of naval vessels to land forces.
*1846 – Slavery in Tunisia is abolished.
*1849 – Elizabeth Blackwell is awarded her M.D. by the Geneva Medical College of Geneva, New York, becoming the United States&#x27; first female doctor.
*1870 – In Montana, U.S. cavalrymen kill 173 Native Americans, mostly women and children, in what becomes known as the Marias Massacre.
*1879 – Anglo-Zulu War: The Battle of Rorke&#x27;s Drift ends.
*1899 – The Malolos Constitution is inaugurated, establishing the First Philippine Republic. Emilio Aguinaldo is sworn in as its first president.
*1900 – Second Boer War: The Battle of Spion Kop between the forces of the South African Republic and the Orange Free State and British forces ends in a British defeat.

===1901–present===
*1904 – Ålesund Fire: The Norwegian coastal town Ålesund is devastated by fire, leaving 10,000 people homeless and one person dead. Kaiser Wilhelm II funds the rebuilding of the town in Jugendstil style.
*1909 – , a passenger ship of the White Star Line, becomes the first ship to use the CQD distress signal after colliding with another ship, the SS &quot;Florida&quot;, off the Massachusetts coastline, an event that kills six people. The &quot;Republic&quot; sinks the next day.
*1912 – The International Opium Convention is signed at The Hague.
*1919 – The First Regional Congress of Peasants, Workers and Insurgents is held by the Makhnovshchina at Velykomykhailivka.
*1920 – The Netherlands refuses to surrender the exiled Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany to the Allies.
*1937 – The trial of the anti-Soviet Trotskyist center sees seventeen mid-level Communists accused of sympathizing with Leon Trotsky and plotting to overthrow Joseph Stalin&#x27;s regime.
*1941 – Charles Lindbergh testifies before the U.S. Congress and recommends that the United States negotiate a neutrality pact with Adolf Hitler.
*1942 – World War II: The Battle of Rabaul commences Japan&#x27;s invasion of Australia&#x27;s Territory of New Guinea.
*1943 – World War II: Troops of the British Eighth Army capture Tripoli in Libya from the German–Italian Panzer Army.
*1945 – World War II: German admiral Karl Dönitz launches Operation Hannibal.
*1950 – The Knesset resolves that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel.
*1957 – American inventor Walter Frederick Morrison sells the rights to his flying disc to the Wham-O toy company, which later renames it the &quot;Frisbee&quot;.
*1958 – After a general uprising and rioting in the streets, President Marcos Pérez Jiménez leaves Venezuela.
*1960 – The bathyscaphe USS &quot;Trieste&quot; breaks a depth record by descending to in the Pacific Ocean.
*1963 – The Guinea-Bissau War of Independence officially begins when PAIGC guerrilla fighters attack the Portuguese Army stationed in Tite.
*1964 – The 24th Amendment to the United States Constitution, prohibiting the use of poll taxes in national elections, is ratified.
*1967 – Diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and Ivory Coast are established.
* 1967 – Milton Keynes (England) is founded as a new town by Order in Council, with a planning brief to become a city of 250,000 people. Its initial designated area enclosed three existing towns and twenty-one villages. The area to be developed was largely farmland, with evidence of continuous settlement dating back to the Bronze Age.
*1968 – USS &quot;Pueblo&quot; (AGER-2) is attacked and seized by the Korean People&#x27;s Navy. 
*1982 – World Airways Flight 30 overshoots the runway at Logan International Airport in Boston, Massachusetts, and crashes into Boston Harbor. Two people are missing and presumed dead.
*1986 – The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducts its first members: Little Richard, Chuck Berry, James Brown, Ray Charles, Sam Cooke, Fats Domino, The Everly Brothers, Buddy Holly, Jerry Lee Lewis and Elvis Presley.
*1987 – Mohammed Said Hersi Morgan sends a &quot;letter of death&quot; to Somali President Siad Barre, proposing the genocide of the Isaaq people.
*1997 – Madeleine Albright becomes the first woman to serve as United States Secretary of State.
*1998 – Netscape announces Mozilla, with the intention to release Communicator code as open source.
*2001 – Five people attempt to set themselves on fire in Beijing&#x27;s Tiananmen Square, an act that many people later claim is staged by the Chinese Communist Party to frame Falun Gong and thus escalate their persecution.
*2002 – U.S. journalist Daniel Pearl is kidnapped in Karachi, Pakistan and subsequently murdered.
*2003 – A very weak signal from Pioneer 10 is detected for the last time, but no usable data can be extracted.
*2018 – A 7.9 earthquake occurs in the Gulf of Alaska. It is tied as the sixth-largest earthquake ever recorded in the United States, but there are no reports of significant damage or fatalities.
* 2018 – A double car bombing in Benghazi, Libya, kills at least 33 people and wounds &quot;dozens&quot; of others. The victims include both military personnel and civilians, according to local officials.
* 2018 – The China–United States trade war begins when President Donald Trump places tariffs on Chinese solar panels and washing machines.
*2022 – Mutinying Burkinabè soldiers led by Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba depose and detain President Roch Marc Christian Kaboré amid widespread anti-government protests.
*2024 – Northwestern Air Flight 738 crashes after takeoff from Fort Smith Airport, Northwest Territories, Canada, killing six people.

==Births==

===Pre-1600===
*1350 – Vincent Ferrer, Spanish missionary and saint (d. 1419)
*1378 – Louis III, Elector Palatine (d. 1436)
*1514 – Hai Rui, Chinese politician (d. 1587)
*1585 – Mary Ward, English Catholic Religious Sister (d. 1645)

===1601–1900===
*1622 – Abraham Diepraam, Dutch painter (d. 1670)
*1719 – John Landen, English mathematician and theorist (d. 1790)
*1737 – John Hancock, American general and politician, first Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1793)
*1745 – William Jessop, English engineer, built the Cromford Canal (d. 1814)
*1752 – Muzio Clementi, Italian pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 1832)
*1780 – Georgios Karaiskakis, Greek general (d. 1827)
*1783 – Stendhal, French novelist (d. 1842)
*1786 – Auguste de Montferrand, French-Russian architect, designed Saint Isaac&#x27;s Cathedral and Alexander Column (d. 1858)
*1799 – Alois Negrelli, Tyrolean engineer and railroad pioneer active in the Austrian Empire (d. 1858) 
*1809 – Surendra Sai, Indian activist (d. 1884)
*1813 – Camilla Collett, Norwegian novelist and activist (d. 1895)
*1828 – Saigō Takamori, Japanese samurai (d. 1877)
*1832 – Édouard Manet, French painter (d. 1883)
*1833 – Muthu Coomaraswamy, Sri Lankan lawyer and politician (d. 1879)
*1838 – Marianne Cope, German-American nun and saint (d. 1918)
*1840 – Ernst Abbe, German physicist and engineer (d. 1905)
*1846 – Nikolay Umov, Russian physicist and mathematician (d. 1915)
*1853 – John Marks Moore, American politician (d. 1902)
*1855 – John Browning, American weapons designer, founded the Browning Arms Company (d. 1926)
*1857 – Andrija Mohorovičić, Croatian meteorologist and seismologist (d. 1936)
*1862 – David Hilbert, German mathematician and academic (d. 1943)
* 1862 – Frank Shuman, American inventor and engineer (d. 1918)
*1872 – Paul Langevin, French physicist and academic (d. 1946)
* 1872 – Jože Plečnik, Slovenian architect, designed Plečnik Parliament (d. 1957)
*1876 – Otto Diels, German chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1954)
*1878 – Rutland Boughton, English composer (d. 1960)
*1880 – Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama, Mexican politician (d. 1967)
*1889 – Claribel Kendall, American mathematician (d. 1965)
*1894 – Jyotirmoyee Devi, Indian author (d. 1988)
*1896 – Alf Blair, Australian rugby league player and coach (d. 1944)
* 1896 – Alf Hall, English-South African cricketer (d. 1964)
*1897 – Subhas Chandra Bose, Indian freedom fighter and politician (d. 1945)
* 1897 – Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky, Austrian architect (d. 2000)
* 1897 – Ieva Simonaitytė, Lithuanian author (d. 1978)
* 1897 – William Stephenson, Canadian captain and spy (d. 1989)
*1898 – Georg Kulenkampff, German violinist (d. 1948)
* 1898 – Randolph Scott, American actor (d. 1987)
* 1898 – Freda Utley, English scholar and author (d. 1978)
*1899 – Glen Kidston, English racing driver and pilot (d. 1931)
*1900 – William Ifor Jones, Welsh organist and conductor (d. 1988)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Arthur Wirtz, American businessman (d. 1983)
*1903 – Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, Colombian lawyer and politician, 16th Minister of National Education of Colombia (d. 1948)
*1905 – Erich Borchmeyer, German sprinter (d. 2000)
*1907 – Dan Duryea, American actor and singer (d. 1968)
* 1907 – Hideki Yukawa, Japanese physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1981)
*1910 – Django Reinhardt, Belgian guitarist and composer (d. 1953)
*1912 – Boris Pokrovsky, Russian director and manager (d. 2009)
*1913 – Jean-Michel Atlan, Algerian-French painter (d. 1960)
* 1913 – Wally Parks, American businessman, founded the National Hot Rod Association (d. 2007)
*1915 – Herma Bauma, Austrian javelin thrower and handball player (d. 2003)
* 1915 – W. Arthur Lewis, Saint Lucian-Barbadian economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1991)
* 1915 – Potter Stewart, American lawyer and judge (d. 1985)
*1916 – David Douglas Duncan, American photographer and journalist (d. 2018)
* 1916 – Airey Neave, English colonel, lawyer, and politician, Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (d. 1979)
*1918 – Gertrude B. Elion, American biochemist and pharmacologist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1999)
*1918 – Charlie Kerins, Executed Irish Republican (d. 1944)
* 1918 – Florence Rush, American social worker and theorist (d. 2008)
*1919 – Frances Bay, Canadian-American actress (d. 2011)
* 1919 – Hans Hass, Austrian biologist and diver (d. 2013)
* 1919 – Ernie Kovacs, American actor and game show host (d. 1962)
* 1919 – Bob Paisley, English footballer and manager (d. 1996)
*1920 – Gottfried Böhm, German architect (d. 2021)
* 1920 – Henry Eriksson, Swedish runner (d. 2000)
* 1920 – Walter Frederick Morrison, American businessman, invented the Frisbee (d. 2010)
*1922 – Leon Golub, American painter and academic (d. 2004)
* 1922 – Tom Lewis, Australian politician, 33rd Premier of New South Wales (d. 2016)
*1923 – Horace Ashenfelter, American runner (d. 2018)
* 1923 – Walter M. Miller, Jr., American soldier and author (d. 1996)
*1924 – Frank Lautenberg, American soldier, businessman, and politician (d. 2013)
*1925 – Marty Paich, American pianist, composer, producer, and conductor (d. 1995)
*1926 – Bal Thackeray, Indian journalist, cartoonist, and politician (d. 2012)
*1927 – Lars-Eric Lindblad, Swedish-American businessman and explorer (d. 1994)
* 1927 – Fred Williams, Australian painter (d. 1982)
*1928 – Jeanne Moreau, French actress (d. 2017)
*1929 – Myron Cope, American journalist and sportscaster (d. 2008)
* 1929 – Filaret Denysenko, Ukrainian religious leader, Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate
* 1929 – Phillip Knightley, Australian journalist, author, and critic (d. 2016)
* 1929 – John Polanyi, German-Canadian chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
*1930 – Tanya Savicheva, Russian child diarist (d. 1944)
*1930 – Mervyn Rose, Australian tennis player (d. 2017)
* 1930 – Derek Walcott, Saint Lucian poet and playwright, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2017)
* 1930 – Teresa Żylis-Gara, Polish operatic soprano (d. 2021)
*1932 – George Allen, English footballer (d. 2016)
* 1932 – Larri Thomas, American actress and dancer (d. 2013)
*1933 – Bill Hayden, Australian politician, 21st Governor General of Australia (d. 2023)
* 1933 – Chita Rivera, American actress, singer, and dancer (d. 2024)
*1934 – Lou Antonio, American actor and director
* 1934 – Pierre Bourgault, Canadian journalist and politician (d. 2003)
*1935 – Mike Agostini, Trinidadian sprinter (d. 2016)
* 1935 – Tom Reamy, American author (d. 1977)
*1936 – Jerry Kramer, American football player and sportscaster
* 1936 – Cécile Ousset, French pianist
*1938 – Giant Baba, Japanese wrestler and promoter, founded All Japan Pro Wrestling (d. 1999)
* 1938 – Georg Baselitz, German painter and sculptor
*1939 – Ed Roberts, American activist (d. 1995)
*1940 – Alan Cheuse, American writer and critic (d. 2015)
* 1940 – Joe Dowell, American singer (d. 2016)
*1941 – Jock R. Anderson, Australian economist and academic
* 1941 – João Ubaldo Ribeiro, Brazilian journalist, author, and academic (d. 2014)
*1942 – Laurie Mayne, Australian cricketer
*1942 – Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat, Mongolian politician, 1st President of Mongolia (d. 2025)
* 1942 – Herman Tjeenk Willink, Dutch judge and politician
*1943 – Gary Burton, American musician
* 1943 – Gil Gerard, American actor
* 1943 – Özhan Canaydın, Turkish basketball player and businessman (d. 2010)
*1944 – Rutger Hauer, Dutch actor, director, and producer (d. 2019)
*1945 – Mike Harris, Canadian politician, 22nd Premier of Ontario
*1946 – Arnoldo Alemán, Nicaraguan lawyer and politician, President of Nicaragua
* 1946 – Boris Berezovsky, Russian-English businessman and mathematician (d. 2013)
* 1946 – Marie Charlotte Fayanga, Central African politician and diplomat (d. 2021)
*1947 – Tom Carper, American captain and politician, 71st Governor of Delaware
* 1947 – Megawati Sukarnoputri, Indonesian politician, President of Indonesia
*1948 – Anita Pointer, American singer-songwriter (d. 2022)
*1949 – Charlie Papazian, American nuclear engineer, brewer and author.
*1950 – Richard Dean Anderson, American actor, producer, and composer
* 1950 – Guida Maria, Portuguese actress (d. 2018)
* 1950 – Suzanne Scotchmer, American economist and academic (d. 2014)
* 1950 – Luis Alberto Spinetta, Argentinian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and poet (d. 2012)
*1951 – Chesley Sullenberger, American airline pilot and safety expert
*1952 – Omar Henry, South African cricketer
* 1952 – Jaroslav Pouzar, Czech ice hockey player
*1953 – John Luther Adams, American composer
* 1953 – Alister McGrath, Irish priest, historian, and theologian
* 1953 – Antonio Villaraigosa, American politician, 41st Mayor of Los Angeles
* 1953 – Robin Zander, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1954 – Trevor Hohns, Australian cricketer
*1957 – Caroline, Princess of Hanover
*1958 – Sergey Litvinov, Russian hammer thrower (d. 2018)
*1959 – Clive Bull, English radio host
*1960 – Greg Ritchie, Australian cricketer
*1961 – Peter Mackenzie, American actor
* 1961 – Yelena Sinchukova, Russian long jumper
*1962 – David Arnold, English composer
* 1962 – Aivar Lillevere, Estonian footballer and coach
* 1962 – Elvira Lindo, Spanish journalist and author
* 1962 – Boris McGiver, American actor
*1963 – Gail O&#x27;Grady, American actress
*1964 – Jonatha Brooke, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1964 – Mariska Hargitay, American actress and producer
* 1964 – Bharrat Jagdeo, Guyanese economist and politician, 7th President of Guyana
*1965 – Louie Clemente, American drummer 
*1966 – Damien Hardman, Australian surfer
* 1966 – Haywoode Workman, American basketball player and referee
*1967 – Owen Cunningham, Australian rugby league player
*1968 – Taro Hakase, Japanese violinist and composer
* 1968 – Petr Korda, Czech-Monégasque tennis player
*1969 – Andrei Kanchelskis, Ukrainian-Russian footballer and manager
* 1969 – Brendan Shanahan, Canadian ice hockey player and actor
* 1969 – Susen Tiedtke, German long jumper
*1970 – Richard Šmehlík, Czech ice hockey player
* 1970 – Spyridon Vasdekis, Greek long jumper
*1971 – Kevin Mawae, American football player and coach
* 1971 – Adam Parore, New Zealand cricketer and mountaineer
* 1971 – Claire Rankin, Canadian actress
*1972 – Ewen Bremner, Scottish actor 
*1973 – Tomas Holmström, Swedish ice hockey player
*1974 – Glen Chapple, English cricketer
* 1974 – Rebekah Elmaloglou, Australian actress 
* 1974 – Richard T. Slone, English painter
* 1974 – Tiffani Thiessen, American actress
*1975 – Phil Dawson, American football player
* 1975 – Tito Ortiz, American mixed martial artist
*1976 – Brandon Duckworth, American baseball player and scout
* 1976 – Anne Margrethe Hausken, Norwegian orienteering competitor
* 1976 – Alex Shaffer, American skier
*1979 – Scott Hannan, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1979 – Larry Hughes, American basketball player
* 1979 – Dawn O&#x27;Porter, Scottish-English fashion designer and journalist
* 1979 – Juan Rincón, Venezuelan baseball player and coach
* 1979 – Maria Stepanova, Russian basketball player
*1981 – Rob Friend, Canadian soccer player
* 1981 – Julia Jones, American actress
*1982 – Oceana Mahlmann, German singer and songwriter
* 1982 – Wily Mo Peña, Dominican baseball player
* 1982 – Andrew Rock, American sprinter
*1983 – Irving Saladino, Panamanian long jumper
*1984 – Arjen Robben, Dutch footballer
*1985 – San E, South Korean rapper
* 1985 – Dong Fangzhuo, Chinese footballer
* 1985 – Doutzen Kroes, Dutch model and actress
* 1985 – Yevgeny Lukyanenko, Russian pole vaulter
* 1985 – Aselefech Mergia, Ethiopian runner
* 1985 – Jeff Samardzija, American baseball and football player
*1986 – Gelete Burka, Ethiopian runner
* 1986 – Marc Laird, Scottish footballer
* 1986 – José Enrique, Spanish footballer
* 1986 – Steven Taylor, English footballer
* 1986 – Sandro Viletta, Swiss skier
*1987 – Leo Komarov, Estonian-Finnish ice hockey player
*1990 – Alex Silva, Canadian wrestler
*1991 – Steve Birnbaum, American soccer player
*1992 – Reina Triendl, Japanese model and actress
*1994 – Addison Russell, American baseball player
*1996 – Keita Bates-Diop, American basketball player
*1996 – Ruben Loftus-Cheek, English footballer
*1998 – XXXTentacion, American rapper (d. 2018)
*1999 – Alban Lafont, French footballer
*2001 – Olga Danilović, Serbian tennis player
*2002 – Joško Gvardiol, Croatian footballer
* 2002 – Nicola Zalewski, Polish footballer
*2004 – Julio Enciso, Paraguayan footballer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 667 – Ildefonsus, bishop of Toledo
* 989 – Adalbero, archbishop of Reims
*1002 – Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor (b. 980)
*1199 – Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur, Moroccan caliph (b. 1160)
*1252 – Isabella, Queen of Armenia
*1297 – Florent of Hainaut, Prince of Achaea (b. c. 1255)
*1423 – Margaret of Bavaria, Burgundian regent (b. 1363)
*1516 – Ferdinand II of Aragon (b. 1452)
*1548 – Bernardo Pisano, Italian priest, scholar, and composer (b. 1490)
*1549 – Johannes Honter, Romanian-Hungarian cartographer and theologian (b. 1498)
*1567 – Jiajing Emperor of China (b. 1507)
*1570 – James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray, Scottish politician (b. 1531)

===1601–1900===
*1620 – John Croke, English politician and judge (b. 1553)
*1622 – William Baffin, English explorer and navigator (b. 1584)
*1650 – Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke (b. 1584)
*1744 – Giambattista Vico, Italian historian and philosopher (b. 1668)
*1785 – Matthew Stewart, Scottish mathematician and academic (b. 1717)
*1789 – Frances Brooke, English author and playwright (b. 1724)
* 1789 – John Cleland, English author (b. 1709)
*1800 – Edward Rutledge, American captain and politician, 39th Governor of South Carolina (b. 1749)
*1803 – Arthur Guinness, Irish brewer, founded Guinness (b. 1725)
*1805 – Claude Chappe, French engineer (b. 1763)
*1806 – William Pitt the Younger, English politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1759)
*1810 – Johann Wilhelm Ritter, German chemist and physicist (b. 1776)
*1812 – Robert Craufurd, Scottish general and politician (b. 1764)
*1820 – Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn (b. 1767)
*1833 – Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth, English admiral and politician (b. 1757)
*1837 – John Field, Irish pianist and composer (b. 1782)
*1866 – Thomas Love Peacock, English author and poet (b. 1785)
*1875 – Charles Kingsley, English priest and author (b. 1819)
*1883 – Gustave Doré, French engraver and illustrator (b. 1832)
*1893 – Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar II, American lawyer and politician, 16th United States Secretary of the Interior (b. 1825)
* 1893 – William Price, Welsh physician, Chartist, and neo-Druid (b. 1800)
* 1893 – José Zorrilla, Spanish poet and playwright (b. 1817)

===1901–present===
*1921 – Mykola Leontovych, Ukrainian composer and conductor (b. 1877)
*1922 – René Beeh, Alsatian painter and draughtsman (b. 1886)
* 1922 – Arthur Nikisch, Hungarian conductor and academic (b. 1855)
*1923 – Max Nordau, Austrian physician and author (b. 1849)
*1931 – Anna Pavlova, Russian-English ballerina (b. 1881)
*1937 – Orso Mario Corbino, Italian physicist and politician (b. 1876)
*1939 – Matthias Sindelar, Austrian footballer and manager (b. 1903)
*1943 – Alexander Woollcott, American actor, playwright, and critic (b. 1887)
*1944 – Edvard Munch, Norwegian painter and illustrator (b. 1863)
*1947 – Pierre Bonnard, French painter (b. 1867)
*1956 – Alexander Korda, Hungarian-English director and producer (b. 1893)
*1963 – Józef Gosławski, Polish sculptor (b. 1908)
*1966 – T. M. Sabaratnam, Sri Lankan lawyer and politician (b. 1895)
*1971 – Fritz Feigl, Austrian-Brazilian chemist and academic (b. 1871)
*1973 – Alexander Onassis, American-Greek businessman (b. 1948)
* 1973 – Kid Ory, American trombonist, composer, and bandleader (b. 1886)
*1976 – Paul Robeson, American actor, singer, and activist (b. 1898)
*1977 – Toots Shor, American businessman, founded Toots Shor&#x27;s Restaurant (b. 1903)
*1978 – Terry Kath, American guitarist and songwriter (b. 1946)
* 1978 – Jack Oakie, American actor (b. 1903)
*1980 – Giovanni Michelotti, Italian engineer (b. 1921)
*1981 – Samuel Barber, American pianist and composer (b. 1910)
*1983 – Fred Bakewell, English cricketer and coach (b. 1908)
*1984 – Muin Bseiso, Palestinian-Egyptian poet and critic (b. 1926)
*1985 – James Beard, American chef and cookbook author for whom the James Beard Foundation Awards are named (b. 1905)
*1986 – Joseph Beuys, German sculptor and painter (b. 1921)
*1988 – Charles Glen King, American biochemist and academic (b. 1896)
*1989 – Salvador Dalí, Spanish painter and sculptor (b. 1904)
* 1989 – Lars-Erik Torph, Swedish race car driver (b. 1961)
*1990 – Allen Collins, American guitarist and songwriter (b. 1952)
*1991 – Northrop Frye, Canadian author and critic (b. 1912)
*1992 – Freddie Bartholomew, American actor (b. 1924)
*1993 – Keith Laumer, American soldier, author, and diplomat (b. 1925)
*1994 – Nikolai Ogarkov, Russian field marshal (b. 1917)
* 1994 – Brian Redhead, English journalist and author (b. 1929)
*1999 – Joe D&#x27;Amato, Italian director and cinematographer (b. 1936)
* 1999 – Jay Pritzker, American businessman, co-founded the Hyatt Corporation (b. 1922)
*2002 – Paul Aars, American race car driver (b. 1934)
* 2002 – Pierre Bourdieu, French sociologist, anthropologist, and philosopher (b. 1930)
* 2002 – Robert Nozick, American philosopher, author, and academic (b. 1938)
*2003 – Nell Carter, American actress and singer (b. 1948)
*2004 – Bob Keeshan, American television personality and producer (b. 1927)
* 2004 – Helmut Newton, German-Australian photographer (b. 1920)
*2005 – Morys Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare, English lieutenant and politician (b. 1921)
* 2005 – Johnny Carson, American talk show host, television personality, and producer (b. 1925)
*2007 – Syed Hussein Alatas, Malaysian sociologist and politician (b. 1928)
* 2007 – E. Howard Hunt, American CIA officer (b. 1918)
* 2007 – Ryszard Kapuściński, Polish journalist and author (b. 1932)
*2009 – Robert W. Scott, American farmer and politician, 67th Governor of North Carolina (b. 1929)
*2010 – Kermit Tyler, American colonel and pilot (b. 1913)
* 2010 – Earl Wild, American pianist and composer (b. 1915)
*2011 – Jack LaLanne, American fitness instructor, author, and television host (b. 1914)
*2012 – Wesley E. Brown, American lawyer and jurist (b. 1907)
* 2012 – Maurice Meisner, American historian, author, and academic (b. 1931)
* 2012 – Bingham Ray, American businessman, co-founded October Films (b. 1954)
*2013 – Józef Glemp, Polish cardinal (b. 1929)
* 2013 – Peter van der Merwe, South African cricketer and referee (b. 1937)
* 2013 – Jean-Félix-Albert-Marie Vilnet, French bishop (b. 1922)
*2014 – Yuri Izrael, Russian meteorologist and journalist (b. 1930)
* 2014 – Riz Ortolani, Italian composer and conductor (b. 1926)
*2015 – Ernie Banks, American baseball player and coach (b. 1931)
* 2015 – Prosper Ego, Dutch activist, founded the Oud-Strijders Legioen (b. 1927)
* 2015 – Abdullah of Saudi Arabia (b. 1924)
*2016 – Jimmy Bain, Scottish bassist (b. 1947)
* 2016 – Bobby Wanzer, American basketball player and coach (b. 1921)
*2017 – Bobby Freeman, American singer, songwriter and record producer (b. 1940)
* 2017 – Gorden Kaye, English actor (b. 1941)
*2018 – Hugh Masekela, South African trumpeter, composer and singer (b. 1939) 
* 2018 – Nicanor Parra, Chilean poet (b. 1914)
* 2018 – Wyatt Tee Walker, American civil rights activist and pastor (b. 1928)
*2019 – Aloysius Pang, Singaporean actor (b. 1990)
* 2019 – Oliver Mtukudzi, Zimbabwean Afro Jazz musician (b. 1952)
*2021 – Hal Holbrook, American actor and director (b. 1925)
* 2021 – Larry King, American journalist and talk show host (b. 1933)
* 2021 – Song Yoo-jung, South Korean actress and model (b. 1994)
*2024 – Charles Osgood, American radio and television commentator, writer and musician (b. 1933)

*2024 – Melanie Safka, American Emmy winning singer-songwriter (b. 1947)

==Holidays and observances==
*Bounty Day (Pitcairn Islands)
*Christian feast day:
**Abakuh
**Marianne of Molokai
**Emerentiana
**Espousals of the Blessed Virgin Mary
**Ildefonsus of Toledo
**Phillips Brooks (Episcopal Church (USA))
**January 23 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose&#x27;s Jayanti (Assam, Orissa, Tripura, and West Bengal, India)
*World Freedom Day (Taiwan and South Korea)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on January 23</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48123" start="28" end="31" title="393" label="393"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="34" end="47" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="48" end="60" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="94" end="102" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23717" start="118" end="121" title="971" label="971"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="130" end="138" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="141" end="153" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="175" title="History of the Song dynasty#Founding of the Song" label="defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="178" end="190" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198071" start="204" end="216" title="Southern Han" label="Southern Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411" start="227" end="231" title="1229" label="1229"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017104" start="267" end="277" title="Nousiainen" label="Nousiainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017115" start="281" end="289" title="Koroinen" label="Koroinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="326" end="331" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="354" end="369" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514" start="436" end="440" title="1264" label="1264"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="472" end="492" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="526" end="543" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="550" end="568" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285054" start="580" end="594" title="Mise of Amiens" label="Mise of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q657967" start="660" end="683" title="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207" start="686" end="690" title="1368" label="1368"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="693" end="706" title="Zhu Yuanzhang" label="Zhu Yuanzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="729" end="743" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="759" end="771" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533" start="774" end="778" title="1546" label="1546"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="824" end="841" title="François Rabelais" label="François Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q822290" start="901" end="925" title="Gargantua and Pantagruel" label="Gargantua and Pantagruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590" start="934" end="938" title="1556" label="1556"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="955" end="965" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q191293" start="982" end="1000" title="1556 Shaanxi earthquake" label="Shaanxi earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="1007" end="1014" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634" start="1082" end="1086" title="1565" label="1565"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183649" start="1093" end="1110" title="Deccan Sultanates" label="Deccan Sultanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q592872" start="1118" end="1127" title="Rama Raya" label="Rama Raya"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="1135" end="1154" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362188" start="1162" end="1180" title="Battle of Talikota" label="Battle of Talikota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611788" start="1254" end="1266" title="Vijayanagara" label="Vijayanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659" start="1270" end="1274" title="1570" label="1570"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="1277" end="1309" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1311" end="1317" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1338" end="1358" title="James VI of Scotland" label="James VI of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666" start="1426" end="1430" title="1571" label="1571"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="1437" end="1451" title="Royal Exchange, London" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709" start="1470" end="1474" title="1579" label="1579"/>
<link wikidata="Q216165" start="1481" end="1497" title="Union of Utrecht" label="Union of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1506" end="1516" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982" start="1564" end="1568" title="1656" label="1656"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="1571" end="1584" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279437" start="1618" end="1638" title="Lettres provinciales" label="Lettres provinciales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902" start="1647" end="1651" title="1719" label="1719"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="1658" end="1670" title="Principality" label="Principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="1674" end="1687" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1710" end="1727" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627" start="1730" end="1734" title="1755" label="1755"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="1737" end="1754" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="1787" end="1791" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="O.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7772" start="1795" end="1799" title="1789" label="1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="1802" end="1820" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown College"/>
<link wikidata="Q557206" start="1832" end="1851" title="Catholic university" label="Catholic university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="1888" end="1908" title="Georgetown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Georgetown, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39459" start="1954" end="1966" title="John Carroll (archbishop of Baltimore)" label="John Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347743" start="1973" end="1988" title="Robert Molyneux" label="Robert Molyneux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="2079" end="2083" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="2086" end="2112" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815" start="2115" end="2119" title="1795" label="1795"/>
<link wikidata="Q228655" start="2148" end="2157" title="Zuiderzee" label="Zuiderzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q183447" start="2178" end="2214" title="Capture of the Dutch fleet at Den Helder" label="captured 14 Dutch ships and 850 guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640" start="2284" end="2288" title="1846" label="1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057917" start="2291" end="2309" title="Slavery in Tunisia" label="Slavery in Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="2325" end="2329" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q234572" start="2332" end="2351" title="Elizabeth Blackwell" label="Elizabeth Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533018" start="2379" end="2401" title="Geneva Medical College" label="Geneva Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378284" start="2405" end="2421" title="Geneva, New York" label="Geneva, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="2478" end="2482" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="2488" end="2495" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2522" end="2538" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120018" start="2596" end="2611" title="Marias Massacre" label="Marias Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="2614" end="2618" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="2621" end="2635" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="Anglo-Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123353" start="2641" end="2669" title="Battle of Rorke&amp;#x27;s Drift" label="Battle of Rorke&amp;#x27;s Drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="2677" end="2681" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549010" start="2688" end="2708" title="Malolos Constitution" label="Malolos Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="2742" end="2767" title="First Philippine Republic" label="First Philippine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="2769" end="2785" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q269860" start="2805" end="2810" title="List of presidents of the Philippines" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="2811" end="2820" title="President of the Philippines" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="2823" end="2827" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="2830" end="2845" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072592" start="2851" end="2870" title="Battle of Spion Kop" label="Battle of Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="2897" end="2919" title="South African Republic" label="South African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="2928" end="2945" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="3012" end="3016" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149826" start="3019" end="3031" title="Ålesund Fire" label="Ålesund Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q62266" start="3060" end="3067" title="Ålesund" label="Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q138340" start="3143" end="3149" title="Kaiser" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="3150" end="3160" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="3197" end="3207" title="Art Nouveau" label="Jugendstil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="3216" end="3220" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q320466" start="3249" end="3264" title="White Star Line" label="White Star Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163144" start="3300" end="3303" title="CQD" label="CQD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417640" start="3359" end="3381" title="SS Florida (1905)" label="SS &amp;quot;Florida&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="3494" end="3498" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q751398" start="3505" end="3535" title="International Opium Convention" label="International Opium Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="3549" end="3558" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="3561" end="3565" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3572" end="3631" title="Regional Congress of Peasants, Workers and Insurgents#First Congress (January 1919)" label="First Regional Congress of Peasants, Workers and Insurgents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436243" start="3647" end="3661" title="Makhnovshchina" label="Makhnovshchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106756" start="3665" end="3682" title="Velykomykhailivka" label="Velykomykhailivka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="3685" end="3689" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="3740" end="3757" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="3776" end="3782" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="3785" end="3789" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q117320" start="3796" end="3838" title="Moscow Trials" label="trial of the anti-Soviet Trotskyist center"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="3904" end="3916" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="3943" end="3956" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="3973" end="3977" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="3980" end="3997" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4019" end="4032" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412901" start="4083" end="4098" title="neutrality pact" label="neutrality pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4104" end="4116" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="4119" end="4123" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4126" end="4138" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572785" start="4144" end="4160" title="Battle of Rabaul (1942)" label="Battle of Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="4184" end="4192" title="New Guinea campaign" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443945" start="4213" end="4236" title="Territory of New Guinea" label="Territory of New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="4239" end="4243" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="4282" end="4293" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="4302" end="4309" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="4313" end="4318" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q175346" start="4328" end="4354" title="German–Italian Panzer Army" label="German–Italian Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="4357" end="4361" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="4393" end="4404" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Karl Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q695666" start="4414" end="4432" title="Operation Hannibal" label="Operation Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="4435" end="4439" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="4446" end="4453" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="4468" end="4477" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="4505" end="4509" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q522207" start="4530" end="4555" title="Walter Frederick Morrison" label="Walter Frederick Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q131689" start="4580" end="4591" title="Frisbee" label="flying disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929348" start="4599" end="4605" title="Wham-O" label="Wham-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="4668" end="4672" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798246" start="4683" end="4726" title="1958 Venezuelan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="general uprising and rioting in the streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942698" start="4728" end="4737" title="President of Venezuela" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q459118" start="4738" end="4758" title="Marcos Pérez Jiménez" label="Marcos Pérez Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="4766" end="4775" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="4778" end="4782" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q208532" start="4789" end="4800" title="bathyscaphe" label="bathyscaphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q850157" start="4801" end="4824" title="Bathyscaphe Trieste" label="USS &amp;quot;Trieste&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="4887" end="4891" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609193" start="4898" end="4931" title="Guinea-Bissau War of Independence" label="Guinea-Bissau War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q776352" start="4955" end="4960" title="PAIGC" label="PAIGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542269" start="4991" end="5006" title="Portuguese Army" label="Portuguese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991840" start="5020" end="5024" title="Tite (Guinea-Bissau)" label="Tite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="5027" end="5031" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q216963" start="5038" end="5052" title="Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="24th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="5060" end="5086" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="5111" end="5121" title="Poll tax (United States)" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="5159" end="5163" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="5166" end="5186" title="Diplomatic relations" label="Diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5199" end="5211" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="5216" end="5227" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="5254" end="5267" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270157" start="5294" end="5302" title="New towns in the United Kingdom" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="5306" end="5322" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865501" start="5517" end="5550" title="History of Milton Keynes" label="evidence of continuous settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5570" end="5580" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="5583" end="5587" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q712703" start="5590" end="5621" title="USS Pueblo (AGER-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pueblo&amp;quot; (AGER-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363476" start="5652" end="5677" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Navy" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="5681" end="5685" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035350" start="5688" end="5711" title="World Airways Flight 30" label="World Airways Flight 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="5737" end="5764" title="Logan International Airport" label="Logan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5768" end="5774" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="5776" end="5789" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q894564" start="5808" end="5821" title="Boston Harbor" label="Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="5866" end="5870" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="5877" end="5903" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q82222" start="5931" end="5945" title="Little Richard" label="Little Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="5947" end="5958" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="5960" end="5971" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="5973" end="5984" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q295919" start="5986" end="5995" title="Sam Cooke" label="Sam Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209586" start="5997" end="6008" title="Fats Domino" label="Fats Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q690138" start="6010" end="6029" title="The Everly Brothers" label="The Everly Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="6031" end="6042" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="6044" end="6059" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="6064" end="6077" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="6080" end="6084" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q610694" start="6087" end="6113" title="Mohammed Said Hersi Morgan" label="Mohammed Said Hersi Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6128" end="6143" title="Isaaq genocide#Letter of Death" label="letter of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="6170" end="6180" title="Siad Barre" label="Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="6227" end="6231" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="6234" end="6252" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="6289" end="6321" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="6324" end="6328" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="6331" end="6339" title="Netscape" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="6350" end="6357" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="6410" end="6421" title="open source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="6424" end="6428" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659241" start="6454" end="6476" title="Tiananmen Square self-immolation incident" label="set themselves on fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="6495" end="6511" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="6566" end="6589" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="6599" end="6609" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110177" start="6634" end="6645" title="persecution of Falun Gong" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="6648" end="6652" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q357936" start="6671" end="6683" title="Daniel Pearl" label="Daniel Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="6700" end="6707" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="6746" end="6750" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q59103" start="6777" end="6787" title="Pioneer 10" label="Pioneer 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="6857" end="6861" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q47486452" start="6870" end="6880" title="2018 Gulf of Alaska earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="6895" end="6909" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617623" start="6929" end="6953" title="List of earthquakes in the United States" label="sixth-largest earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="7085" end="7093" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="7270" end="7299" title="China–United States trade war" label="China–United States trade war"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="7322" end="7334" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q50335907" start="7342" end="7349" title="First Trump tariffs" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="7397" end="7401" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q110666454" start="7440" end="7466" title="Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba" label="Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q110663445" start="7467" end="7484" title="January 2022 Burkina Faso coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="depose and detain"/>
<link wikidata="Q599988" start="7495" end="7521" title="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré" label="Roch Marc Christian Kaboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="7565" end="7569" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q124396142" start="7572" end="7599" title="Northwestern Air Flight 738" label="Northwestern Air Flight 738"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912580" start="7627" end="7645" title="Fort Smith Airport" label="Fort Smith Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="7727" end="7731" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q317131" start="7734" end="7748" title="Vincent Ferrer" label="Vincent Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306" start="7790" end="7794" title="1378" label="1378"/>
<link wikidata="Q64515" start="7797" end="7824" title="Louis III, Elector Palatine" label="Louis III, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204" start="7836" end="7840" title="1514" label="1514"/>
<link wikidata="Q934891" start="7843" end="7850" title="Hai Rui" label="Hai Rui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736" start="7882" end="7886" title="1585" label="1585"/>
<link wikidata="Q291061" start="7889" end="7898" title="Mary Ward (nun)" label="Mary Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815" start="7962" end="7966" title="1622" label="1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q329945" start="7969" end="7985" title="Abraham Diepraam" label="Abraham Diepraam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902" start="8012" end="8016" title="1719" label="1719"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398963" start="8019" end="8030" title="John Landen" label="John Landen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993" start="8078" end="8082" title="1737" label="1737"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="8085" end="8097" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="8138" end="8163" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586" start="8175" end="8179" title="1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094334" start="8182" end="8196" title="William Jessop" label="William Jessop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187616" start="8226" end="8240" title="Cromford Canal" label="Cromford Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618" start="8252" end="8256" title="1752" label="1752"/>
<link wikidata="Q193673" start="8259" end="8273" title="Muzio Clementi" label="Muzio Clementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716" start="8327" end="8331" title="1780" label="1780"/>
<link wikidata="Q734967" start="8334" end="8354" title="Georgios Karaiskakis" label="Georgios Karaiskakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745" start="8381" end="8385" title="1783" label="1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="8388" end="8396" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760" start="8425" end="8429" title="1786" label="1786"/>
<link wikidata="Q767288" start="8432" end="8454" title="Auguste de Montferrand" label="Auguste de Montferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q215423" start="8491" end="8519" title="Saint Isaac&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Isaac&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q907366" start="8524" end="8540" title="Alexander Column" label="Alexander Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="8552" end="8556" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q78836" start="8559" end="8573" title="Alois Negrelli" label="Alois Negrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="8656" end="8660" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918122" start="8663" end="8675" title="Surendra Sai" label="Surendra Sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="8704" end="8708" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q243045" start="8711" end="8726" title="Camilla Collett" label="Camilla Collett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570" start="8771" end="8775" title="1828" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q310462" start="8778" end="8792" title="Saigō Takamori" label="Saigō Takamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="8822" end="8826" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="8829" end="8842" title="Édouard Manet" label="Édouard Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="8870" end="8874" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943867" start="8877" end="8895" title="Muthu Coomaraswamy" label="Muthu Coomaraswamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612" start="8941" end="8945" title="1838" label="1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q76680" start="8948" end="8961" title="Marianne Cope" label="Marianne Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="9004" end="9008" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q76359" start="9011" end="9021" title="Ernst Abbe" label="Ernst Abbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640" start="9064" end="9068" title="1846" label="1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996992" start="9071" end="9083" title="Nikolay Umov" label="Nikolay Umov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666" start="9132" end="9136" title="1853" label="1853"/>
<link wikidata="Q123229914" start="9139" end="9155" title="John Marks Moore" label="John Marks Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673" start="9188" end="9192" title="1855" label="1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q220520" start="9195" end="9208" title="John Browning" label="John Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q991188" start="9249" end="9270" title="Browning Arms Company" label="Browning Arms Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680" start="9282" end="9286" title="1857" label="1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q243445" start="9289" end="9308" title="Andrija Mohorovičić" label="Andrija Mohorovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="9361" end="9365" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="9368" end="9381" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444200" start="9436" end="9448" title="Frank Shuman" label="Frank Shuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="9492" end="9496" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q25320" start="9499" end="9512" title="Paul Langevin" label="Paul Langevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314886" start="9563" end="9575" title="Jože Plečnik" label="Jože Plečnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204921" start="9607" end="9625" title="Plečnik Parliament" label="Plečnik Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766" start="9637" end="9641" title="1876" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q76616" start="9644" end="9654" title="Otto Diels" label="Otto Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="9685" end="9696" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="9717" end="9721" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q673401" start="9724" end="9740" title="Rutland Boughton" label="Rutland Boughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="9770" end="9774" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q506713" start="9777" end="9801" title="Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama" label="Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="9833" end="9837" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126927" start="9840" end="9856" title="Claribel Kendall" label="Claribel Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="9892" end="9896" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q12780095" start="9899" end="9915" title="Jyotirmoyee Devi" label="Jyotirmoyee Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="9942" end="9946" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721636" start="9949" end="9958" title="Alf Blair" label="Alf Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721690" start="10020" end="10028" title="Alf Hall" label="Alf Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="10073" end="10077" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="10080" end="10099" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q78858" start="10158" end="10184" title="Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky" label="Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q459271" start="10224" end="10240" title="Ieva Simonaitytė" label="Ieva Simonaitytė"/>
<link wikidata="Q620577" start="10279" end="10297" title="William Stephenson" label="William Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="10335" end="10339" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q470033" start="10342" end="10359" title="Georg Kulenkampff" label="Georg Kulenkampff"/>
<link wikidata="Q295984" start="10397" end="10411" title="Randolph Scott" label="Randolph Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496668" start="10447" end="10458" title="Freda Utley" label="Freda Utley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="10498" end="10502" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q452696" start="10505" end="10517" title="Glen Kidston" label="Glen Kidston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="10562" end="10566" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491437" start="10569" end="10587" title="William Ifor Jones" label="William Ifor Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="10649" end="10653" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865382" start="10656" end="10668" title="Arthur Wirtz" label="Arthur Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="10702" end="10706" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q132479" start="10709" end="10729" title="Jorge Eliécer Gaitán" label="Jorge Eliécer Gaitán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062480" start="10769" end="10811" title="Minister of National Education of Colombia" label="Minister of National Education of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="10823" end="10827" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q648180" start="10830" end="10846" title="Erich Borchmeyer" label="Erich Borchmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="10875" end="10879" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159055" start="10882" end="10892" title="Dan Duryea" label="Dan Duryea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155777" start="10939" end="10952" title="Hideki Yukawa" label="Hideki Yukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="10987" end="10998" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="11019" end="11023" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q44122" start="11026" end="11042" title="Django Reinhardt" label="Django Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="11086" end="11090" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221431" start="11093" end="11108" title="Boris Pokrovsky" label="Boris Pokrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="11150" end="11154" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q689646" start="11157" end="11174" title="Jean-Michel Atlan" label="Jean-Michel Atlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963455" start="11219" end="11230" title="Wally Parks" label="Wally Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="11266" end="11294" title="National Hot Rod Association" label="National Hot Rod Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="11306" end="11310" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q260805" start="11313" end="11324" title="Herma Bauma" label="Herma Bauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q272519" start="11390" end="11405" title="W. Arthur Lewis" label="W. Arthur Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="11454" end="11465" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="11494" end="11508" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="11547" end="11551" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q934820" start="11554" end="11574" title="David Douglas Duncan" label="David Douglas Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334302" start="11632" end="11643" title="Airey Neave" label="Airey Neave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460599" start="11686" end="11732" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="11744" end="11748" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q35703" start="11751" end="11768" title="Gertrude B. Elion" label="Gertrude B. Elion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="11810" end="11821" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="11842" end="11846" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085114" start="11849" end="11863" title="Charlie Kerins" label="Charlie Kerins"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="11874" end="11890" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460770" start="11910" end="11923" title="Florence Rush" label="Florence Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="11972" end="11976" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q292446" start="11979" end="11990" title="Frances Bay" label="Frances Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q78828" start="12037" end="12046" title="Hans Hass" label="Hans Hass"/>
<link wikidata="Q990890" start="12096" end="12108" title="Ernie Kovacs" label="Ernie Kovacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q314436" start="12163" end="12174" title="Bob Paisley" label="Bob Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="12218" end="12222" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q76841" start="12225" end="12239" title="Gottfried Böhm" label="Gottfried Böhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q958508" start="12277" end="12291" title="Henry Eriksson" label="Henry Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q522207" start="12327" end="12352" title="Walter Frederick Morrison" label="Walter Frederick Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q131689" start="12389" end="12396" title="Frisbee" label="Frisbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="12408" end="12412" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q475655" start="12415" end="12425" title="Leon Golub" label="Leon Golub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525352" start="12476" end="12485" title="Tom Lewis (Australian politician)" label="Tom Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="12515" end="12541" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="12553" end="12557" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q957130" start="12560" end="12578" title="Horace Ashenfelter" label="Horace Ashenfelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q357839" start="12615" end="12636" title="Walter M. Miller, Jr." label="Walter M. Miller, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="12677" end="12681" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q508752" start="12684" end="12700" title="Frank Lautenberg" label="Frank Lautenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="12759" end="12763" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q358879" start="12766" end="12777" title="Marty Paich" label="Marty Paich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="12842" end="12846" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q61193" start="12849" end="12862" title="Bal Thackeray" label="Bal Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="12921" end="12925" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491369" start="12928" end="12946" title="Lars-Eric Lindblad" label="Lars-Eric Lindblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565078" start="13009" end="13022" title="Fred Williams (artist)" label="Fred Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="13054" end="13058" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q106099" start="13061" end="13074" title="Jeanne Moreau" label="Jeanne Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="13102" end="13106" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948426" start="13109" end="13119" title="Myron Cope" label="Myron Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q695966" start="13177" end="13194" title="Filaret Denysenko" label="Filaret Denysenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q389676" start="13241" end="13286" title="Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate" label="Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915325" start="13296" end="13313" title="Phillip Knightley" label="Phillip Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q237825" start="13376" end="13388" title="John Polanyi" label="John Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="13428" end="13439" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="13450" end="13454" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q48364" start="13457" end="13472" title="Tanya Savicheva" label="Tanya Savicheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="13507" end="13511" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q913948" start="13514" end="13525" title="Mervyn Rose" label="Mervyn Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q132701" start="13571" end="13584" title="Derek Walcott" label="Derek Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="13620" end="13631" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q515798" start="13660" end="13677" title="Teresa Żylis-Gara" label="Teresa Żylis-Gara"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="13714" end="13718" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536193" start="13721" end="13733" title="George Allen (footballer, born 1932)" label="George Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837377" start="13773" end="13785" title="Larri Thomas" label="Larri Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="13826" end="13830" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q250087" start="13833" end="13844" title="Bill Hayden" label="Bill Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="13874" end="13903" title="Governor General of Australia" label="Governor General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q450918" start="13923" end="13935" title="Chita Rivera" label="Chita Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="13985" end="13989" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260112" start="13992" end="14003" title="Lou Antonio" label="Lou Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384148" start="14042" end="14058" title="Pierre Bourgault" label="Pierre Bourgault"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="14106" end="14110" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933032" start="14113" end="14126" title="Mike Agostini" label="Mike Agostini"/>
<link wikidata="Q328550" start="14168" end="14177" title="Tom Reamy" label="Tom Reamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="14206" end="14210" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q547622" start="14213" end="14225" title="Jerry Kramer" label="Jerry Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009784" start="14278" end="14291" title="Cécile Ousset" label="Cécile Ousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="14309" end="14313" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387241" start="14316" end="14326" title="Giant Baba" label="Giant Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="14368" end="14391" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q164775" start="14411" end="14425" title="Georg Baselitz" label="Georg Baselitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="14456" end="14460" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q537832" start="14463" end="14473" title="Ed Roberts (activist)" label="Ed Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="14504" end="14508" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706366" start="14511" end="14522" title="Alan Cheuse" label="Alan Cheuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691397" start="14570" end="14580" title="Joe Dowell" label="Joe Dowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="14609" end="14613" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207433" start="14616" end="14632" title="Jock R. Anderson" label="Jock R. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140743" start="14677" end="14696" title="João Ubaldo Ribeiro" label="João Ubaldo Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="14752" end="14756" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501663" start="14759" end="14771" title="Laurie Mayne" label="Laurie Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q887753" start="14802" end="14824" title="Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat" label="Punsalmaagiin Ochirbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q756265" start="14852" end="14873" title="President of Mongolia" label="President of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950583" start="14893" end="14914" title="Herman Tjeenk Willink" label="Herman Tjeenk Willink"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14944" end="14948" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q353096" start="14951" end="14962" title="Gary Burton" label="Gary Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350588" start="14991" end="15001" title="Gil Gerard" label="Gil Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q247111" start="15027" end="15041" title="Özhan Canaydın" label="Özhan Canaydın"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="15096" end="15100" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q213574" start="15103" end="15115" title="Rutger Hauer" label="Rutger Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="15164" end="15168" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q598964" start="15171" end="15182" title="Mike Harris" label="Mike Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="15210" end="15228" title="Premier of Ontario" label="Premier of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="15230" end="15234" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q356647" start="15237" end="15251" title="Arnoldo Alemán" label="Arnoldo Alemán"/>
<link wikidata="Q852448" start="15287" end="15309" title="President of Nicaragua" label="President of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q311019" start="15319" end="15335" title="Boris Berezovsky (businessman)" label="Boris Berezovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q125166043" start="15402" end="15425" title="Marie Charlotte Fayanga" label="Marie Charlotte Fayanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="15478" end="15482" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q457432" start="15485" end="15495" title="Tom Carper" label="Tom Carper"/>
<link wikidata="Q887210" start="15535" end="15555" title="Governor of Delaware" label="Governor of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q76179" start="15565" end="15586" title="Megawati Sukarnoputri" label="Megawati Sukarnoputri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755916" start="15611" end="15633" title="President of Indonesia" label="President of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15635" end="15639" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745995" start="15642" end="15655" title="Anita Pointer" label="Anita Pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15695" end="15699" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085345" start="15702" end="15718" title="Charlie Papazian" label="Charlie Papazian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="15767" end="15771" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q203047" start="15774" end="15795" title="Richard Dean Anderson" label="Richard Dean Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10292705" start="15845" end="15856" title="Guida Maria" label="Guida Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650954" start="15896" end="15913" title="Suzanne Scotchmer" label="Suzanne Scotchmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q957627" start="15966" end="15987" title="Luis Alberto Spinetta" label="Luis Alberto Spinetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="16051" end="16055" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q463124" start="16058" end="16078" title="Chesley Sullenberger" label="Chesley Sullenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="16122" end="16126" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525452" start="16129" end="16139" title="Omar Henry" label="Omar Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q569401" start="16174" end="16189" title="Jaroslav Pouzar" label="Jaroslav Pouzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="16216" end="16220" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q788469" start="16223" end="16240" title="John Luther Adams" label="John Luther Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q451103" start="16269" end="16284" title="Alister McGrath" label="Alister McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q218511" start="16335" end="16355" title="Antonio Villaraigosa" label="Antonio Villaraigosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465319" start="16383" end="16403" title="Mayor of Los Angeles" label="Mayor of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171273" start="16413" end="16425" title="Robin Zander" label="Robin Zander"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="16469" end="16473" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839221" start="16476" end="16488" title="Trevor Hohns" label="Trevor Hohns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="16512" end="16516" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q233966" start="16519" end="16548" title="Caroline, Princess of Hanover" label="Caroline, Princess of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16550" end="16554" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q314664" start="16557" end="16572" title="Sergey Litvinov (athlete, born 1958)" label="Sergey Litvinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="16608" end="16612" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134513" start="16615" end="16625" title="Clive Bull" label="Clive Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16647" end="16651" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606194" start="16654" end="16666" title="Greg Ritchie" label="Greg Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="16690" end="16694" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q10348945" start="16697" end="16712" title="Peter Mackenzie" label="Peter Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q599616" start="16738" end="16755" title="Yelena Sinchukova" label="Yelena Sinchukova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="16778" end="16782" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q346285" start="16785" end="16797" title="David Arnold" label="David Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699365" start="16825" end="16840" title="Aivar Lillevere" label="Aivar Lillevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q237058" start="16881" end="16893" title="Elvira Lindo" label="Elvira Lindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945331" start="16934" end="16947" title="Boris McGiver" label="Boris McGiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="16965" end="16969" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q270743" start="16972" end="16989" title="Gail O&amp;#x27;Grady" label="Gail O&amp;#x27;Grady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="17009" end="17013" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q437787" start="17016" end="17030" title="Jonatha Brooke" label="Jonatha Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="17083" end="17099" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q212760" start="17140" end="17154" title="Bharrat Jagdeo" label="Bharrat Jagdeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q685925" start="17195" end="17214" title="President of Guyana" label="President of Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="17216" end="17220" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015449" start="17223" end="17237" title="Louie Clemente" label="Louie Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="17258" end="17262" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012780" start="17265" end="17279" title="Damien Hardman" label="Damien Hardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q366607" start="17308" end="17324" title="Haywoode Workman" label="Haywoode Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17366" end="17370" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114442" start="17373" end="17388" title="Owen Cunningham" label="Owen Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="17422" end="17426" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357450" start="17429" end="17440" title="Taro Hakase" label="Taro Hakase"/>
<link wikidata="Q312717" start="17483" end="17493" title="Petr Korda" label="Petr Korda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="17527" end="17531" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q312148" start="17534" end="17552" title="Andrei Kanchelskis" label="Andrei Kanchelskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q739144" start="17604" end="17620" title="Brendan Shanahan" label="Brendan Shanahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84839" start="17668" end="17681" title="Susen Tiedtke" label="Susen Tiedtke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="17703" end="17707" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373846" start="17710" end="17725" title="Richard Šmehlík" label="Richard Šmehlík"/>
<link wikidata="Q119472" start="17760" end="17777" title="Spyridon Vasdekis" label="Spyridon Vasdekis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="17798" end="17802" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195751" start="17805" end="17816" title="Kevin Mawae" label="Kevin Mawae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679585" start="17862" end="17873" title="Adam Parore" label="Adam Parore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975115" start="17922" end="17935" title="Claire Rankin" label="Claire Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="17955" end="17959" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q520651" start="17962" end="17974" title="Ewen Bremner" label="Ewen Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="17993" end="17997" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344532" start="18000" end="18015" title="Tomas Holmström" label="Tomas Holmström"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="18044" end="18048" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567643" start="18051" end="18063" title="Glen Chapple" label="Glen Chapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q596776" start="18092" end="18110" title="Rebekah Elmaloglou" label="Rebekah Elmaloglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329370" start="18141" end="18157" title="Richard T. Slone" label="Richard T. Slone"/>
<link wikidata="Q230045" start="18184" end="18200" title="Tiffani Thiessen" label="Tiffani Thiessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="18220" end="18224" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378763" start="18227" end="18238" title="Phil Dawson" label="Phil Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q459809" start="18274" end="18284" title="Tito Ortiz" label="Tito Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="18317" end="18321" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923756" start="18324" end="18341" title="Brandon Duckworth" label="Brandon Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q543137" start="18387" end="18409" title="Anne Margrethe Hausken" label="Anne Margrethe Hausken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717780" start="18454" end="18466" title="Alex Shaffer (alpine skier)" label="Alex Shaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="18484" end="18488" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342406" start="18491" end="18503" title="Scott Hannan" label="Scott Hannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q725890" start="18541" end="18553" title="Larry Hughes" label="Larry Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178794" start="18591" end="18609" title="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Porter" label="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187779" start="18669" end="18680" title="Juan Rincón" label="Juan Rincón"/>
<link wikidata="Q294004" start="18728" end="18743" title="Maria Stepanova" label="Maria Stepanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="18772" end="18776" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q128870" start="18779" end="18789" title="Rob Friend" label="Rob Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q239240" start="18823" end="18834" title="Julia Jones" label="Julia Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="18854" end="18858" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q77041" start="18861" end="18876" title="Oceana Mahlmann" label="Oceana Mahlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059455" start="18916" end="18928" title="Wily Mo Peña" label="Wily Mo Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q506999" start="18965" end="18976" title="Andrew Rock" label="Andrew Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="18997" end="19001" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q310417" start="19004" end="19019" title="Irving Saladino" label="Irving Saladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="19045" end="19049" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q43913" start="19052" end="19064" title="Arjen Robben" label="Arjen Robben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="19084" end="19088" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413792" start="19091" end="19096" title="San E" label="San E"/>
<link wikidata="Q315305" start="19127" end="19140" title="Dong Fangzhuo" label="Dong Fangzhuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108289" start="19170" end="19183" title="Doutzen Kroes" label="Doutzen Kroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q350995" start="19218" end="19236" title="Yevgeny Lukyanenko" label="Yevgeny Lukyanenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q258564" start="19268" end="19284" title="Aselefech Mergia" label="Aselefech Mergia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176584" start="19312" end="19327" title="Jeff Samardzija" label="Jeff Samardzija"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="19368" end="19372" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q270241" start="19375" end="19387" title="Gelete Burka" label="Gelete Burka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755682" start="19415" end="19425" title="Marc Laird" label="Marc Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q248890" start="19456" end="19468" title="José Enrique (footballer)" label="José Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q311951" start="19498" end="19511" title="Steven Taylor (footballer)" label="Steven Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181284" start="19541" end="19555" title="Sandro Viletta" label="Sandro Viletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="19570" end="19574" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q928815" start="19577" end="19588" title="Leo Komarov" label="Leo Komarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="19626" end="19630" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q902667" start="19633" end="19643" title="Alex Silva (wrestler)" label="Alex Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="19664" end="19668" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157893" start="19671" end="19685" title="Steve Birnbaum" label="Steve Birnbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="19711" end="19715" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049948" start="19718" end="19731" title="Reina Triendl" label="Reina Triendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="19761" end="19765" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681280" start="19768" end="19783" title="Addison Russell" label="Addison Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="19811" end="19815" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q47463922" start="19818" end="19834" title="Keita Bates-Diop" label="Keita Bates-Diop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="19864" end="19868" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q18616995" start="19871" end="19889" title="Ruben Loftus-Cheek" label="Ruben Loftus-Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="19911" end="19915" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q28561969" start="19918" end="19930" title="XXXTentacion" label="XXXTentacion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="19959" end="19963" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590318" start="19966" end="19978" title="Alban Lafont" label="Alban Lafont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="19999" end="20003" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679891" start="20006" end="20020" title="Olga Danilović" label="Olga Danilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="20045" end="20049" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q73400656" start="20052" end="20066" title="Joško Gvardiol" label="Joško Gvardiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q64031898" start="20097" end="20112" title="Nicola Zalewski" label="Nicola Zalewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="20133" end="20137" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q85872272" start="20140" end="20152" title="Julio Enciso (footballer, born 2004)" label="Julio Enciso"/>
<link wikidata="Q30702" start="20204" end="20207" title="667" label="667"/>
<link wikidata="Q456069" start="20210" end="20220" title="Ildefonsus" label="Ildefonsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423027" start="20222" end="20238" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toledo" label="bishop of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702" start="20241" end="20244" title="989" label="989"/>
<link wikidata="Q347218" start="20247" end="20255" title="Adalbero (archbishop of Reims)" label="Adalbero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365421" start="20271" end="20276" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q19223" start="20278" end="20282" title="1002" label="1002"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="20285" end="20313" title="Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19752" start="20324" end="20328" title="1199" label="1199"/>
<link wikidata="Q455739" start="20331" end="20356" title="Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur" label="Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497" start="20385" end="20389" title="1252" label="1252"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924" start="20392" end="20418" title="Isabella, Queen of Armenia" label="Isabella, Queen of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562" start="20420" end="20424" title="1297" label="1297"/>
<link wikidata="Q597299" start="20427" end="20445" title="Florent of Hainaut" label="Florent of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267" start="20478" end="20482" title="1423" label="1423"/>
<link wikidata="Q271914" start="20485" end="20504" title="Margaret of Bavaria" label="Margaret of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212" start="20535" end="20539" title="1516" label="1516"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="20542" end="20564" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551" start="20576" end="20580" title="1548" label="1548"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920493" start="20583" end="20598" title="Bernardo Pisano" label="Bernardo Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554" start="20649" end="20653" title="1549" label="1549"/>
<link wikidata="Q738256" start="20656" end="20671" title="Johannes Honter" label="Johannes Honter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642" start="20731" end="20735" title="1567" label="1567"/>
<link wikidata="Q10011" start="20738" end="20753" title="Jiajing Emperor" label="Jiajing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659" start="20774" end="20778" title="1570" label="1570"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="20781" end="20813" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810" start="20863" end="20867" title="1620" label="1620"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227685" start="20870" end="20880" title="John Croke" label="John Croke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815" start="20922" end="20926" title="1622" label="1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q55807" start="20929" end="20943" title="William Baffin" label="William Baffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951" start="20987" end="20991" title="1650" label="1650"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620547" start="20994" end="21030" title="Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke" label="Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7583" start="21042" end="21046" title="1744" label="1744"/>
<link wikidata="Q178709" start="21049" end="21066" title="Giambattista Vico" label="Giambattista Vico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756" start="21113" end="21117" title="1785" label="1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299807" start="21120" end="21135" title="Matthew Stewart (mathematician)" label="Matthew Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772" start="21184" end="21188" title="1789" label="1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q729541" start="21191" end="21205" title="Frances Brooke" label="Frances Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q460861" start="21256" end="21268" title="John Cleland" label="John Cleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875" start="21296" end="21300" title="1800" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q878666" start="21303" end="21318" title="Edward Rutledge" label="Edward Rutledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773752" start="21358" end="21384" title="Governor of South Carolina" label="Governor of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887" start="21396" end="21400" title="1803" label="1803"/>
<link wikidata="Q454138" start="21403" end="21418" title="Arthur Guinness" label="Arthur Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="21442" end="21450" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898" start="21462" end="21466" title="1805" label="1805"/>
<link wikidata="Q361305" start="21469" end="21482" title="Claude Chappe" label="Claude Chappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="21511" end="21515" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="21518" end="21542" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="21564" end="21600" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922" start="21612" end="21616" title="1810" label="1810"/>
<link wikidata="Q58868" start="21619" end="21640" title="Johann Wilhelm Ritter" label="Johann Wilhelm Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="21682" end="21686" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q705972" start="21689" end="21704" title="Robert Craufurd" label="Robert Craufurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973" start="21749" end="21753" title="1820" label="1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q157009" start="21756" end="21798" title="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn" label="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="21810" end="21814" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q335338" start="21817" end="21852" title="Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth" label="Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="21896" end="21900" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q209684" start="21903" end="21913" title="John Field (composer)" label="John Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="21953" end="21957" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q561408" start="21960" end="21979" title="Thomas Love Peacock" label="Thomas Love Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="22016" end="22020" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q353238" start="22023" end="22039" title="Charles Kingsley" label="Charles Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="22078" end="22082" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682" start="22085" end="22097" title="Gustave Doré" label="Gustave Doré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="22142" end="22146" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549250" start="22149" end="22184" title="Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar II" label="Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="22223" end="22262" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="United States Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017083" start="22282" end="22295" title="William Price (physician)" label="William Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q331863" start="22357" end="22370" title="José Zorrilla" label="José Zorrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="22431" end="22435" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q467914" start="22438" end="22455" title="Mykola Leontovych" label="Mykola Leontovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="22501" end="22505" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q25711728" start="22508" end="22517" title="René Beeh" label="René Beeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q57210" start="22571" end="22585" title="Arthur Nikisch" label="Arthur Nikisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="22631" end="22635" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q472270" start="22638" end="22648" title="Max Nordau" label="Max Nordau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="22691" end="22695" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q151874" start="22698" end="22710" title="Anna Pavlova" label="Anna Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="22749" end="22753" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q511418" start="22756" end="22774" title="Orso Mario Corbino" label="Orso Mario Corbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="22820" end="22824" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q312865" start="22827" end="22844" title="Matthias Sindelar" label="Matthias Sindelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="22889" end="22893" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q361859" start="22896" end="22915" title="Alexander Woollcott" label="Alexander Woollcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="22967" end="22971" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q41406" start="22974" end="22986" title="Edvard Munch" label="Edvard Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="23033" end="23037" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q26408" start="23040" end="23054" title="Pierre Bonnard" label="Pierre Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="23082" end="23086" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q55221" start="23089" end="23104" title="Alexander Korda" label="Alexander Korda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="23157" end="23161" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q26737" start="23164" end="23179" title="Józef Gosławski (sculptor)" label="Józef Gosławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="23208" end="23212" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q619244" start="23215" end="23231" title="T. M. Sabaratnam" label="T. M. Sabaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="23277" end="23281" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q214308" start="23284" end="23295" title="Fritz Feigl" label="Fritz Feigl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="23348" end="23352" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q331187" start="23355" end="23372" title="Alexander Onassis" label="Alexander Onassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q441399" start="23420" end="23427" title="Kid Ory" label="Kid Ory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="23486" end="23490" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="23493" end="23505" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="23555" end="23559" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040587" start="23562" end="23572" title="Toots Shor" label="Toots Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824322" start="23604" end="23632" title="Toots Shor&amp;#x27;s Restaurant" label="Toots Shor&amp;#x27;s Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="23644" end="23648" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q692632" start="23651" end="23661" title="Terry Kath" label="Terry Kath"/>
<link wikidata="Q545846" start="23716" end="23726" title="Jack Oakie" label="Jack Oakie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="23754" end="23758" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q606379" start="23761" end="23780" title="Giovanni Michelotti" label="Giovanni Michelotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="23810" end="23814" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q216870" start="23817" end="23830" title="Samuel Barber" label="Samuel Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="23873" end="23877" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528308" start="23880" end="23893" title="Fred Bakewell" label="Fred Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="23934" end="23938" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082042" start="23941" end="23952" title="Muin Bseiso" label="Muin Bseiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="24002" end="24006" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399476" start="24009" end="24020" title="James Beard" label="James Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129536" start="24069" end="24097" title="James Beard Foundation Award" label="James Beard Foundation Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="24120" end="24124" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="24127" end="24139" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="24180" end="24184" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959232" start="24187" end="24204" title="Charles Glen King" label="Charles Glen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="24250" end="24254" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="24257" end="24270" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827184" start="24320" end="24335" title="Lars-Erik Torph" label="Lars-Erik Torph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="24372" end="24376" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q463185" start="24379" end="24392" title="Allen Collins" label="Allen Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="24439" end="24443" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q354256" start="24446" end="24459" title="Northrop Frye" label="Northrop Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="24499" end="24503" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q739522" start="24506" end="24525" title="Freddie Bartholomew" label="Freddie Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="24553" end="24557" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q724395" start="24560" end="24572" title="Keith Laumer" label="Keith Laumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="24624" end="24628" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q48097" start="24631" end="24646" title="Nikolai Ogarkov" label="Nikolai Ogarkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965109" start="24689" end="24702" title="Brian Redhead" label="Brian Redhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="24745" end="24749" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q684569" start="24752" end="24768" title="Joe D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="Joe D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378735" start="24826" end="24838" title="Jay Pritzker" label="Jay Pritzker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425063" start="24877" end="24894" title="Hyatt" label="Hyatt Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="24906" end="24910" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604272" start="24913" end="24922" title="Paul Aars" label="Paul Aars"/>
<link wikidata="Q156268" start="24968" end="24983" title="Pierre Bourdieu" label="Pierre Bourdieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="25056" end="25069" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="25125" end="25129" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q271840" start="25132" end="25143" title="Nell Carter" label="Nell Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="25184" end="25188" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354581" start="25191" end="25202" title="Bob Keeshan" label="Bob Keeshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57395" start="25268" end="25281" title="Helmut Newton" label="Helmut Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="25325" end="25329" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401247" start="25332" end="25363" title="Morys Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare" label="Morys Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="25418" end="25431" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="25506" end="25510" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660347" start="25513" end="25532" title="Syed Hussein Alatas" label="Syed Hussein Alatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q712791" start="25590" end="25604" title="E. Howard Hunt" label="E. Howard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="25615" end="25618" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q216813" start="25646" end="25665" title="Ryszard Kapuściński" label="Ryszard Kapuściński"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="25707" end="25711" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q262620" start="25714" end="25729" title="Robert W. Scott" label="Robert W. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202700" start="25768" end="25794" title="Governor of North Carolina" label="Governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="25806" end="25810" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394084" start="25813" end="25825" title="Kermit Tyler" label="Kermit Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q963059" start="25873" end="25882" title="Earl Wild" label="Earl Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="25925" end="25929" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677099" start="25932" end="25944" title="Jack LaLanne" label="Jack LaLanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="26014" end="26018" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319747" start="26021" end="26036" title="Wesley E. Brown" label="Wesley E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793347" start="26084" end="26099" title="Maurice Meisner" label="Maurice Meisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q863790" start="26161" end="26172" title="Bingham Ray" label="Bingham Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880776" start="26207" end="26220" title="October Films" label="October Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="26232" end="26236" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q365238" start="26239" end="26250" title="Józef Glemp" label="Józef Glemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653986" start="26287" end="26306" title="Peter van der Merwe (cricketer)" label="Peter van der Merwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q744202" start="26363" end="26393" title="Jean-Félix-Albert-Marie Vilnet" label="Jean-Félix-Albert-Marie Vilnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="26420" end="26424" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198841" start="26427" end="26438" title="Yuri Izrael" label="Yuri Izrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q288217" start="26496" end="26508" title="Riz Ortolani" label="Riz Ortolani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="26552" end="26556" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051017" start="26559" end="26570" title="Ernie Banks" label="Ernie Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923907" start="26626" end="26637" title="Prosper Ego" label="Prosper Ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689372" start="26667" end="26688" title="Oud-Strijders Legioen" label="Oud-Strijders Legioen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57298" start="26708" end="26732" title="Abdullah of Saudi Arabia" label="Abdullah of Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="26744" end="26748" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q552061" start="26751" end="26761" title="Jimmy Bain" label="Jimmy Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q888707" start="26799" end="26811" title="Bobby Wanzer" label="Bobby Wanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="26861" end="26865" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q713351" start="26868" end="26881" title="Bobby Freeman" label="Bobby Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012106" start="26950" end="26961" title="Gorden Kaye" label="Gorden Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="26988" end="26992" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q246594" start="26995" end="27008" title="Hugh Masekela" label="Hugh Masekela"/>
<link wikidata="Q360832" start="27075" end="27088" title="Nicanor Parra" label="Nicanor Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039516" start="27122" end="27138" title="Wyatt Tee Walker" label="Wyatt Tee Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="27193" end="27197" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637855" start="27200" end="27213" title="Aloysius Pang" label="Aloysius Pang"/>
<link wikidata="Q983221" start="27252" end="27267" title="Oliver Mtukudzi" label="Oliver Mtukudzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="27310" end="27314" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q314801" start="27317" end="27329" title="Hal Holbrook" label="Hal Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="27378" end="27388" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q17172330" start="27448" end="27461" title="Song Yoo-jung" label="Song Yoo-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="27505" end="27509" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081387" start="27512" end="27526" title="Charles Osgood" label="Charles Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="27603" end="27607" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q157293" start="27610" end="27623" title="Melanie (singer)" label="Melanie Safka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950055" start="27706" end="27716" title="Bounty Day" label="Bounty Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="27718" end="27734" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="27747" end="27756" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232912" start="27760" end="27766" title="Abakuh" label="Abakuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q76680" start="27769" end="27788" title="Marianne Cope" label="Marianne of Molokai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389729" start="27791" end="27802" title="Emerentiana" label="Emerentiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399157" start="27805" end="27841" title="Espousals of the Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Espousals of the Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q456069" start="27844" end="27854" title="Ildefonsus" label="Ildefonsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q974734" start="27867" end="27882" title="Phillips Brooks" label="Phillips Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="27884" end="27906" title="Episcopal Church (USA)" label="Episcopal Church (USA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155833" start="27910" end="27949" title="January 23 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="January 23 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104920297" start="27951" end="27992" title="Netaji Jayanti" label="Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose&amp;#x27;s Jayanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="27994" end="27999" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="28001" end="28007" title="Orissa, India" label="Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="28009" end="28016" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="28022" end="28033" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q698234" start="28043" end="28060" title="World Freedom Day" label="World Freedom Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="28062" end="28068" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="28073" end="28084" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15992" wikidata="Q23685" url="?curid=15992" title="Jimmy Carter">
<text>James Earl Carter Jr. (October 1, 1924December 29, 2024) was an American politician and humanitarian who served as the 39th president of the United States from 1977 to 1981. A member of the Democratic Party, Carter was the 76th governor of Georgia from 1971 to 1975 and in the Georgia State Senate from 1963 to 1967. He was the longest-lived president in U.S. history and the first to reach the age of 100.

Born in Plains, Georgia, Carter graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in 1946 and joined the submarine service before returning to his family&#x27;s peanut farm. He was active in the civil rights movement, then served as state senator and governor before running for president in 1976. He secured the Democratic nomination as a dark horse before narrowly defeating Republican incumbent Gerald Ford in the general election.

As president, Carter pardoned all Vietnam draft evaders and negotiated major foreign policy agreements, including the Camp David Accords, the Panama Canal Treaties, and the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, and he established diplomatic relations with China. He created a national energy policy that included conservation, price control, and new technology. He created the Departments of Energy and Education. The later years of his presidency were marked by several foreign policy crises, including the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan (leading to the end of &quot;détente&quot; and the 1980 Olympics boycott) and the fallout of the Iranian revolution (including the Iran hostage crisis and 1979 oil crisis). Carter sought reelection in 1980, defeating a primary challenge by Senator Ted Kennedy, but lost the election to Republican nominee Ronald Reagan.

Polls of historians and political scientists have ranked Carter&#x27;s presidency below average. His post-presidency—the longest in U.S. history—is viewed more favorably. After Carter&#x27;s presidential term ended, he established the Carter Center to promote human rights, earning him the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize. He traveled extensively to conduct peace negotiations, monitor elections, and end neglected tropical diseases, becoming a major contributor to the eradication of dracunculiasis. Carter was a key figure in the nonprofit housing organization Habitat for Humanity. He also wrote political memoirs and other books, commentary on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, and poetry.

== Early life ==
James Earl Carter Jr. was born on October 1, 1924, in Plains, Georgia, at the Wise Sanitarium, where his mother worked as a registered nurse. Carter was the first U.S. president born in a hospital. He was the eldest child of Bessie Lillian Gordy and James Earl Carter Sr., and a descendant of English immigrant Thomas Carter, who settled in the Colony of Virginia in 1635. In Georgia, numerous generations of Carters worked as cotton farmers. Carter&#x27;s father was a successful local businessman who ran a general store and was an investor in farmland; he had served as a reserve second lieutenant in the U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps during World War I.

During Carter&#x27;s infancy, his family moved several times, settling on a dirt road in nearby Archery, which was almost entirely populated by impoverished Black families. His family eventually had three more children, Gloria, Ruth, and Billy. Carter had a good relationship with his parents, even though his mother was often absent during his childhood since she worked long hours. Although his father was staunchly pro-segregation, he allowed Jimmy to befriend the Black farmhands&#x27; children. Carter was an enterprising teenager who was given his own acre of Earl&#x27;s farmland, where he grew and sold peanuts. Carter also rented out a section of tenant housing he had purchased.

=== Education ===
Carter attended Plains High School from 1937 to 1941, graduating from the 11th grade; the school did not have a 12th grade. By that time, Archery and Plains had been impoverished by the Great Depression, but the family benefited from New Deal farming subsidies, and Carter&#x27;s father became a community leader. Carter was a diligent student with a fondness for reading. According to a popular anecdote, he was passed over for valedictorian after he and his friends skipped school to venture downtown in a hot rod (although it is not clear he would otherwise have been valedictorian). Carter played on the Plains High School basketball team and joined Future Farmers of America, which helped him develop a lifelong interest in woodworking.

Carter had long dreamed of attending the United States Naval Academy. In 1941, he started undergraduate coursework in engineering at Georgia Southwestern College in nearby Americus, Georgia. The next year, Carter transferred to the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, where civil rights icon Blake Van Leer was president. While at Georgia Tech, Carter took part in the Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps. Van Leer encouraged Carter to join the Naval Academy. In 1943, he received an appointment to the Naval Academy from U.S. Representative Stephen Pace, and Carter graduated with a Bachelor of Science in 1946. He was a good student, but was seen as reserved and quiet, in contrast to the academy&#x27;s culture of aggressive hazing of freshmen. While at the academy, Carter fell in love with Rosalynn Smith, a friend of his sister Ruth. The two wed shortly after his graduation in 1946, and were married until her death on November 19, 2023. Carter was a sprint football player for the Navy Midshipmen and a standout freshman cross country runner. He graduated 60th out of 821 midshipmen in the class of 1947 with a Bachelor of Science degree and was commissioned as an ensign.

== Naval career ==
From 1946 to 1953, the Carters lived in Virginia, Hawaii, Connecticut, New York, and California, during his deployments in the Atlantic and Pacific fleets. In 1948, he began officer training for submarine duty and served aboard . Carter was promoted to lieutenant junior grade in 1949. His service aboard &quot;Pomfret&quot; included a simulated war patrol to the western Pacific and Chinese coast from January to March of that year. In 1951, Carter was assigned to the diesel/electric , qualified for command, and served in several positions, including executive officer.

In 1952, Carter began an association with the Navy&#x27;s fledgling nuclear submarine program, led by then-Captain Hyman G. Rickover. Rickover had high standards, and Carter later said that, next to his parents, Rickover had the greatest influence on his life. Carter was sent to the Naval Reactors Branch of the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington, D.C., for three-month temporary duty, while Rosalynn moved with their children to Schenectady, New York.

On December 12, 1952, an accident with the experimental NRX reactor at Atomic Energy of Canada&#x27;s Chalk River Laboratories caused a partial meltdown. Carter was ordered to Chalk River to lead a U.S. maintenance crew to assist in the shutdown of the reactor. The painstaking process required each team member to don protective gear and be lowered individually into the reactor for 90 seconds at a time, limiting their exposure to radioactivity while they disassembled the crippled reactor. During and after his presidency, Carter said that his experience at Chalk River had shaped his views on atomic energy and led him to cease the development of a neutron bomb.

In March 1953, Carter began a six-month nuclear power plant operation course at Union College in Schenectady. His intent was to eventually work aboard , which was intended to be the second U.S. nuclear submarine. His plans changed when his father died of pancreatic cancer in July, two months before construction of &quot;Seawolf&quot; began, and Carter obtained a release from active duty so he could take over the family peanut business. Deciding to leave Schenectady proved difficult, as Rosalynn had grown comfortable with their life there. She later said that returning to small-town life in Plains seemed &quot;a monumental step backward&quot;. Carter left active duty on October 9, 1953. He served in the inactive Navy Reserve until 1961 and left with the rank of lieutenant. Carter&#x27;s awards include the American Campaign Medal, World War II Victory Medal, China Service Medal, and National Defense Service Medal. As a submarine officer, he also earned the &quot;dolphin&quot; badge.

== Farming ==
After debt settlements and division of his father&#x27;s estate, Jimmy inherited comparatively little. For a year, he, Rosalynn, and their three sons lived in public housing in Plains. Carter set out to expand the family&#x27;s peanut-growing business. Transitioning from the Navy to farming was difficult as his first-year harvest failed due to drought, and Carter had to open several lines of credit to keep the farm afloat. He took classes and studied agriculture while Rosalynn learned accounting to manage the business&#x27;s books. Though they barely broke even the first year, the Carters grew the business and became quite successful.

== Early political career (1963–1971) ==
=== Georgia state senator (1963–1967) ===
As racial tension inflamed in Plains by the 1954 Supreme Court of the United States ruling in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, Carter favored integration but often kept those feelings to himself to avoid making enemies. By 1961, Carter began to speak more prominently of integration as a member of the Baptist Church and chairman of the Sumter County school board. In 1962, he announced his campaign for an open Georgia State Senate seat. Rosalynn, who had an instinct for politics and organization, was instrumental in his campaign. While early counting of the ballots showed Carter trailing his opponent, Homer Moore, this was later proven to be the result of fraudulent voting.Another election was held, in which Carter defeated Moore as the sole Democratic candidate. He served in both the 127th Georgia General Assembly and the 128th Georgia General Assembly.

The civil rights movement was well underway when Carter took office. Carter remained relatively quiet on the issue at first, even as it polarized much of the county, to avoid alienating his segregationist colleagues. Carter did speak up on a few divisive issues, giving speeches against literacy tests and against an amendment to the Georgia Constitution that he felt implied a compulsion to practice religion. Carter entered the state Democratic Executive Committee two years into office, where he helped rewrite the state party&#x27;s rules. He became the chairman of the West Central Georgia Planning and Development Commission, which oversaw the disbursement of federal and state grants for projects such as historic site restoration.

When Bo Callaway was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1964, Carter immediately began planning to challenge him. The two had previously clashed over which two-year college would be expanded to a four-year college program by the state, and Carter saw Callaway—who had switched to the Republican Party—as representing aspects of politics he despised. Carter was reelected to a second two-year term in the state Senate, where he chaired its Education Committee and sat on the Appropriations Committee. He contributed to a bill expanding statewide education funding and getting Georgia Southwestern State University a four-year program. He leveraged his regional planning work, giving speeches around the district to make himself more visible to potential voters. On the last day of the term, Carter announced his candidacy for the House of Representatives. Callaway decided to run for governor instead; Carter decided to do the same.

=== 1966 and 1970 gubernatorial campaigns ===
In the 1966 gubernatorial election, Carter ran against liberal former governor Ellis Arnall and conservative segregationist Lester Maddox in the Democratic primary. In a press conference, he described his ideology as &quot;Conservative, moderate, liberal and middle-of-the-road ... I believe I am a more complicated person than that.&quot; He lost the primary but drew enough votes as a third-place candidate to force Arnall into a runoff election with Maddox, who defeated Arnall. In the general election, Republican nominee Callaway won a plurality of the vote but less than a majority, allowing the Democratic-majority Georgia House of Representatives to elect Maddox as governor. Maddox&#x27;s victory—due to his segregationist stance—was seen as the worst outcome for the indebted Carter. Carter returned to his agriculture business, carefully planning his next campaign. This period was a spiritual turning point for Carter; he declared himself a born again Christian. His last child, Amy, was born during this time.

In the 1970 gubernatorial election, liberal former governor Carl Sanders became Carter&#x27;s main opponent in the Democratic primary. Carter ran a more modern campaign, employing printed graphics and statistical analysis. Responding to polls, he leaned more conservative than before, positioning himself as a populist and criticizing Sanders for both his wealth and perceived links to the national Democratic Party. He also accused Sanders of corruption, but when pressed by the media, he did not provide evidence. Throughout his campaign, Carter sought both the black vote and the votes of those who had supported prominent Alabama segregationist George Wallace. While he met with black figures such as Martin Luther King Sr. and Andrew Young and visited many black-owned businesses, he also praised Wallace and promised to invite him to give a speech in Georgia. Carter&#x27;s appeal to racism became more blatant over time, with his senior campaign aides handing out a photograph of Sanders celebrating with Black basketball players.

Carter came ahead of Sanders in the first ballot, leading to a runoff election. The subsequent campaign was even more bitter. Despite his early support for civil rights, Carter&#x27;s appeal to racism grew, and he criticized Sanders for supporting Martin Luther King Jr. Carter won the runoff election and won the general election against Republican nominee Hal Suit. Once elected, Carter began to speak against Georgia&#x27;s racist politics. Leroy Johnson, a black state senator, voiced his support for Carter: &quot;I understand why he ran that kind of ultra-conservative campaign. I don&#x27;t believe you can win this state without being a racist.&quot;

== Georgia governorship (1971–1975) ==
Carter was sworn in as the 76th governor of Georgia on January 12, 1971. In his inaugural speech, he declared that &quot;the time for racial discrimination is over&quot;, shocking the crowd and causing many segregationists who had supported his candidacy to feel betrayed. Carter was reluctant to engage with fellow politicians, making him unpopular with the legislature. He expanded the governor&#x27;s authority by introducing a reorganization plan submitted in January 1972. Despite an initially cool reception in the legislature, the plan passed at midnight on the last day of the session. Carter merged about 300 state agencies into 22, although it is disputed whether that saved the state money. On July 8, 1971, during an appearance in Columbus, Georgia, he stated his intention to establish a Georgia Human Rights Council.

In a July 1971 news conference, Carter announced that he had ordered department heads to reduce spending to prevent a $57 million deficit by the end of the 1972 fiscal year, specifying that each state department would be affected and estimating that five percent over government revenue would be lost if state departments continued to fully use allocated funds. In January 1972, he requested that the state legislature fund an early childhood development program along with prison reform programs and $48 million (equivalent to $ in ) in paid taxes for nearly all state employees.

In March 1972, Carter said he might call a special session of the general assembly if the Justice Department struck down any reapportionment plans by either the House or Senate. He pushed several reforms through the legislature, providing equal state aid to schools, setting up community centers for mentally disabled children, and increasing educational programs for convicts. In one of his more controversial decisions, he vetoed a plan to build a dam on Georgia&#x27;s Flint River, which attracted the attention of environmentalists nationwide.
Civil rights were a high priority for Carter, who added black state employees and portraits of three prominent black Georgians to the capitol building. This angered the Ku Klux Klan. He favored a constitutional amendment to ban busing for the purpose of expediting integration in schools on a televised joint appearance with Florida Governor Reubin Askew on January 31, 1973, and co-sponsored an anti-busing resolution with Wallace at the 1971 National Governors Conference. After the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Georgia&#x27;s death penalty statute in &quot;Furman v. Georgia&quot; (1972), Carter signed a revised statute that reintroduced the practice. He later regretted endorsing the death penalty, saying, &quot;I didn&#x27;t see the injustice of it as I do now.&quot;

Ineligible for a second consecutive term under the 1945 Georgia Constitution, Carter considered running for president and engaged in national politics. He was named to several southern planning commissions and a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention, where U.S. Senator George McGovern was the likely nominee. Carter tried to ingratiate himself with conservative and anti-McGovern voters. He was fairly obscure at the time, and his attempt at triangulation failed. On August 3, Carter met with Wallace in Birmingham, Alabama, to discuss preventing the Democrats from losing in a landslide, but they did.

Carter regularly met with his fledgling campaign staff and decided to start putting together a presidential campaign for 1976. He tried unsuccessfully to become chairman of the National Governors Association to boost his visibility. With David Rockefeller&#x27;s endorsement, he was named to the Trilateral Commission in April 1973. The next year, he was named chairman of the Democratic National Committee&#x27;s congressional and gubernatorial campaigns. In May 1973, Carter warned his party against politicizing the Watergate scandal, which he attributed to president Richard Nixon&#x27;s isolation from Americans and secretive decision-making.

== 1976 presidential campaign ==


On December 12, 1974, Carter announced his presidential campaign at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. His speech contained themes of domestic inequality, optimism, and change. Upon his entrance in the Democratic primaries, he was competing against sixteen other candidates, and was considered to have little chance against the more nationally known politicians such as Wallace. His name recognition was very low, and his opponents derisively asked &quot;Jimmy Who?&quot;. In response to this, Carter began to emphasize his name and what he stood for, stating &quot;My name is Jimmy Carter, and I&#x27;m running for president.&quot;

This strategy proved successful. By mid-March 1976, Carter was not only far ahead of the active contenders for the presidential nomination, but led incumbent Republican president Gerald Ford by a few percentage points. As the Watergate scandal was still fresh in the voters&#x27; minds, Carter&#x27;s position as an outsider proved helpful. He promoted government reorganization. In June, Carter published a memoir titled &quot;Why Not the Best?&quot; to introduce himself to the American public.
Carter became the front-runner early on by winning the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. His strategy involved reaching a region before another candidate could extend influence there, traveling over , visiting 37 states, and delivering over 200 speeches before any other candidate had entered the race. In the South, he tacitly conceded certain areas to Wallace and swept them as a moderate when it became clear Wallace could not win the region. In the North, Carter appealed largely to conservative Christian and rural voters. While he did not achieve a majority in most Northern states, he won several by building the largest singular support base. Although Carter was initially dismissed as a regional candidate, he would clinch the Democratic nomination. In 1980, Laurence Shoup noted that the national news media discovered and promoted Carter, and stated:


During an interview in April 1976, Carter said, &quot;I have nothing against a community that is... trying to maintain the ethnic purity of their neighborhoods.&quot; His remark was intended as supportive of open housing laws, but specifying opposition to government efforts to &quot;inject black families into a white neighborhood just to create some sort of integration&quot;. Carter&#x27;s stated positions during his campaign included public financing of congressional campaigns, supporting the creation of a federal consumer protection agency, creating a separate cabinet-level department for education, signing a peace treaty with the Soviet Union to limit nuclear weapons, reducing the defense budget, a tax proposal implementing &quot;a substantial increase toward those who have the higher incomes&quot; alongside a levy reduction on taxpayers with lower and middle incomes, making multiple amendments to the Social Security Act, and having a balanced budget by the end of his first term.

On July 15, 1976, Carter chose U.S. senator Walter Mondale as his running mate. Carter and Ford faced off in three televised debates, the first United States presidential debates since 1960.

For the November 1976 issue of &quot;Playboy&quot;, which hit newsstands a couple of weeks before the election, Robert Scheer interviewed Carter. While discussing his religion&#x27;s view of pride, Carter said: &quot;I&#x27;ve looked on a lot of women with lust. I&#x27;ve committed adultery in my heart many times.&quot; This response and his admission in another interview that he did not mind if people uttered the word &quot;fuck&quot; led to a media feeding frenzy and critics lamenting the erosion of boundary between politicians and their private intimate lives.

=== Election ===
Carter once had a sizable lead over Ford in national polling, but by late September his lead had narrowed to only several points. In the final days before the election, several polls showed that Ford had tied Carter, and one Gallup poll found that he was slightly ahead. Most analysts agreed that Carter was going to win the popular vote, but some argued Ford had an opportunity to win the electoral college and thus the election.

Carter and Mondale ultimately defeated Ford and his runningmate (Senator Bob Dole), receiving 297 electoral votes and 50.1% of the popular vote. Carter&#x27;s victory was attributed in part to his overwhelming support among black voters in states decided by close margins. In Ohio and Wisconsin, where the margin between Carter and Ford was under two points, the black vote was crucial for Carter; if he had not won both states, Ford would have won the election.

=== Transition ===
Preliminary planning for Carter&#x27;s presidential transition had been underway for months before his election. Carter had been the first presidential candidate to allot significant funds and a significant number of personnel to a pre-election transition planning effort, which then became standard practice. He set a mold that influenced all future transitions to be larger, more methodical and more formal than they were.

On November 22, 1976, Carter conducted his first visit to Washington, D.C. after being elected, meeting with director of the Office of Management and Budget James Lynn and United States secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld at the Blair House, and holding an afternoon meeting with President Ford at the White House. The next day, he conferred with congressional leaders, saying that his meetings with cabinet members had been &quot;very helpful&quot; and that Ford had offered his assistance if he needed anything. Relations between Ford and Carter were relatively cold during the transition. During his transition, Carter announced the selection of numerous designees for positions in his administration.

A few weeks before his inauguration, Carter moved his peanut business into the hands of trustees to avoid a potential conflict of interest. He also asked incoming members of his administration to divest themselves of assets through blind trusts.

== Presidency (1977–1981) ==

Carter was inaugurated as the 39th president on January 20, 1977. One of Carter&#x27;s first acts was the fulfillment of a campaign promise by issuing Proclamation 4483 declaring unconditional amnesty for Vietnam War-era draft evaders. Carter&#x27;s tenure in office was marked by an economic malaise, a time of continuing inflation and recession and the 1979 energy crisis. Under Carter, in May 1980, the Federal Trade Commission became &quot;apparently the first agency ever closed by a budget dispute&quot;, but Congress took action and the agency opened the next day.

Carter attempted to calm various conflicts around the world, most visibly in the Middle East with the signing of the Camp David Accords; giving the Panama Canal to Panama; and signing the SALT II nuclear arms reduction treaty with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. His final year was marred by the Iran hostage crisis, which contributed to his losing the 1980 election to Ronald Reagan. Whistleblowers have alleged, most recently in 2023, that people working on the Reagan campaign&#x27;s behalf convinced Iran to prolong the crisis to reduce Carter&#x27;s chance of reelection.

=== Domestic policy ===

====Holidays and proclamations====
In 1978, Carter signed into law a bill creating a celebration in May called Asian American Heritage Week. May 7 and 10 were designated for national observance and recognition of the contributions of Asian Americans and Asian immigrants to American society. In 1992, President George H. W. Bush signed a bill expanding the celebration into Asian American Heritage Month. In 2021, President Biden signed a bill renaming this celebration Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Heritage Month.

==== Economy ====

The first two years of Carter&#x27;s presidency were a time of intense stagflation, primarily due to recovery from a previous recession that had left fixed investment at extreme lows and unemployment at 9%. Under Carter, the unemployment rate declined from 8.1% when he took office to 5.7% by July 1978, but during the early 1980s recession it returned to its pre-1977 level. His last two years were marked by double-digit inflation, very high interest rates, oil shortages, and slow economic growth. Due to economic stimulus legislation, such as the Public Works Employment Act of 1977, proposed by Carter and passed by Congress, real household median income had grown by 5.2%, with a projection of 6.4% for the next quarter.

The 1979 energy crisis ended this period of growth, and as inflation and interest rates rose, economic growth, job creation and consumer confidence declined sharply. Federal Reserve Board chairman G. William Miller&#x27;s relatively loose monetary policy had already contributed to somewhat higher inflation, rising from 5.8% in 1976 to 7.7% in 1978. The sudden doubling of crude oil prices forced inflation to double-digit levels, averaging 11.3% in 1979 and 13.5% in 1980. The sudden shortage of gasoline as the 1979 summer vacation season began exacerbated the problem and came to symbolize the crisis to the general public; the acute shortage, originating in the shutdown of Amerada Hess refining facilities, led the federal government to sue the company that year.

==== Environment ====
During his 1976 campaign, Carter promised to sign into law any bills Congress passed to regulate strip mining. In 1977, Carter signed the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, which regulated strip mining.

In 1978, Carter declared a federal emergency in the Love Canal neighborhood of Niagara Falls, New York. More than 800 families were evacuated from the neighborhood, which was on top of a toxic waste landfill. The Superfund law was created in response to the situation. Federal disaster money was appropriated to demolish about 500 houses and two schools built atop the dump, and to remediate the dump and construct a containment area for the hazardous waste. This was the first time such a process had been undertaken. Carter acknowledged that several more &quot;Love Canals&quot; existed across the country, and that discovering such hazardous dump sites was &quot;one of the grimmest discoveries of our modern era&quot;.

In December 1978, Carter used the 1906 Antiquities Act and his executive order power to designate of land in Alaska as a national monument. This executive order protected the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge until Congress codified it into law with the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980, which doubled the amount of public land set aside for national parks and wildlife refuges.

==== U.S. energy crisis ====

Moralism typified much of Carter&#x27;s action. On April 18, 1977, he delivered a televised speech declaring that the energy crisis was the &quot;moral equivalent of war&quot;. He encouraged energy conservation and installed solar water heating panels on the White House. He wore a cardigan to offset turning down the heat in the White House. On August 4, 1977, Carter signed the Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977, forming the Department of Energy, the first new cabinet position in eleven years.

Carter emphasized that the House of Representatives had &quot;adopted almost all&quot; of the energy proposal he had made five months earlier and called the compromise &quot;a turning point in establishing a comprehensive energy program.&quot; The next month, he called energy &quot;the most important domestic issue that we will face while I am in office&quot;.

On January 12, 1978, Carter said the continued discussions about his energy reform proposal had been &quot;long and divisive and arduous&quot;. In an April 11, 1978, news conference, Carter said his biggest surprise &quot;in the nature of a disappointment&quot; since becoming president was the difficulty Congress had in passing legislation, citing the energy reform bill in particular. After much deliberation and modification, Congress approved the Carter energy legislation on October 15, 1978. It deregulated the sale of natural gas, dropped a longstanding pricing disparity between intra- and interstate gas, and created tax credits to encourage energy conservation and the use of non-fossil fuels.

On March 1, 1979, Carter submitted a standby gasoline rationing plan per the request of Congress. On April 5, he delivered an address in which he stressed the urgency of energy conservation and increasing domestic production of energy sources.

On July 15, 1979, Carter delivered a nationally televised address in which he identified what he believed to be a &quot;&quot; among American people, under the advisement of pollster Pat Caddell who believed Americans faced a crisis in confidence from events of the 1960s and 1970s, before his presidency. Some later called this his &quot;malaise speech&quot;, memorable for mixed reactions and his use of rhetoric. The speech&#x27;s negative reception centered on a view that he did not emphasize his own efforts to address the energy crisis and seemed too reliant on Americans.

==== Relations with Congress ====
Carter typically refused to conform to Washington&#x27;s rules. He avoided phone calls from members of Congress and verbally insulted them. He was unwilling to return political favors. His negativity led to frustration in passing legislation. During a press conference on February 23, 1977, Carter stated that it was &quot;inevitable&quot; that he would come into conflict with Congress and added that he had found &quot;a growing sense of cooperation&quot; with Congress and met in the past with congressional members of both parties. Carter developed a bitter feeling following an unsuccessful attempt at having Congress enact the scrapping of several water projects.

As a rift ensued between the White House and Congress afterward, Carter noted that the Democratic Party&#x27;s liberal wing opposed his policies the most ardently, attributing this to Ted Kennedy&#x27;s wanting the presidency. Thinking he had support from 74 Congressmen, Carter issued a &quot;hit list&quot; of 19 projects that he claimed were &quot;pork barrel&quot; spending that he said he would veto if they were included in legislation. He found himself again at odds with Congressional Democrats, as House Speaker Tip O&#x27;Neill found it inappropriate for a president to pursue what had traditionally been the role of Congress. Carter was also weakened by signing a bill that contained many of the &quot;hit list&quot; projects he had intended to veto.

In an address to a fundraising dinner for the Democratic National Committee on June 23, 1977, Carter said, &quot;I think it&#x27;s good to point out tonight, too, that we have evolved a good working relationship with the Congress. For eight years we had government by partisanship. Now we have government by partnership.&quot; At a July 28 news conference, assessing the first six months of his presidency, Carter spoke of his improved understanding of Congress: I have learned to respect the Congress more in an individual basis. I&#x27;ve been favorably impressed at the high degree of concentrated experience and knowledge that individual members of Congress can bring on a specific subject, where they&#x27;ve been the chairman of a subcommittee or committee for many years and have focused their attention on this particular aspect of government life which I will never be able to do.

On May 10, 1979, the House voted against giving Carter authority to produce a standby gas rationing plan. The following day, Carter described himself as shocked and embarrassed for the U.S. government by the vote and concluded &quot;the majority of the House Members are unwilling to take the responsibility, the political responsibility for dealing with a potential, serious threat to our Nation.&quot; He added that most House members were placing higher importance on &quot;local or parochial interests&quot; and challenged the House to compose its own rationing plan in the next 90 days.

Carter&#x27;s remarks were met with criticism by House Republicans, who accused his comments of not befitting the formality a president should have in their public remarks. Others pointed to 106 Democrats voting against his proposal and the bipartisan criticism potentially coming back to haunt him. At a news conference on July 25, 1979, Carter called on believers in the future of the U.S. and his proposed energy program to speak with Congress as it bore the responsibility to impose his proposals. Amid the energy proposal opposition, &quot;The New York Times&quot; commented that &quot;as the comments flying up and down Pennsylvania Avenue illustrate, there is also a crisis of confidence between Congress and the President, sense of doubt and distrust that threatens to undermine the President&#x27;s legislative program and become an important issue in next year&#x27;s campaign.&quot;

==== Deregulation ====


In 1977, Carter appointed Alfred E. Kahn to lead the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). He was part of a push for deregulation of the industry, supported by leading economists, leading think tanks in Washington, a civil society coalition advocating the reform, the head of the regulatory agency, Senate leadership, the Carter administration, and even some in the airline industry. This coalition swiftly gained legislative results in 1978.

Carter signed the Airline Deregulation Act into law on October 24, 1978. The main purpose of the act was to remove government control over fares, routes and market entry (of new airlines) from commercial aviation. The Civil Aeronautics Board&#x27;s powers of regulation were to be phased out, eventually allowing market forces to determine routes and fares. The Act did not remove or diminish the Federal Aviation Administration&#x27;s regulatory powers over airline safety.

In 1978, Carter signed a bill into law &quot;allowing homebrewing and small-scale craft brewing to operate legally&quot;. The new law deregulated the American beer industry by making it legal to sell malt, hops, and yeast to American home brewers for the first time since the 1920 beginning of prohibition in the United States. This deregulation led to an increase in home brewing that by the 2000s had developed into a strong craft microbrew culture in the United States.

==== Chrysler bailout ====

In the late 1970s, the Chrysler Cooperation—one of the &quot;Big Three&quot; automakers in the U.S.—faced near-certain bankruptcy as it projected a loss of $1billion. Carter proposed that the company forgo salary increases and bonuses, saying that it might be done &quot;without decimating the company or putting it on its knees&quot;, but the company had already frozen wage increases and bonuses months before, to no avail. In 1979, Congress began working on a bailout plan for Chrysler, led by Congressman James J. Blanchard. Carter assembled a team that included Vice President Mondale and Assistant Domestic Policy Adviser David Rubenstein to secure a $1.5 billion loan guarantee.

In December, Congress passed the Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979 to bail Chrysler out with $3.5billion (equivalent to $billion in ) in aid. The bill turned over $162 million in stock to Chrysler&#x27;s workers, eliminated around $125 million in wage increases, and gave Chrysler $500 million in bank loans. Carter, who had initially opposed the bailout of corporations, signed it into law in January, saying that the bill saved thousands of jobs. The bailout was successful at the time, but Chrysler would eventually file for bankruptcy during the 2008 financial crisis.

==== Healthcare ====
During his presidential campaign, Carter embraced healthcare reform akin to the Ted Kennedy-sponsored bipartisan universal national health insurance. Carter&#x27;s proposals on healthcare while in office included a 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal, and a 1979 proposal that provided private health insurance coverage. The 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal was passed in the Senate, but later defeated in the House. During 1978, he met with Kennedy over a compromise healthcare law that proved unsuccessful. He later said Kennedy&#x27;s disagreements thwarted his plan to provide a comprehensive American health care system.

In 1980, Carter signed into law the Mental Health Systems (MHSA) Act, which allocated block grants to states to bolster community health services and provided funding to states to create and implement community-based health services. The MHSA was considered landmark legislation in mental health care. By September 1981, the Reagan administration had repealed most of the law.

==== Education ====

Early into his term, Carter collaborated with Congress to fulfill his campaign promise to create a cabinet-level education department. In an address from the White House on February 28, 1978, Carter argued &quot;Education is far too important a matter to be scattered piecemeal among various government departments and agencies, which are often busy with sometimes dominant concerns.&quot; On February 8, 1979, the Carter administration released an outline of its plan to establish an education department and asserted enough support for the enactment to occur by June. On October 17, the same year, Carter signed the Department of Education Organization Act into law, establishing the United States Department of Education.

Carter added 43,000 children and families to the Head Start program, while the percentage of nondefense dollars spent on education was doubled. In a speech on November 1, 1980, Carter stated his administration had extended Head Start to migrant children.

==== LGBTQ rights ====
During Carter&#x27;s administration, the United States Foreign Service &quot;lifted its ban on gay and lesbian personnel&quot;. In 1977, the Carter administration became the first U.S. presidential administration to invite gay and lesbian rights activists to the White House to discuss federal policy with regard to ending employment discrimination in the federal government on the basis of sexual orientation and related issues.

=== Foreign policy ===


==== Israel and Egypt ====


From the onset of his presidency, Carter attempted to mediate the Arab–Israeli conflict. After a failed attempt to seek a comprehensive settlement in 1977 (through reconvening the 1973 Geneva conference), Carter invited the Egyptian president Anwar Sadat and Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin to the presidential lodge Camp David in September 1978, in hopes of creating a definitive peace. While the two sides could not agree on Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank, the negotiations resulted in Egypt formally recognizing Israel, and the creation of an elected government in the West Bank and Gaza. This resulted in the Camp David Accords, which ended the war between Israel and Egypt.

The accords were a source of great domestic opposition in both Egypt and Israel. Historian Jørgen Jensehaugen argues that by the time Carter left office in January 1981, he was &quot;in an odd position—he had attempted to break with traditional U.S. policy but ended up fulfilling the goals of that tradition, which had been to break up the Arab alliance, sideline the Palestinians, build an alliance with Egypt, weaken the Soviet Union and secure Israel.&quot;

==== Africa ====
In an address to the African officials at the United Nations on October 4, 1977, Carter stated the U.S.&#x27;s interest to &quot;see a strong, vigorous, free, and prosperous Africa with as much of the control of government as possible in the hands of the residents of your countries&quot; and pointed to their unified efforts on &quot;the problem of how to resolve the Rhodesian, Zimbabwe question.&quot; At a news conference later that month, Carter said the U.S. wanted to &quot;work harmoniously with South Africa in dealing with the threats to peace in Namibia and in Zimbabwe in particular&quot;, to do away with racial issues such as apartheid, and to work for equal opportunities in other facets of society in the region.

Despite human rights concerns, Carter continued U.S. support for Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire. Zaire received nearly half the foreign aid Carter allocated to sub-Saharan Africa. Under Carter an alliance with Liberia&#x27;s Samuel Doe, who had come to power in a 1980 coup, was pursued.
Carter visited Nigeria from March 31 to April 3, 1978, to improve relations, the first U.S. president to do so. He reiterated interest in convening a peace conference on Rhodesia that involved all parties.

The elections of Margaret Thatcher as prime minister of the United Kingdom and Abel Muzorewa for Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia, South Africa turning down a plan for South West Africa&#x27;s independence, and domestic opposition in Congress were seen as a heavy blow to the Carter administration&#x27;s policy toward South Africa. On May 16, 1979, the Senate voted in favor of lifting economic sanctions against Rhodesia, seen by some Rhodesians and South Africans as a potentially fatal blow to joint diplomacy efforts and any compromise between the Salisbury leaders and guerrillas. On December 3, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance promised Senator Jesse Helms that when the British governor arrived in Salisbury to implement an agreed Lancaster House settlement and the electoral process began, the President would take prompt action to lift sanctions against Zimbabwe Rhodesia.

==== East Asia ====
Carter sought closer relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC), continuing the Nixon administration&#x27;s drastic policy of rapprochement. The two countries increasingly collaborated against the Soviet Union, and the Carter administration tacitly consented to the Chinese invasion of Vietnam. In December 1978, he announced the United States&#x27; intention to formally recognize and establish full diplomatic relations with the PRC starting on January 1, 1979, while severing ties with Taiwan, including revoking a mutual defense treaty with the latter. In 1979, Carter extended formal diplomatic recognition to the PRC for the first time. This decision led to a boom in trade between the United States and the PRC, which was pursuing economic reforms under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping. Carter supported the China-allied Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia fighting the Soviet-backed Vietnamese invasion. 

After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Carter allowed the sale of military supplies to China and began negotiations to share military intelligence. In January 1980, Carter unilaterally revoked the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with the Republic of China (ROC). Conservative Republicans challenged Carter&#x27;s abrogation of the treaty in court, but the Supreme Court ruled that the issue was a non-justiciable political question in &quot;Goldwater v. Carter&quot;. The U.S. continued to maintain quasi-diplomatic contacts with the ROC through the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act.

During Carter&#x27;s presidency, the U.S. continued to support Indonesia under Suharto as a Cold War ally, despite human rights violations in East Timor. The violations followed Indonesia&#x27;s December 1975 invasion of East Timor. Under Carter&#x27;s administration military assistance to Indonesia increased, peaking in 1978. This was antithetical to Carter&#x27;s stated policy of &quot;not selling weapons if it would exacerbate a potential conflict in a region&quot;. In the Philippines, Carter supported the regime of President Ferdinand Marcos.

During a news conference on March 9, 1977, Carter reaffirmed his interest in having a gradual withdrawal of American troops from South Korea. On May 19, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; quoted Chief of Staff of U.S. forces in South Korea John K. Singlaub as criticizing Carter&#x27;s withdrawal of troops from the Korean peninsula. Carter relieved Singlaub of his duties on May 21.

During a news conference on May 26, 1977, Carter said South Korea could defend itself with reduced American troops in case of conflict. From June 30 to July 1, 1979, Carter held meetings with president of South Korea Park Chung Hee for a discussion on relations between the U.S. and South Korea as well as Carter&#x27;s interest in preserving his policy of worldwide tension reduction. On April 21, 1978, Carter announced a reduction in American troops in South Korea scheduled to be released by the end of the year by two-thirds, citing lack of action by Congress in regard to a compensatory aid package for the South Korean government. He supported South Korean President Chun Doo-hwan during the suppression of the Gwangju Uprising in May 1980. South Korean pro-democracy activist Kim Dae-jung was sentenced to death in September 1980, but his sentence was commuted after the intervention of presidents Carter and Reagan.

==== Iran ====
On November 15, 1977, Carter pledged that his administration would continue positive relations between the U.S. and Iran, calling its contemporary status &quot;strong, stable and progressive&quot;. On December 31, 1977, he called Iran under the Shah an &quot;island of stability&quot;. Carter praised the Shah&#x27;s &quot;great leadership&quot; and spoke of &quot;personal friendship&quot; between them. American support for the unpopular Shah increased anti-American sentiment in Iran, which intensified after the Shah, who was dying of cancer, left Iran for the last time in January 1979 and Carter allowed him to be admitted to the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York on October 22, 1979.

On November 4, 1979, a group of Iranian students took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. The students belonged to the Muslim Student Followers of the Imam&#x27;s Line and supported the Iranian revolution. Fifty-two American diplomats and citizens were held hostage for the next 444 days. They were freed immediately after Ronald Reagan succeeded Carter as president on January 20, 1981. During the crisis, Carter remained in isolation in the White House for more than 100 days.

A month into the affair, Carter announced his commitment to resolving the dispute without &quot;any military action that would cause bloodshed or arouse the unstable captors of our hostages to attack them or to punish them&quot;. On April 7, 1980, he issued Executive Order 12205, imposing economic sanctions against Iran, and announced further government measures he deemed necessary to ensure a safe release.

On April 24, 1980, Carter ordered Operation Eagle Claw to try to free the hostages. The mission failed, leaving eight American servicemen dead and two aircraft destroyed. The failure led Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who had opposed the mission, to resign.

Released in 2017, a declassified memo produced by the CIA in 1980 concluded &quot;Iranian hardliners—especially Ayatollah Khomeini&quot; were &quot;determined to exploit the hostage issue to bring about President Carter&#x27;s defeat in the November elections.&quot; Additionally, Tehran in 1980 wanted &quot;the world to believe that Imam Khomeini caused President Carter&#x27;s downfall and disgrace.&quot;

==== Soviet Union ====

On February 8, 1977, Carter said he had urged the Soviet Union to align with the U.S. in forming &quot;a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an extended period of time&quot;, and that he was in favor of the Soviet Union ceasing deployment of the RSD-10 Pioneer. At a June 13 press conference, he announced that the U.S. would &quot;work closely with the Soviet Union on a comprehensive test ban treaty to prohibit all testing of nuclear devices underground or in the atmosphere&quot;, and that Paul Warnke would negotiate demilitarization of the Indian Ocean with the Soviet Union.

At a December 30 news conference, Carter said that during &quot;the last few months, the United States and the Soviet Union have made great progress in dealing with a long list of important issues, the most important of which is to control the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons&quot;, and that the two countries sought to conclude SALT II talks by the spring of the next year. The talk of a comprehensive test ban treaty materialized with the signing of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II by Carter and Leonid Brezhnev on June 18, 1979.

In 1979, the Soviets intervened in the Second Yemenite War. The Soviet backing of South Yemen constituted a &quot;smaller shock&quot;, in tandem with tensions that were rising due to the Iranian Revolution. This played a role in making Carter&#x27;s stance on the Soviet Union more assertive, a shift that finalized with the impending Soviet-Afghan War.

In his 1980 State of the Union Address, Carter emphasized the significance of relations between the two regions: &quot;Now, as during the last 3½ decades, the relationship between our country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be engulfed in global conflict.&quot;

===== Soviet invasion of Afghanistan =====
Communists under the leadership of Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power in Afghanistan on April 27, 1978. Due to the regime&#x27;s improvement of secular education and redistribution of land coinciding with mass executions and political oppression, Taraki was deposed by rival Hafizullah Amin in September. Amin was considered a &quot;brutal psychopath&quot; by foreign observers and had lost control of much of the country, prompting the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan on December 24, 1979, execute Amin, and install Babrak Karmal as president.

In the West, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was considered a threat to global security and the oil supplies of the Persian Gulf, as well as the existence of Pakistan. These concerns led Carter to expand collaboration between the CIA and Pakistan&#x27;s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), which had begun in July 1979, when the CIA started providing $695,000 worth of non-lethal assistance to the Afghan mujahideen. The modest scope of this early collaboration was likely influenced by the understanding, later recounted by CIA official Robert Gates, &quot;that a substantial U.S. covert aid program&quot; might have &quot;raise[d] the stakes&quot;, thereby causing &quot;the Soviets to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise intended.&quot;

According to a 2020 review of declassified U.S. documents by Conor Tobin in the journal &quot;Diplomatic History&quot;: The primary significance of this small-scale aid was in creating constructive links with dissidents through Pakistan&#x27;s ISI that could be utilized in the case of an overt Soviet intervention ... The small-scale covert program that developed &quot;in response&quot; to the increasing Soviet influence was part of a contingency plan &quot;if&quot; the Soviets did intervene militarily, as Washington would be in a better position to make it difficult for them to consolidate their position, but not designed to induce an intervention.

On December 28, 1979, Carter signed a presidential finding explicitly allowing the CIA to transfer &quot;lethal military equipment either directly or through third countries to the Afghan opponents of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan&quot; and to arrange &quot;selective training, conducted outside of Afghanistan, in the use of such equipment either directly or via third country intermediation.&quot; His finding defined the CIA&#x27;s mission as &quot;harassment&quot; of Soviet troops; at the time, &quot;this was not a war the CIA expected to win outright on the battlefield,&quot; in the words of Steve Coll.

Carter was determined to respond harshly to what he considered a dangerous provocation. In a televised speech on January 23, 1980, he announced sanctions on the Soviet Union, promised renewed aid and registration to Pakistan and the Selective Service System, and committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulf&#x27;s defense. Carter imposed an embargo on grain shipments to the USSR, tabled SALT II, requested a 5% annual increase in defense spending, and called for a boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, which was ultimately joined by 65 other nations.

In early 1980, Carter determined the thrust of U.S. policy for the duration of the war: he initiated a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistan&#x27;s ISI and secured a pledge from Saudi Arabia to match U.S. funding for this purpose. Despite huge expenditure, the Soviet Union was unable to quell the insurgency and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989. The routing of U.S. aid through Pakistan led to some controversy, as weapons sent to Karachi were frequently controlled by Pakistan, whose government influenced which rebels received assistance. Despite this, Carter has expressed no regret over his decision to support what he considered the Afghan freedom fighters.

==== International trips ====

Carter made twelve international trips to 25 countries as president. He was the first president to make a state visit to Sub-Saharan Africa when he went to Nigeria in 1978. He made several trips to the Middle East to broker peace negotiations. His visit to Iran from December 31, 1977, to January 1, 1978, took place less than a year before the overthrow of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. 
Carter gave his &quot;Island of Stability&quot; speech during this visit.

=== Allegations and investigations ===
On September 21, 1977, the Carter administration&#x27;s Office of Management and Budget director Bert Lance resigned amid allegations of improper banking activities before his tenure. United States Attorney General Griffin Bell appointed Paul J. Curran as a special counsel to investigate loans made to the peanut business Carter owned by a bank controlled by Lance, and Carter became the first sitting president to testify under oath as part of an investigation of him. In October 1979, Curran announced that no evidence had been found to support allegations that funds loaned from the National Bank of Georgia had been diverted to Carter&#x27;s 1976 presidential campaign, ending the investigation.

=== 1980 presidential campaign ===
Carter&#x27;s reelection campaign was based primarily on attacking Ronald Reagan. The campaign frequently pointed out and mocked Reagan&#x27;s proclivity for gaffes, using his age and perceived lack of connection to his native California voter base against him. Later, the campaign used similar rhetoric as Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s 1964 presidential campaign, portraying Reagan as a warmonger who could not be trusted with the nuclear arsenal. Carter attempted to deny the Reagan campaign $29.4 million (equivalent to $ in ) in campaign funds, due to dependent conservative groups already raising $60 million to get him elected—an amount that exceeded the limit of campaign funds. Carter&#x27;s attempt was later denied by the Federal Election Commission.

Carter announced his reelection campaign in December 1979. A month earlier, Senator Ted Kennedy had announced his candidacy for the Democratic nomination. During the Democratic presidential primaries, questions about Kennedy were a frequent subject of Carter&#x27;s press conferences. Despite winning key states such as California and New York, Kennedy surprised his supporters by running a weak campaign. Carter won most of the primaries and secured renomination. He later wrote that the strongest opposition to his policies came from the Democratic Party&#x27;s liberal wing, which he attributed to Kennedy. Kennedy had mobilized the liberal wing, which weakened Carter&#x27;s support in the general election.

Carter and Mondale were formally nominated at the 1980 Democratic National Convention in New York City. Carter delivered a speech notable for its tribute to the late Hubert Humphrey, whom he initially called &quot;Hubert Horatio Hornblower&quot;, and Kennedy made &quot;The Dream Shall Never Die&quot; speech, in which he criticized Reagan and did not endorse Carter.

Along with Reagan and Kennedy, Carter was opposed by centrist John B. Anderson, who had previously contested the Republican presidential primaries, and upon losing to Reagan, reentered the race as an independent. Anderson advertised himself as a more liberal alternative to Reagan&#x27;s conservatism. As the campaign went on, Anderson&#x27;s polling numbers dropped and his base was gradually pulled to Carter or Reagan. Carter had to run against his own &quot;stagflation&quot;-ridden economy, while the hostage crisis in Iran dominated the news. He was attacked by conservatives for failing to &quot;prevent Soviet gains&quot; in less-developed countries, as pro-Soviet governments had taken power in countries including Angola, Ethiopia, Nicaragua and Afghanistan. His brother, Billy Carter, caused controversy due to his association with Muammar Gaddafi&#x27;s regime in Libya. Carter alienated many liberal college students, who were expected to be one of his strongest support bases, by reactivating the Selective Service System on July 2, 1980, reinstating registration for the military draft. His campaign manager, Timothy Kraft, stepped down five weeks before the general election amid what turned out to be an uncorroborated allegation of cocaine use.

On October 28, Carter and Reagan participated in the sole presidential debate of the election cycle in which they were both present, due to Carter refusing to participate in debates that included Anderson. Though initially trailing Carter by several points, Reagan experienced a surge in polling after the debate. This was in part influenced by Reagan deploying the phrase &quot;There you go again&quot;, which became the election&#x27;s defining phrase. It was later discovered that in the final days of the campaign, Reagan&#x27;s team acquired classified documents Carter used to prepare for the debate.

Reagan and his running mate (George H. W. Bush) defeated Carter and Mondale in a landslide, winning 489 electoral votes. The Senate went Republican for the first time since 1952. Carter&#x27;s 49 electoral votes were the second-fewest for an incumbent president seeking reelection. In his concession speech, Carter admitted that he was hurt by the election&#x27;s outcome but pledged &quot;a very fine transition period&quot; with President-elect Reagan.

== Post-presidency (1981–2024) ==

Shortly after losing reelection, Carter told the White House press corps that he intended to emulate the retirement of Harry S. Truman and not use his subsequent public life to enrich himself.

=== Diplomacy ===
Diplomacy was a large part of Carter&#x27;s post-presidency. These diplomatic efforts began in the Middle East, with a September 1981 meeting with prime minister of Israel Menachem Begin, and a March 1983 tour of Egypt that included meeting with members of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

In 2018, official files revealed that, in January 1993, Carter had been suggested for a Northern Ireland peace process role by president-elect Bill Clinton amid speculation that Clinton would appoint a special envoy for Northern Ireland.

In 1994, Clinton sought Carter&#x27;s assistance in a North Korea peace mission, during which Carter negotiated an understanding with Kim Il Sung. Carter outlined a treaty with Kim, which he announced to CNN without the Clinton administration&#x27;s consent to spur American action.
In March 1999, Carter visited Taiwan and met with President Lee Teng-hui. During the meeting, Carter praised the progress Taiwan made in democracy, human rights, economy, culture, science, and technology. But Carter remained a controversial figure in Taiwan for having ended U.S. diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (Taiwan).

In 2003, Carter championed a plan to hold elections in Venezuela amid protests aimed at doing so. Ultimately, no elections were held.

In 2006, Carter stated his disagreements with Israel&#x27;s domestic and foreign policy while saying he supported the country, extending his criticisms to Israel&#x27;s policies in Lebanon, the West Bank, and Gaza.

In July 2007, Carter joined Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg, South Africa, to announce his participation in The Elders, a group of independent global leaders working together on peace and human rights issues. After the announcement, Carter participated in visits to Darfur, Sudan, Cyprus, the Korean Peninsula, and the Middle East, among others. He attempted to travel to Zimbabwe in 2008, but was stopped by President Robert Mugabe&#x27;s government. In December 2008, Carter met with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and in a June 2012 call with Jeffery Brown, he stressed that Egyptian military generals could take full executive and legislative power to form a new constitution favoring themselves if their announced intentions came true.

On August 10, 2010, Carter traveled to North Korea and negotiated the release of Aijalon Gomes. In 2017, as tensions between the U.S. and North Korea persisted, Carter recommended a peace treaty between the two nations, and confirmed that he had volunteered to the Trump administration to be a diplomatic envoy to North Korea.

=== Views on later presidents ===
Carter began his first year out of office with a pledge not to critique the Reagan administration, saying it was &quot;too early&quot;. He sided with Reagan on issues like building neutron arms after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, but frequently spoke out against his administration, denouncing many of its actions in the Middle East. He condemned the handling of the Sabra and Shatila massacre, the lack of efforts to rescue and retrieve four American businessmen from West Beirut in 1984, Reagan&#x27;s support of the Strategic Defense Initiative in 1985, and his claim of an international conspiracy on terrorism. In 1987 he criticized Reagan for conceding to terrorist demands, nominating Robert Bork for the Supreme Court, and his handling of the Persian Gulf crisis.

On January 16, 1989, before the inauguration of George H. W. Bush, Carter told Gerald Ford that Reagan had experienced a media honeymoon, saying that he believed Reagan&#x27;s immediate successor would be less fortunate.

Carter had a mostly poor relationship with Bill Clinton, who snubbed him from his inauguration ceremony. He questioned the Clinton administration&#x27;s morality, particularly with respect to the Monica Lewinsky scandal and the pardon of Marc Rich.

In July 2001, Carter said he was &quot;disappointed in almost everything&quot; President George W. Bush had done, but after the September 11 attacks, he offered only praise, calling on Americans to support Bush with &quot;complete unity&quot;. Later, Carter opposed the Iraq War and what he considered an attempt by Bush and Tony Blair to oust Saddam Hussein with &quot;lies and misinterpretations&quot;. In 2004, Carter said he believed Bush had exploited the September 11 attacks. In 2007, Carter said the Bush administration &quot;has been the worst in history&quot; on foreign affairs; he later said he was just comparing Bush&#x27;s tenure to Nixon&#x27;s. On the Bush administration&#x27;s behalf, Tony Fratto responded that Carter&#x27;s comments increased his irrelevance.

Though he praised President Barack Obama in the early part of his tenure, Carter stated his disagreement with using drone strikes against suspected terrorists, Obama&#x27;s choice to keep Guantanamo Bay detention camp open, and the federal surveillance programs Edward Snowden revealed.

During Donald Trump&#x27;s presidency, Carter spoke favorably of the chance for immigration reform and criticized Trump for his handling of the U.S. national anthem protests. In October 2017, he defended Trump in an interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot;, criticizing the media&#x27;s coverage of him as harsher &quot;than any other president certainly that I&#x27;ve known about&quot;. In 2019, Trump called Carter and expressed concern that China was &quot;getting ahead&quot; of the United States. Carter agreed, saying that China&#x27;s strength came from its lack of involvement in armed conflict and calling the U.S. &quot;the most warlike nation in the history of the world.&quot;

In July 2021, Carter gave his final recorded interview and said that President Joe Biden &quot;has done very well&quot; in office.

=== Presidential politics ===

Carter was considered a potential candidate in the 1984 presidential election. In May 1982, Carter ruled out another run, and instead endorsed Mondale for the Democratic presidential nomination. After Mondale secured the nomination in the Democratic primaries, Carter critiqued the Reagan campaign, spoke at the 1984 Democratic National Convention, and advised Mondale about his campaign. After the election, in which Reagan defeated Mondale, Carter said the loss was predictable because Mondale&#x27;s platform included raising taxes.

In March 1987, Carter ruled himself out as a candidate in the 1988 presidential election. Ahead of the 1988 Democratic National Convention, Carter predicted that the convention would see party unity after tensions arose between presumptive nominee Michael Dukakis and runner-up Jesse Jackson. Carter delivered an address at the convention.

Carter spoke of the need for the 1992 Democratic National Convention to address certain issues not focused on in the past, and campaigned for Clinton after he became the Democratic nominee, publicly stating his expectation to be consulted during Clinton&#x27;s presidency.

Carter endorsed Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee, days before the 2000 presidential election, and in subsequent years voiced his opinion that Gore won the election, despite Republican nominee George W. Bush having been certified the victor following the Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot;.

In the 2004 presidential election, Carter endorsed the Democratic nominee John Kerry and spoke at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. He also voiced concern about another voting mishap in Florida.

During the 2008 Democratic presidential primaries, it was speculated that Carter would endorse Barack Obama over his main primary rival Hillary Clinton, as Carter and other members of the Carter family had spoken favorably of Obama. Although he did not endorse Obama during the primaries, he said in late May 2008 that Clinton should end her bid and concede to Obama after the final primaries on June 3. On June 3, Carter endorsed Obama, and said he would vote for Obama as a superdelegate to the 2008 Democratic National Convention (as a former president, Carter was entitled to hold one of 20 superdelegate slots reserved for &quot;distinguished party leaders&quot;). Before this, he had remained publicly neutral. During the general election campaign, Carter criticized John McCain, the Republican nominee. Once Obama became the presumptive nominee, he advised Obama not to select Clinton as his running mate.

Ahead of the primaries of the 2012 presidential election, Carter expressed his preference for Mitt Romney to win the Republican nomination, though he clarified that he preferred Romney because he believed him to be the prospective Republican nominee who would most assure Obama&#x27;s reelection. Carter recorded an address that was shown at the 2012 Democratic National Convention.

In the 2016 presidential election, Carter was critical of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump shortly after Trump entered the primary, predicting that he would lose. As the primary continued, Carter said he preferred Trump to his main rival, Ted Cruz, though he rebuked the Trump campaign during the primary and in his address to the 2016 Democratic National Convention. In August 2016, Carter endorsed the presumptive Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton. He again expressed his support of Clinton in his speech to the Democratic convention, which he delivered by video. In 2019, Carter said that Trump would not have been elected without Russia&#x27;s interference in the 2016 election. When questioned, he agreed that Trump is an &quot;illegitimate president&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Lewis_6/28/2019&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;C-SPAN_6/28/2019&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In a 2017 discussion with Senator Bernie Sanders, Carter said he voted for Sanders in the 2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries.

Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter delivered a recorded audio message endorsing Joe Biden for the virtual 2020 Democratic National Convention. On January 6, 2021, after the U.S. Capitol attack, Carter released a statement that he and his wife were &quot;troubled&quot; by the events, that what had occurred was &quot;a national tragedy and is not who we are as a nation&quot;, and that &quot;having observed elections in troubled democracies worldwide, I know that we the people can unite to walk back from this precipice to peacefully uphold the laws of our nation&quot;. Carter recorded an audio message for Biden&#x27;s inauguration on January 20, 2021, as the Carters could not attend the ceremony in person.

In November 2022, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit overruled a three-judge panel of the court and scheduled a rehearing of the case against the Trump administration-proposed land swap in Alaska to allow a road through the Izembek National Wildlife Refuge. In an unusual action, Carter had filed an opinion in support of a lawsuit by environmental groups, saying the swap violated the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act passed near the end of his presidency. Carter said the act &quot;may be the most significant domestic achievement of my political life&quot;.

In August 2024, Carter&#x27;s son Chip said his father wanted to live to 100 to vote for Kamala Harris in the 2024 presidential election. He did so on October 16.

=== Hurricane relief ===
Carter criticized the Bush administration&#x27;s handling of Hurricane Katrina, and built homes in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy. He also partnered with former presidents to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities, in addition to writing op-eds about the goodness seen in Americans who assist each other during natural disasters.

=== Other activities ===

The Carter family&#x27;s peanut business accumulated a $1 million debt in 1981. Carter began writing books to pay off this debt. As of July 2019, he had &quot;published more than 30, from a children&#x27;s book to reflections on his presidency&quot;. After he left the White House, &quot;[o]n average, he completed just about one book per year over those 35 years, including many bestsellers, a novel and a children&#x27;s book.&quot;

In 1982, Carter founded the Carter Center, a non-governmental and nonprofit organization with the purpose of advancing human rights and alleviating human suffering. Among these efforts has been working with the World Health Organization to eradicate dracunculiasis, also called Guinea worm disease. The incidence of this disease has decreased from 3.5million cases in the mid-1980s to four in the first seven months of 2024, according to the Carter Center&#x27;s statistics.

Carter attended the dedication of his presidential library and those of Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush. He delivered eulogies at the funerals of Coretta Scott King, Gerald Ford, and Theodore Hesburgh.

In 2007, Carter founded the New Baptist Covenant organization for social justice.

In 2013, Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter, their son Chip, and their daughter-in-law Becky traveled to the neighborhood of Queens Village in New York City. They worked on five housing construction projects with Habitat for Humanity.

, Carter was Honorary Chair of the World Justice Project. He was formerly an honorary chair of the Continuity of Government Commission. He continued to occasionally teach Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church as of 2019. Carter also taught at Emory University, and in 2019 was awarded tenure for 37 years of service.

=== Israel and Palestine ===
Carter&#x27;s 2006 book &quot;,&quot; a &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller, generated controversy for characterizing Israel&#x27;s policies in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip as amounting to apartheid. In remarks broadcast over radio, he said that Israel&#x27;s policies amounted to an apartheid worse than South Africa&#x27;s:

Carter defended himself against accusations of antisemitism by saying &quot;the hope is that my book will at least stimulate a debate, which has not existed in this country. There&#x27;s never been any debate on this issue of any significance.&quot; He said that Israel would not have peace until it agreed to withdraw from the occupied territories, adding, &quot;the greatest commitment in my life has been trying to bring peace to Israel.&quot;

In a 2007 speech at Brandeis University, Carter apologized for wording in the book that suggested that Palestinian suicide terror attacks were justified as a political tool. &quot;That sentence was worded in a completely improper and stupid way. I&#x27;ve written my publishers to change that sentence immediately in future editions of the book. I apologize to you personally and to everyone here.&quot;

In his 2010 book &quot;We Can Have Peace in the Holy Land&quot;, Carter cites Israel&#x27;s unwillingness to withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories and settlement expansion as the primary obstacle to peace in the Middle East.

== Personal life ==
Carter had three younger siblings, all of whom died of pancreatic cancer: Gloria Spann, Ruth Stapleton, and Billy Carter. He was a first cousin of politician Hugh Carter and a distant cousin of the Carter family of musicians.

Carter married Rosalynn Smith on July 7, 1946, in the Plains Methodist Church, the church of Rosalynn&#x27;s family. They had three sons, John &quot;Jack&quot;, James III &quot;Chip&quot;, and Donnel &quot;Jeff&quot;, and a daughter, Amy. Mary Prince (an African American woman wrongly convicted of murder, and later pardoned) was their daughter Amy&#x27;s nanny for most of the period from 1971 until Carter&#x27;s presidency ended. Carter had asked to be designated as her parole officer, helping enable her to work in the White House.

On October 19, 2019, the Carters became the longest-wed presidential couple, having overtaken George and Barbara Bush at 26,765 days. After Rosalynn&#x27;s death on November 19, 2023, Carter released the following statement:

The Carters&#x27; eldest son, Jack Carter, was the 2006 Democratic nominee for U.S. Senate in Nevada and lost to Republican incumbent John Ensign. Jack&#x27;s son Jason Carter is a former Georgia state senator who in 2014 was the Democratic nominee for governor of Georgia, losing to the Republican incumbent, Nathan Deal. On December 20, 2015, while teaching a Sunday school class, Carter announced that his 28-year-old grandson Jeremy Carter had died of unspecified causes.

=== Interests, friendships and hobbies ===
Carter&#x27;s hobbies included painting, fly fishing, woodworking, cycling, tennis, and skiing. He also had an interest in poetry, particularly the works of Dylan Thomas. During a state visit to the UK in 1977, Carter suggested that Thomas should have a memorial in Poets&#x27; Corner at Westminster Abbey; this came to fruition in 1982. In 1994, Carter published a book of poetry, &quot;Always a Reckoning and Other Poems,&quot; illustrated by his granddaughter Sarah Chuldenko.

Carter was a personal friend of Elvis Presley, whom he and Rosalynn met on June 30, 1973. They remained in contact by telephone two months before Presley&#x27;s sudden death in August 1977. According to Carter, Presley was almost incoherent because of barbiturates; although he phoned the White House several more times, that was the last time they spoke. The day after Presley&#x27;s death, Carter issued a statement and said Presley had &quot;changed the face of American popular culture&quot;.

Carter filed a report with both the International UFO Bureau and the National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena saying that he saw an unidentified flying object in October 1969. Records showed that Carter got the date wrong, and it was in fact on January 6, 1969. In 2016, a former Air Force scientist found old government reports about a scientific project that on that date launched a barium cloud to examine the upper atmosphere. It would have appeared in the sky at an elevation of 33 degrees, which is almost exactly what Carter had speculated.

=== Beliefs ===
From a young age, Carter showed deep commitment to evangelical Christianity. He taught Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church in Plains. At a private inauguration worship service, the preacher was Nelson Price, the pastor of Roswell Street Baptist Church of Marietta, Georgia. An evangelical Christian, Carter appealed to voters after the scandals of the Nixon Administration, and is credited with popularizing the term &quot;born again&quot; into American lexicon during his 1976 presidential campaign. As president, Carter prayed several times a day, and said Jesus was the driving force in his life. He was greatly influenced by a sermon he had heard as a young man that asked: &quot;If you were arrested for being a Christian, would there be enough evidence to convict you?&quot; In 2000, after the Southern Baptist Convention announced it would no longer permit women to become pastors, he renounced his membership, saying: &quot;I personally feel that women should play an absolutely equal role in service of Christ in the church.&quot; He remained a member of the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship. Carter&#x27;s support for the Equal Rights Amendment led many evangelical conservatives to leave the Democratic Party, contributing to the development of the Christian right in American politics.

== Health ==

On August 3, 2015, Carter underwent elective surgery to remove a small mass on his liver, and his prognosis for a full recovery was initially said to be excellent. On August 12, he announced he had been diagnosed with cancer that had metastasized. On August 20, Carter said that melanoma had been found in his brain and liver and that he had begun treatment. On December 5, he announced that his medical scans no longer showed any cancer.

Carter broke his hip in a fall at his Plains home on May 13, 2019, and underwent surgery the same day at the Phoebe Sumter Medical Center in Americus, Georgia. On October 6, an injury above his left eyebrow sustained in another fall at home required 14 stitches and resulted in a black eye. On October 21, Carter was admitted to the Phoebe Sumter Medical Center after sustaining a minor pelvic fracture from falling at home for the third time in 2019.

On November 11, 2019, Carter was hospitalized at the Emory University Hospital in Atlanta for a procedure to relieve pressure on his brain caused by bleeding connected with his falls. He was released from the hospital on November 27. On December 2, 2019, Carter was readmitted to the hospital for a urinary tract infection. He was released on December 4.

On February 18, 2023, the Carter Center announced that following a &quot;series of short hospital stays&quot;, Carter decided to &quot;spend his remaining time at home with his family&quot; in Plains to &quot;receive hospice care&quot; for an unspecified illness.

=== Longevity ===
At 100 years old, Carter was the longest-lived former U.S. president. He was the earliest-serving living former president since Gerald Ford&#x27;s death in 2006. In 2012, he surpassed Herbert Hoover as the longest-retired president. In 2017 and 2021, he became the first president to live to the 40th anniversary of his inauguration and post-presidency, respectively. In 2017, Carter, then 92, became the oldest former president ever to attend an American presidential inauguration. On March 22, 2019, he became the longest-lived U.S. president. He said in a 2019 interview with &quot;People&quot; that he never expected to live as long as he had and that the best explanation for longevity was a good marriage.

The Carter Center announced &quot;Jimmy Carter 100: A Celebration in Song&quot;, an event concert to celebrate Carter&#x27;s 100th birthday that featured appearances by musicians and celebrities. The event took place on September 17, 2024, at the Fox Theatre in Atlanta. On October 1, 2024, Carter turned 100, the first U.S. president to do so. Local events celebrating his birthday included a F-18 Super Hornet flyover formation by eight Navy pilots from Naval Air Station Oceana, which Carter viewed from his backyard, and a naturalization ceremony for 100 new citizens at Plains High School, which Chip Carter attended.

Carter made arrangements to be buried in front of his home at 209 Woodland Drive in Plains. In 2006, he said that a funeral in Washington, D.C., with visitation at the Carter Center, was also planned. Carter asked President Biden to deliver his eulogy.

== Death and funeral ==
Carter died at his home in Plains, Georgia, on December 29, 2024, at the age of 100.

Shortly after the announcement, President Joe Biden released a statement honoring Carter&#x27;s legacy, calling him a &quot;man of principle, faith, and humility&quot;. The nation held an official state funeral and day of mourning for Carter on January 9, 2025. All five living U.S. presidents—Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama, president-elect Donald Trump, and incumbent Biden—attended Carter&#x27;s funeral.

== Legacy ==
=== Assessments ===
When Carter left office in 1981, scholars and even many Democrats viewed his presidency as a failure. Betty Glad, a political scientist at the University of Illinois, summarized the public consensus on Carter: &quot;he didn&#x27;t have a well-developed political philosophy and gave people a feeling he didn&#x27;t quite know where he was headed.&quot;

Historians have ranked Carter&#x27;s presidency as below average. After leaving office, he told allies he predicted history would be kinder to him than voters were in the 1980 election. In a 1982 &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; survey, when 49 historians and scholars were asked to rank the best and worst U.S. presidents, Carter was ranked the tenth worst. In 2006, conservative British historian Andrew Roberts ranked Carter the worst U.S. president. Yet some of Carter&#x27;s policy accomplishments have been more favorably received. The 2009 documentary &quot;Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace&quot; credits Carter&#x27;s efforts at Camp David, which brought peace between Israel and Egypt, with bringing the only meaningful peace to the Middle East. Stuart E. Eizenstat, who served as Carter&#x27;s chief White House domestic policy adviser, wrote, &quot;Carter&#x27;s accomplishments at home and abroad were more extensive and longer lasting than those of almost all modern presidents.&quot;

While historians generally consider Carter a below-average president, his post-presidency activities have been universally praised, including his peacekeeping and humanitarian efforts. &quot;The Independent&quot; wrote in 2009, &quot;Carter is widely considered a better man than he was a president.&quot;

=== Public opinion ===
In exit polls from the 1976 presidential election, many voters still held Ford&#x27;s pardon of Nixon in 1974 against him. By comparison, Carter was viewed as a sincere, honest, and well-meaning southerner. During his presidency, polls generally showed that most Americans saw Carter as likable and &quot;a man of high moral principles&quot;. In the 1980 election, Reagan projected an easy self-confidence, in contrast to Carter&#x27;s serious and introspective temperament. Carter was portrayed as more pessimistic and indecisive than Reagan, who was known for his charm and delegation of tasks to subordinates. Reagan used the economic issues, the Iran hostage crisis, and the lack of Washington cooperation to portray Carter as a weak and ineffectual leader. Carter was the first elected incumbent president since Herbert Hoover in 1932 to lose a reelection bid.

Carter began his presidency with an approval rating between 66% and 75%. He maintained approval ratings above 50% until March 1978, and the following month his approval rating fell to 39%, primarily due to the declining economy. His ratings briefly rebounded after the Camp David Accords in late 1978 but dipped during the 1979 energy crisis and got as low as 28% in July 1979. At the beginning of the Iran hostage crisis, his approval rating surged to 61%, up 23 points from his pre-crisis rating. Polls also found that up to 77% of Americans approved of Carter&#x27;s initial response to the crisis, but by June 1980, amid heated criticism from across the political spectrum for his failure to free the hostages, his approval rating slumped to 33%; that same month Reagan surpassed Carter in pre-1980 election polling. As Carter was leaving office, a Gallup poll found that 48% of Americans thought he had been an &quot;average&quot; or &quot;above average&quot; president, 46% said he had been &quot;below average&quot; or &quot;poor&quot;, and only 3% thought he had been &quot;outstanding&quot;. His average approval rating during his entire presidency was 46%, and he left office as one of the most unpopular U.S. presidents in history.

In a 1990 Gallup survey, 45% of respondents said they approved of the overall job Carter did as president, leaving only Nixon and Lyndon B. Johnson with lower ratings. In a 2006 poll, 61% of respondents said they approved of the job Carter did as president, his highest rating since 1979. In a 2021 survey, 27% of respondents said he had been an &quot;outstanding&quot; or &quot;above average&quot; president, 43% regarded him as &quot;average&quot;, and only 24% said he had been &quot;below average&quot; or &quot;poor&quot;.

=== Awards and honors ===
Carterpuri, a village in Haryana, India, was renamed in his honor after he visited in 1978.

Carter received the American Academy of Achievement&#x27;s Golden Plate Award in 1984. 
The Jimmy Carter Library and Museum was opened in 1986. The following year, buildings connected to Carter&#x27;s life were granted status as National Historic Sites and in 2021 were collectively renamed the Jimmy Carter National Historic Park.

In 1991, Carter was made an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa at Kansas State University, and was elected to the American Philosophical Society. In 1998, the U.S. Navy named the third and final submarine .

Carter received the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights, given in honor of human rights achievements, and the Hoover Medal, recognizing engineers who have contributed to global causes. Carter&#x27;s 2002 Nobel Peace Prize was partially a response to president George W. Bush&#x27;s threats of war against Iraq and Carter&#x27;s criticism of the Bush administration.

In 2009, the Souther Field Airport in Americus, Georgia, was renamed Jimmy Carter Regional Airport.

In November 2024, Carter received his 10th nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for audio recordings of his books. He won four times—for &quot;Our Endangered Values: America&#x27;s Moral Crisis&quot; (2007), &quot;A Full Life: Reflections at 90&quot; (2015), &quot;Faith: A Journey For All&quot; (2018), and &quot;Last Sunday in Plains: A Centennial Celebration&quot; (2024). He is the most nominated and awarded recipient in the category. 

On February 21, 2024, the White House Historical Association unveiled its official 2024 White House Christmas ornament honoring Carter&#x27;s naval service and efforts for peace. This was the first time a president being honored was alive at the time of the unveiling.

== See also ==

* 
* 
* List of peace activists
* 
* &quot;Mush from the Wimp&quot; – Joke headline from &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; in a 1980 op-ed


== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== News sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Websites ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Andelic, Patrick. &quot;Donkey Work: Congressional Democrats in Conservative America, 1974–1994&quot; (2019) excerpt 
* In-depth biography focused on the presidency. Excerpt; .
* 
* Daigle, Craig. &quot;Beyond Camp David: Jimmy Carter, Palestinian Self-Determination, and Human Rights.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 42.5 (2018): 802–830.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Jensehaugen, Jørgen. &quot;Arab-Israeli diplomacy under Carter: the US, Israel and the Palestinians&quot; (Bloomsbury, 2018).
* 
* 
* 
* Reichard, Gary W. &quot;Early Returns: Assessing Jimmy Carter&quot; &quot;Presidential Studies Quarterly&quot; 20#3 (Summer 1990) 603–620. online 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Williams, Daniel K. &quot;The Election of the Evangelical: Jimmy Carter, Gerald Ford, and the Presidential Contest of 1976&quot; (University Press of Kansas, 2020) online review 
* 
=== Primary sources ===
* Carter, Jimmy (1977). &quot;Why Not the Best?&quot;.
* Carter, Jimmy (1982). &quot;Keeping Faith: Memoirs of a President&quot;; excerpt; .
* Carter, Jimmy (1978–1981). &quot;Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977&quot;. Annual compilation of all his public documents.
* Carter, Jimmy (2001). &quot;An Hour Before Daylight: Memories of a Rural Boyhood&quot;. Excerpt; .
* Carter, Jimmy (2002). &quot;The Nobel Peace Prize Lecture: Delivered in Oslo on December 10, 2002&quot;.
* Carter, Jimmy (2003). &quot;Negotiation: The Alternative To Hostility&quot;; excerpt; .
* Carter, Jimmy (2005). &quot;Our Endangered Values: America&#x27;s Moral Crisis&quot;. Excerpt; .
* Carter, Jimmy (2006). &quot;Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid&quot;.
* Carter, Jimmy (2007). &quot;Beyond the White House: Waging Peace, Fighting Disease, Building Hope&quot;.
* Carter, Jimmy (2011). &quot;White House Diary&quot;.
* Carter, Jimmy (2015). &quot;A Full Life: Reflections at Ninety&quot;.
* 

== External links ==
* Jimmy Carter Presidential Library &amp; Museum
* The Carter Center
* Jimmy Carter National Historic Site
* White House biography
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="0" end="21" title="Jimmy Carter" label="James Earl Carter Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="124" end="154" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="190" end="206" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q880198" start="228" end="247" title="governor of Georgia" label="governor of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494569" start="277" end="297" title="Georgia State Senate" label="Georgia State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099823" start="328" end="367" title="List of presidents of the United States by age" label="longest-lived president in U.S. history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944360" start="395" end="405" title="age of 100" label="age of 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q608527" start="416" end="431" title="Plains, Georgia" label="Plains, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="459" end="477" title="U.S. Naval Academy" label="U.S. Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631652" start="501" end="518" title="submarines in the United States Navy" label="submarine service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="591" end="612" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q106930259" start="663" end="684" title="Jimmy Carter 1976 presidential campaign" label="running for president"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="688" end="692" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152917" start="709" end="730" title="1976 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="736" end="746" title="dark horse" label="dark horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="773" end="783" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="794" end="805" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065479" start="853" end="887" title="Proclamation 4483" label="pardoned all Vietnam draft evaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="950" end="968" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="974" end="995" title="Panama Canal Treaties" label="Panama Canal Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="1021" end="1052" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269155" start="1061" end="1104" title="Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations" label="established diplomatic relations with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="1235" end="1241" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="1246" end="1255" title="United States Department of Education" label="Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="1276" end="1290" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="his presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="1351" end="1381" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="1411" end="1418" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="1433" end="1454" title="1980 Olympics boycott" label="1980 Olympics boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="1479" end="1497" title="Iranian revolution" label="Iranian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="1513" end="1532" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="1537" end="1552" title="1979 oil crisis" label="1979 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125726711" start="1562" end="1579" title="Jimmy Carter 1980 presidential campaign" label="sought reelection"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="1583" end="1587" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255747" start="1599" end="1618" title="1980 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="a primary challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="1630" end="1641" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1687" end="1700" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="1753" end="1784" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="ranked Carter&amp;#x27;s presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q43078956" start="1800" end="1819" title="Post-presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="His post-presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q118483" start="1938" end="1951" title="Carter Center" label="Carter Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="1998" end="2015" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q933054" start="2072" end="2089" title="election monitoring" label="monitor elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q929451" start="2099" end="2126" title="neglected tropical diseases" label="neglected tropical diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815447" start="2164" end="2193" title="eradication of dracunculiasis" label="eradication of dracunculiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192147" start="2257" end="2277" title="Habitat for Humanity" label="Habitat for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2287" end="2326" title="Bibliography of Jimmy Carter#Books by Carter" label="wrote political memoirs and other books"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="2346" end="2374" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q608527" start="2460" end="2475" title="Plains, Georgia" label="Plains, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548118" start="2484" end="2499" title="Wise Sanitarium" label="Wise Sanitarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548136" start="2631" end="2651" title="Bessie Lillian Gordy" label="Bessie Lillian Gordy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133272" start="2656" end="2677" title="James Earl Carter Sr." label="James Earl Carter Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="2751" end="2769" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244860" start="2915" end="2928" title="general store" label="general store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269323" start="3014" end="3043" title="U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps" label="U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3051" end="3062" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q54888606" start="3161" end="3168" title="Archery, Georgia" label="Archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571337" start="3285" end="3291" title="Gloria Carter Spann" label="Gloria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382914" start="3293" end="3297" title="Ruth Carter Stapleton" label="Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912331" start="3303" end="3308" title="Billy Carter" label="Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="3483" end="3498" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="pro-segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="3959" end="3975" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="4007" end="4015" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="4202" end="4215" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="4281" end="4288" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="4427" end="4452" title="Future Farmers of America" label="Future Farmers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="4557" end="4584" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547746" start="4649" end="4677" title="Georgia Southwestern College" label="Georgia Southwestern College"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="4748" end="4779" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924471" start="4816" end="4830" title="Blake Van Leer" label="Blake Van Leer"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="4893" end="4930" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q125640" start="5068" end="5080" title="Stephen Pace (politician)" label="Stephen Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q219353" start="5321" end="5335" title="Rosalynn Smith" label="Rosalynn Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581310" start="5484" end="5499" title="sprint football" label="sprint football"/>
<link wikidata="Q678745" start="5515" end="5530" title="Navy Midshipmen" label="Navy Midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q678745" start="5555" end="5575" title="Navy Midshipmen cross country" label="cross country runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="5699" end="5705" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5767" end="5775" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="5777" end="5783" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="5785" end="5796" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5798" end="5806" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5812" end="5822" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="5850" end="5862" title="U.S. Atlantic Fleet" label="the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="5867" end="5881" title="U.S. Pacific Fleet" label="Pacific fleets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="5980" end="6003" title="lieutenant junior grade" label="lieutenant junior grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="6369" end="6386" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q541637" start="6416" end="6433" title="Hyman G. Rickover" label="Hyman G. Rickover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972225" start="6585" end="6599" title="Naval Reactors" label="Naval Reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="6614" end="6638" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="6736" end="6757" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724378" start="6816" end="6819" title="NRX" label="NRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q757601" start="6831" end="6854" title="Atomic Energy of Canada" label="Atomic Energy of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059760" start="6862" end="6886" title="Chalk River Laboratories" label="Chalk River Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q105807" start="6904" end="6912" title="Nuclear meltdown" label="meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q719349" start="7413" end="7425" title="neutron bomb" label="neutron bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567748" start="7508" end="7521" title="Union College" label="Union College"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="7683" end="7700" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="8149" end="8161" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="8199" end="8209" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338107" start="8244" end="8267" title="American Campaign Medal" label="American Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079534" start="8269" end="8295" title="World War II Victory Medal" label="World War II Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073493" start="8297" end="8316" title="China Service Medal" label="China Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611552" start="8322" end="8352" title="National Defense Service Medal" label="National Defense Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631624" start="8397" end="8422" title="Submarine Warfare insignia" label="&amp;quot;dolphin&amp;quot; badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="9215" end="9249" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="9266" end="9293" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="9476" end="9490" title="Baptist Church" label="Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q503076" start="9511" end="9524" title="Sumter County, Georgia" label="Sumter County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494569" start="9586" end="9606" title="Georgia State Senate" label="Georgia State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104818592" start="9968" end="9998" title="127th Georgia General Assembly" label="127th Georgia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754158" start="10007" end="10037" title="128th Georgia General Assembly" label="128th Georgia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="10044" end="10065" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="10327" end="10340" title="literacy test" label="literacy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164192" start="10374" end="10394" title="Constitution of Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631824" start="10785" end="10796" title="Bo Callaway" label="Bo Callaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="10816" end="10854" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11086" end="11102" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547746" start="11377" end="11414" title="Georgia Southwestern State University" label="Georgia Southwestern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332396" start="11860" end="11872" title="Ellis Arnall" label="Ellis Arnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q885384" start="11905" end="11918" title="Lester Maddox" label="Lester Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="12213" end="12228" title="runoff election" label="runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494564" start="12403" end="12435" title="Georgia House of Representatives" label="Georgia House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="12734" end="12744" title="born again" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216197" start="12772" end="12775" title="Amy Carter" label="Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q888924" start="12865" end="12877" title="Carl Sanders" label="Carl Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="13115" end="13123" title="populist" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="13454" end="13468" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603376" start="13510" end="13532" title="Martin Luther King Sr." label="Martin Luther King Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q959635" start="13537" end="13549" title="Andrew Young" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="14092" end="14114" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5640943" start="14202" end="14210" title="Hal Suit" label="Hal Suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528976" start="14288" end="14301" title="Leroy Johnson (Georgia politician)" label="Leroy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q880198" start="14575" end="14594" title="governor of Georgia" label="governor of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="15286" end="15303" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428859" start="16429" end="16440" title="Flint River" label="Flint River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="16674" end="16686" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="16733" end="16739" title="busing" label="busing"/>
<link wikidata="Q887146" start="16847" end="16859" title="Reubin Askew" label="Reubin Askew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858818" start="17036" end="17049" title="Capital punishment in Georgia (U.S. state)" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559328" start="17067" end="17084" title="Furman v. Georgia" label="Furman v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575004" start="17511" end="17546" title="1972 Democratic National Convention" label="1972 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="17567" end="17582" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="17802" end="17821" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="18079" end="18109" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="18140" end="18157" title="David Rockefeller" label="David Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="18198" end="18219" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="18279" end="18308" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="18421" end="18438" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="18473" end="18486" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036350" start="18658" end="18677" title="National Press Club (United States)" label="National Press Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="19408" end="19419" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="19781" end="19794" title="Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="19803" end="19824" title="New Hampshire primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916205" start="20809" end="20821" title="open housing" label="open housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="20958" end="20972" title="Racial integration" label="of integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21242" end="21254" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550813" start="21519" end="21538" title="Social Security Act" label="Social Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046241" start="21625" end="21630" title="1976 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection" label="chose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="21644" end="21658" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407190" start="21744" end="21778" title="United States presidential debates" label="United States presidential debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="21829" end="21836" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435548" start="21904" end="21917" title="Robert Scheer" label="Robert Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="22605" end="22611" title="Gallup Inc." label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="22705" end="22717" title="popular vote" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="22770" end="22787" title="United States Electoral College" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="22885" end="22893" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893166" start="23334" end="23357" title="United States presidential transition" label="presidential transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="23846" end="23877" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385357" start="23878" end="23888" title="James Lynn" label="James Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="23928" end="23943" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q881182" start="23951" end="23962" title="Blair House" label="Blair House"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="24024" end="24035" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="24546" end="24566" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q884177" start="24660" end="24671" title="blind trust" label="blind trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065479" start="24856" end="24873" title="Proclamation 4483" label="Proclamation 4483"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="24898" end="24905" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="24910" end="24921" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="24926" end="24939" title="draft evaders" label="draft evaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="25017" end="25051" title="Early 1980s recession in the United States" label="continuing inflation and recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="25060" end="25078" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="25111" end="25135" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="25395" end="25413" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="25415" end="25438" title="Torrijos–Carter Treaties" label="giving the Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="25466" end="25503" title="Salt II" label="SALT II nuclear arms reduction treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="25523" end="25538" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="25573" end="25592" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="25630" end="25643" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="25647" end="25660" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934346" start="25771" end="25807" title="October surprise conspiracy theory" label="convinced Iran to prolong the crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="26191" end="26208" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806710" start="26254" end="26283" title="Asian American Heritage Month" label="Asian American Heritage Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="26511" end="26522" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="26555" end="26575" title="1973–1975 recession" label="a previous recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="26759" end="26780" title="Early 1980s recession in the United States" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="27172" end="27190" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925768" start="27296" end="27315" title="consumer confidence" label="consumer confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="27334" end="27355" title="Federal Reserve Board" label="Federal Reserve Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q939880" start="27365" end="27382" title="G. William Miller" label="G. William Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="27407" end="27422" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="27542" end="27551" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615684" start="27847" end="27859" title="Amerada Hess" label="Amerada Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="28058" end="28070" title="strip mining" label="strip mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645925" start="28099" end="28149" title="Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977" label="Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872409" start="28234" end="28244" title="Love Canal" label="Love Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133" start="28261" end="28284" title="Niagara Falls, New York" label="Niagara Falls, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042630" start="28369" end="28380" title="toxic waste" label="toxic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="28395" end="28404" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774237" start="28940" end="28960" title="1906 Antiquities Act" label="1906 Antiquities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q638097" start="29081" end="29112" title="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge" label="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="29158" end="29213" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="29528" end="29547" title="energy conservation" label="energy conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116986903" start="29562" end="29607" title="Solar power at the White House" label="solar water heating panels on the White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q877140" start="29619" end="29627" title="cardigan (sweater)" label="cardigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="29717" end="29762" title="Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977" label="Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393574" start="30962" end="30985" title="Rationing in the United States" label="gasoline rationing plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146191" start="31345" end="31356" title="Pat Caddell" label="Pat Caddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="31501" end="31508" title="malaise" label="malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q86751493" start="32632" end="32673" title="Ted Kennedy 1980 presidential campaign" label="Ted Kennedy&amp;#x27;s wanting the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="32955" end="32968" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="House Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094491" start="32969" end="32985" title="Tip O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Tip O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722582" start="35641" end="35655" title="Alfred E. Kahn" label="Alfred E. Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17675706" start="35668" end="35691" title="Civil Aeronautics Board" label="Civil Aeronautics Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q408772" start="36070" end="36094" title="Airline Deregulation Act" label="Airline Deregulation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698788" start="36160" end="36185" title="Airline deregulation" label="remove government control"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="36245" end="36264" title="commercial aviation" label="commercial aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="36449" end="36480" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="36728" end="36732" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="36734" end="36738" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="36744" end="36749" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621599" start="36762" end="36774" title="Homebrewing" label="home brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="36822" end="36854" title="prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="36961" end="36970" title="Microbrewery" label="microbrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="37053" end="37073" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q859399" start="37091" end="37100" title="Big Three (automobile manufacturers)" label="Big Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q44312" start="37493" end="37500" title="bailout" label="bailout"/>
<link wikidata="Q880085" start="37539" end="37557" title="James J. Blanchard" label="James J. Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018737" start="37658" end="37674" title="David Rubenstein" label="David Rubenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378741" start="37750" end="37797" title="Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979" label="Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="38281" end="38302" title="2008 financial crisis" label="2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="38406" end="38417" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519138" start="38449" end="38474" title="national health insurance" label="national health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906858" start="39002" end="39034" title="Mental Health Systems Act of 1980" label="Mental Health Systems (MHSA) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927195" start="39052" end="39063" title="block grant" label="block grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260268" start="39983" end="40023" title="Department of Education Organization Act" label="Department of Education Organization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="40051" end="40088" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q10973208" start="40140" end="40150" title="Head Start (program)" label="Head Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="40921" end="40942" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532992" start="41035" end="41057" title="Geneva Conference (1973)" label="1973 Geneva conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="41098" end="41109" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="41137" end="41151" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164535" start="42823" end="42839" title="Mobutu Sese Seko" label="Mobutu Sese Seko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="42843" end="42848" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q294618" start="42978" end="42988" title="Samuel Doe" label="Samuel Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628137" start="43017" end="43026" title="1980 Liberian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1980 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="43265" end="43282" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="43286" end="43322" title="prime minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q318479" start="43327" end="43340" title="Abel Muzorewa" label="Abel Muzorewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243305" start="43345" end="43380" title="Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia" label="Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="43419" end="43436" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="43665" end="43673" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="43872" end="43883" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="43901" end="43912" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="43955" end="43964" title="Harare" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="44433" end="44460" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Chinese invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="44656" end="44662" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="44946" end="44959" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="44995" end="45006" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="45017" end="45025" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="45053" end="45072" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Vietnamese invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="45086" end="45116" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524749" start="45276" end="45311" title="Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty" label="Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="45321" end="45338" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823570" start="45496" end="45514" title="political question" label="political question"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580387" start="45524" end="45543" title="Goldwater v. Carter" label="Goldwater v. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="45638" end="45658" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="45724" end="45733" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="45740" end="45747" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136238" start="45776" end="45799" title="East Timor genocide" label="human rights violations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732464" start="45803" end="45813" title="East Timor (province)" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583734" start="45856" end="45878" title="Indonesian invasion of East Timor" label="December 1975 invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843875" start="46142" end="46153" title="History of the Philippines (1965–1986)" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="46196" end="46212" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q488521" start="46344" end="46355" title="Fourth Republic of Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="46374" end="46393" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242399" start="46452" end="46468" title="John K. Singlaub" label="John K. Singlaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296418" start="46789" end="46813" title="president of South Korea" label="president of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14356" start="46814" end="46828" title="Park Chung Hee" label="Park Chung Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14362" start="47271" end="47284" title="Chun Doo-hwan" label="Chun Doo-hwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174990" start="47315" end="47331" title="Gwangju Uprising" label="Gwangju Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q45785" start="47381" end="47393" title="Kim Dae-jung" label="Kim Dae-jung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48085" end="48094" title="Iranian revolution#Revolution (late 1978–1979)" label="left Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="48174" end="48212" title="Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center" label="Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369972" start="48310" end="48332" title="U.S. Embassy in Tehran" label="U.S. Embassy in Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942968" start="48363" end="48411" title="Muslim Student Followers of the Imam&amp;#x27;s Line" label="Muslim Student Followers of the Imam&amp;#x27;s Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="48430" end="48448" title="Iranian revolution" label="Iranian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="48567" end="48580" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q612739" start="49170" end="49190" title="Operation Eagle Claw" label="Operation Eagle Claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="49508" end="49526" title="Ayatollah Khomeini" label="Ayatollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="50104" end="50118" title="RSD-10 Pioneer" label="RSD-10 Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154239" start="50352" end="50363" title="Paul Warnke" label="Paul Warnke"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="50905" end="50940" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II" label="Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="50955" end="50970" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q12207418" start="51029" end="51048" title="Second Yemenite War" label="Second Yemenite War"/>
<link wikidata="Q199841" start="51072" end="51083" title="South Yemen" label="South Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579411" start="51352" end="51383" title="1980 State of the Union Address" label="1980 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="51789" end="51808" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="51809" end="51836" title="Saur Revolution" label="seized power in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="52027" end="52042" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="52205" end="52223" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="invade Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="52272" end="52285" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="52420" end="52432" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="52558" end="52585" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="52701" end="52718" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="52841" end="52853" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716472" start="53156" end="53174" title="Diplomatic History (journal)" label="Diplomatic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q128771" start="54329" end="54339" title="Steve Coll" label="Steve Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="54575" end="54599" title="Selective Service System" label="Selective Service System"/>
<link wikidata="Q864211" start="54605" end="54658" title="Carter Doctrine" label="committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulf&amp;#x27;s defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="54818" end="54838" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="55001" end="55060" title="Operation Cyclone" label="a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistan&amp;#x27;s ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="55222" end="55247" title="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="withdrew from Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="55342" end="55349" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="55863" end="55867" title="Pahlavi Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="55964" end="55990" title="Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16052298" start="56015" end="56034" title="Island of Stability (speech)" label="Island of Stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="56163" end="56194" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q827400" start="56204" end="56214" title="Bert Lance" label="Bert Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="56291" end="56321" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335058" start="56322" end="56334" title="Griffin Bell" label="Griffin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151482" start="56345" end="56359" title="Paul J. Curran" label="Paul J. Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q107284900" start="57151" end="57199" title="Lyndon B. Johnson 1964 presidential campaign" label="Lyndon Johnson&amp;#x27;s 1964 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365209" start="57314" end="57329" title="Ronald Reagan 1980 presidential campaign" label="Reagan campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="57568" end="57595" title="Federal Election Commission" label="Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="57682" end="57693" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255747" start="57764" end="57797" title="1980 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="Democratic presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579232" start="58361" end="58396" title="1980 Democratic National Convention" label="1980 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="58477" end="58492" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424762" start="58532" end="58550" title="Horatio Hornblower" label="Horatio Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589110" start="58581" end="58606" title="The Dream Shall Never Die" label="The Dream Shall Never Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q936548" start="58742" end="58758" title="John B. Anderson" label="John B. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314682" start="58793" end="58826" title="1980 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="Republican presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="59142" end="59153" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="59523" end="59538" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="59556" end="59561" title="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="59691" end="59715" title="Selective Service System" label="Selective Service System"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052235" start="59804" end="59817" title="Timothy Kraft" label="Timothy Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="59930" end="59937" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782825" start="60323" end="60341" title="There you go again" label="There you go again"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247867" start="60482" end="60511" title="Debategate" label="acquired classified documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="60581" end="60598" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348114" start="60684" end="60699" title="1980 United States Senate elections" label="went Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="61162" end="61177" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="61402" end="61426" title="prime minister of Israel" label="prime minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="61516" end="61549" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="61640" end="61670" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Northern Ireland peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="61695" end="61707" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258496" start="61754" end="61788" title="United States Special Envoy for Northern Ireland" label="special envoy for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="61925" end="61936" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="62134" end="62146" title="Lee Teng-hui" label="Lee Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="62468" end="62477" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891879" start="62483" end="62509" title="2002–2003 Venezuelan general strike" label="protests aimed at doing so"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="62742" end="62751" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="62757" end="62761" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="62792" end="62806" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517662" start="62871" end="62881" title="The Elders (organization)" label="The Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="63029" end="63035" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="63056" end="63072" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="63182" end="63195" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="63266" end="63281" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175874" start="63312" end="63325" title="Jeffrey Brown (journalist)" label="Jeffery Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696884" start="63589" end="63602" title="Aijalon Gomes" label="Aijalon Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="63946" end="63967" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="64074" end="64104" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208199" start="64243" end="64269" title="Sabra and Shatila massacre" label="Sabra and Shatila massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="64345" end="64356" title="Beirut" label="West Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="64395" end="64423" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365780" start="64568" end="64579" title="Robert Bork" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153922" start="64681" end="64714" title="inauguration of George H. W. Bush" label="inauguration of George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="64914" end="64926" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="65067" end="65090" title="Monica Lewinsky scandal" label="Monica Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q706542" start="65109" end="65118" title="Marc Rich" label="Marc Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="65210" end="65224" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="65249" end="65269" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="65391" end="65399" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="65446" end="65456" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="65465" end="65479" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822384" start="65825" end="65836" title="Tony Fratto" label="Tony Fratto"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="65931" end="65943" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="66019" end="66024" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q357" start="66091" end="66120" title="Guantanamo Bay detention camp" label="Guantanamo Bay detention camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="66165" end="66179" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="66198" end="66210" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q26878551" start="66335" end="66364" title="U.S. national anthem protests (2016–present)" label="U.S. national anthem protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="66966" end="66975" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="67101" end="67127" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255748" start="67285" end="67309" title="1984 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="the Democratic primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581655" start="67362" end="67397" title="1984 Democratic National Convention" label="1984 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851206" start="67425" end="67437" title="Walter Mondale 1984 presidential campaign" label="his campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="67649" end="67675" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584413" start="67690" end="67725" title="1988 Democratic National Convention" label="1988 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="67815" end="67826" title="presumptive nominee" label="presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="67835" end="67850" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="67865" end="67878" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587616" start="67961" end="67996" title="1992 Democratic National Convention" label="1992 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="68233" end="68240" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="68282" end="68308" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="68408" end="68422" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065434" start="68507" end="68519" title="Bush v. Gore" label="Bush v. Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="68535" end="68561" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="68602" end="68612" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q359657" start="68630" end="68665" title="2004 Democratic National Convention" label="2004 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9062647" start="68742" end="68780" title="2008 Democratic presidential primaries" label="2008 Democratic presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="68826" end="68838" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="68867" end="68882" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034682" start="69228" end="69263" title="2008 Democratic National Convention" label="2008 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="69504" end="69515" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="69675" end="69701" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="69739" end="69750" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104713" start="69991" end="70026" title="2012 Democratic National Convention" label="2012 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="70036" end="70062" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="70121" end="70133" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="70282" end="70290" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156276" start="70374" end="70409" title="2016 Democratic National Convention" label="2016 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q28005470" start="70679" end="70726" title="Russia&amp;#x27;s interference in the 2016 election" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s interference in the 2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="70955" end="70969" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004294" start="71011" end="71055" title="2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="71129" end="71138" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090703" start="71155" end="71190" title="2020 Democratic National Convention" label="2020 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="71222" end="71241" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="U.S. Capitol attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738250" start="71659" end="71684" title="Biden&amp;#x27;s inauguration" label="Biden&amp;#x27;s inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="71785" end="71837" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="71931" end="71951" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676130" start="71961" end="71970" title="Izembek National Wildlife Refuge" label="land swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676130" start="72009" end="72041" title="Izembek National Wildlife Refuge" label="Izembek National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="72171" end="72218" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="72451" end="72464" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="72472" end="72498" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="72573" end="72592" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="72612" end="72629" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="72667" end="72682" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377199" start="72738" end="72756" title="One America Appeal" label="One America Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="72780" end="72796" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38685186" start="72801" end="72815" title="Hurricane Irma" label="Hurricane Irma"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="72823" end="72833" title="Gulf Coast" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q118483" start="73463" end="73476" title="Carter Center" label="Carter Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476215" start="73544" end="73566" title="Human rights activists" label="advancing human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="73589" end="73598" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="73646" end="73671" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815447" start="73675" end="73699" title="eradication of dracunculiasis" label="eradicate dracunculiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q230969" start="74103" end="74121" title="Coretta Scott King" label="Coretta Scott King"/>
<link wikidata="Q330704" start="74140" end="74157" title="Theodore Hesburgh" label="Theodore Hesburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005430" start="74188" end="74208" title="New Baptist Covenant" label="New Baptist Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="74226" end="74240" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192147" start="74447" end="74467" title="Habitat for Humanity" label="Habitat for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035892" start="74505" end="74526" title="World Justice Project" label="World Justice Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165419" start="74569" end="74604" title="Continuity of Government Commission" label="Continuity of Government Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="74717" end="74733" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="74861" end="74899" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="74972" end="74988" title="Israeli-occupied" label="Israeli-occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="75030" end="75039" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124314434" start="75200" end="75227" title="Weaponization of antisemitism" label="accusations of antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="75496" end="75516" title="Israeli-occupied territories" label="occupied territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="75636" end="75655" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977468" start="76044" end="76078" title="We Can Have Peace in the Holy Land" label="We Can Have Peace in the Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="76148" end="76180" title="occupied Palestinian territories" label="occupied Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="76185" end="76205" title="Israeli settlements" label="settlement expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="76335" end="76352" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571337" start="76354" end="76366" title="Gloria Carter Spann" label="Gloria Spann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382914" start="76368" end="76382" title="Ruth Stapleton" label="Ruth Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912331" start="76388" end="76400" title="Billy Carter" label="Billy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930275" start="76438" end="76449" title="Hugh Carter" label="Hugh Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="76478" end="76491" title="Carter family" label="Carter family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111597" start="76645" end="76666" title="Jack Carter (politician)" label="John &amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216197" start="76741" end="76744" title="Amy Carter" label="Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713091" start="76746" end="76757" title="Mary Prince (nanny)" label="Mary Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q13968" start="76982" end="76996" title="parole officer" label="parole officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="77151" end="77163" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891732" start="77339" end="77372" title="2006 United States Senate election in Nevada" label="nominee for U.S. Senate in Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q529372" start="77406" end="77417" title="John Ensign" label="John Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162170" start="77435" end="77447" title="Jason Carter (politician)" label="Jason Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547920" start="77525" end="77544" title="2014 Georgia gubernatorial election" label="governor of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179732" start="77582" end="77593" title="Nathan Deal" label="Nathan Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="77833" end="77844" title="fly fishing" label="fly fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191023" start="77949" end="77961" title="Dylan Thomas" label="Dylan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="78058" end="78076" title="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="78080" end="78097" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="78305" end="78318" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869538" start="78840" end="78893" title="National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena" label="National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850258" start="78906" end="78942" title="Jimmy Carter UFO incident" label="he saw an unidentified flying object"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="79400" end="79424" title="evangelical Christianity" label="evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="79463" end="79477" title="Baptist Church" label="Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="79707" end="79727" title="Nixon Administration" label="Nixon Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="79778" end="79788" title="born again" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="79809" end="79816" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="80155" end="80182" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167880" start="80423" end="80453" title="Cooperative Baptist Fellowship" label="Cooperative Baptist Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="80485" end="80507" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366374" start="80517" end="80542" title="evangelical conservatives" label="evangelical conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="80613" end="80628" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354947" start="80702" end="80718" title="elective surgery" label="elective surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="80900" end="80912" title="metastasized" label="metastasized"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="80945" end="80953" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="81076" end="81103" title="Remission (medicine)" label="no longer showed any cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q882770" start="81386" end="81395" title="black eye" label="black eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373728" start="81612" end="81637" title="Emory University Hospital" label="Emory University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908267" start="82132" end="82144" title="Hospice care in the United States" label="hospice care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090984" start="82326" end="82350" title="Death and state funeral of Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="82382" end="82396" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q27824398" start="82645" end="82679" title="First inauguration of Donald Trump" label="American presidential inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099823" start="82714" end="82742" title="List of presidents of the United States by age" label="longest-lived U.S. president"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="82783" end="82789" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440190" start="83158" end="83169" title="Fox Theatre (Atlanta)" label="Fox Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944360" start="83209" end="83219" title="turned 100" label="turned 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q223318" start="83305" end="83322" title="F-18 Super Hornet" label="F-18 Super Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394215" start="83367" end="83391" title="Naval Air Station Oceana" label="Naval Air Station Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q107599584" start="83597" end="83615" title="209 Woodland Drive" label="209 Woodland Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="83941" end="83950" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="84096" end="84109" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="84193" end="84205" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="84207" end="84221" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="84223" end="84235" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="84253" end="84265" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q42356182" start="84455" end="84465" title="Betty Glad" label="Betty Glad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="84469" end="84488" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="84496" end="84518" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="84718" end="84754" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="have ranked Carter&amp;#x27;s presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="84909" end="84924" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758403" start="85101" end="85115" title="Andrew Roberts, Baron Roberts of Belgravia" label="Andrew Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="85267" end="85305" title="Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace" label="Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626497" start="85463" end="85482" title="Stuart E. Eizenstat" label="Stuart E. Eizenstat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="85853" end="85865" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="85898" end="85913" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065445" start="86111" end="86138" title="Ford&amp;#x27;s pardon of Nixon" label="Ford&amp;#x27;s pardon of Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="86232" end="86242" title="Southern United States" label="southerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="86687" end="86706" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="86854" end="86868" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="86869" end="86876" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="in 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="86940" end="86955" title="approval rating" label="approval rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="87757" end="87763" title="Gallup Inc." label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="88278" end="88295" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047243" start="88703" end="88713" title="Carterpuri" label="Carterpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="88728" end="88735" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="88816" end="88847" title="American Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q386481" start="88888" end="88919" title="Jimmy Carter Library and Museum" label="Jimmy Carter Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="89025" end="89048" title="National Historic Site (United States)" label="National Historic Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199775" start="89091" end="89126" title="Jimmy Carter National Historic Park" label="Jimmy Carter National Historic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="89176" end="89190" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="89194" end="89217" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="89242" end="89272" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q27028" start="89356" end="89405" title="United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights" label="United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17132005" start="89460" end="89472" title="Hoover Medal" label="Hoover Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="89554" end="89571" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686837" start="89730" end="89743" title="Souther Field" label="Souther Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q123067" start="89755" end="89772" title="Americus, Georgia" label="Americus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901528" start="89786" end="89815" title="Jimmy Carter Regional Airport" label="Jimmy Carter Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="89880" end="89919" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909467" start="89983" end="90004" title="Our Endangered Values" label="Our Endangered Values"/>
<link wikidata="" start="90054" end="90084" title="A Full Life: Reflections at 90" label="A Full Life: Reflections at 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q603770" start="90308" end="90342" title="White House Historical Association" label="White House Historical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="90576" end="90599" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941200" start="90611" end="90629" title="Mush from the Wimp" label="Mush from the Wimp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15993" wikidata="Q159592" url="?curid=15993" title="John Napier">
<text>John Napier of Merchiston ( ; Latinized as Ioannes Neper; 1 February 1550 – 4 April 1617), nicknamed Marvellous Merchiston, was a Scottish landowner known as a mathematician, physicist, and astronomer. He was the 8th Laird of Merchiston.

John Napier is best known as the discoverer of logarithms. He also invented the so-called &quot;Napier&#x27;s bones&quot; and made common the use of the decimal point in arithmetic and mathematics.

Napier&#x27;s birthplace, Merchiston Tower in Edinburgh, is now part of the facilities of Edinburgh Napier University. There is a memorial to him at St Cuthbert&#x27;s at the west side of Edinburgh.

==Life==
Napier&#x27;s father was Sir Archibald Napier of Merchiston Castle, and his mother was Janet Bothwell, daughter of the politician and judge Francis Bothwell, and a sister of Adam Bothwell who became the Bishop of Orkney. Archibald Napier was 16 years old when John Napier was born.

There are no records of Napier&#x27;s early learning, but many believe that he was privately tutored during early childhood. At age 13, he was enrolled in St Salvator&#x27;s College, St Andrews. Near the time of his matriculation the quality of the education provided by the university was poor, owing in part to the Reformation&#x27;s causing strife between those of the old faith and the growing numbers of Protestants. There are no records showing that John Napier completed his education at St Andrews. It is believed he left Scotland to further his education in mainland Europe, following the advice given by his uncle Adam Bothwell in a letter written to John Napier&#x27;s father on 5 December 1560, saying, &quot;I pray you, sir, to send John to the schools either to France or Flanders, for he can learn no good at home&quot;. It is not known which university Napier attended in Europe, but when he returned to Scotland in 1571 he was fluent in Greek, a language that was not commonly taught in European universities at the time. There are also no records showing his enrollment in the premier universities in Paris or Geneva during this time.

In 1571, Napier, aged 21, returned to Scotland, and bought a castle at Gartness in 1574. On the death of his father in 1608, Napier and his family moved into Merchiston Castle in Edinburgh, where he resided the remainder of his life. He had a property within Edinburgh city as well on Borthwick&#x27;s Close off the Royal Mile.
On 7 June 1596 Napier wrote a paper &quot;Secret inventions, profitable and necessary in these days for defence of this island&quot;. He describes two kinds of burning mirror for use against ships at a distance, a special kind of artillery shot, and a musket-proof metal chariot.

Napier died from the effects of gout at home at Merchiston Castle at the age of 67. He was buried in the kirkyard of St Giles in Edinburgh. Following the loss of the kirkyard of St Giles to build Parliament House, his remains were transferred to an underground vault on the north side of St Cuthbert&#x27;s Parish Church at the west side of Edinburgh. There is also a wall monument to Napier at St Cuthbert&#x27;s.

Many mathematicians at the time were acutely aware of the issues of computation and were dedicated to relieving practitioners of the calculation burden. Napier was famous for his devices to assist with these issues of computation. He invented a well-known mathematical artefact, the ingenious numbering rods more quaintly known as &quot;Napier&#x27;s bones&quot;, that offered mechanical means for facilitating computation.

In addition, Napier recognized the potential of the recent developments in mathematics, particularly those of prosthaphaeresis, decimal fractions, and symbolic index arithmetic, to tackle the issue of reducing computation. He appreciated that, for the most part, practitioners who had laborious computations generally did them in the context of trigonometry. Therefore, as well as developing the logarithmic relation, Napier set it in a trigonometric context so it would be even more relevant.

==Mathematics==
===Napier&#x27;s Bones===
His work &quot;Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio&quot; (1614) contained fifty-seven pages of explanatory matter and ninety pages of tables listing the natural logarithms of trigonometric functions. The book also has a discussion of theorems in spherical trigonometry, usually known as Napier&#x27;s Rules of Circular Parts.

Modern English translations of both Napier&#x27;s books on logarithms and their description can be found on the web, as well as a discussion of Napier&#x27;s bones and Promptuary (another early calculating device).

His invention of logarithms was quickly taken up at Gresham College, and prominent English mathematician Henry Briggs visited Napier in 1615. Among the matters they discussed were a re-scaling of Napier&#x27;s logarithms, in which the presence of the mathematical constant now known as &quot;e&quot; (more accurately, &quot;e&quot; times a large power of 10 rounded to an integer) was a practical difficulty. Neither Napier nor Briggs actually discovered the constant &quot;e&quot;; that discovery was made decades later by Jacob Bernoulli.

Napier delegated to Briggs the computation of a revised table. The computational advance available via logarithms, the inverse of powered numbers or exponential notation, was such that it made calculations by hand much quicker. The way was opened to later scientific advances, in astronomy, dynamics, and other areas of physics.

Napier made further contributions. He improved Simon Stevin&#x27;s decimal notation, introducing the full stop (.) as the delimiter for the fractional part. Lattice multiplication, used by Fibonacci, was made more convenient by his introduction of Napier&#x27;s bones, a multiplication tool using a set of numbered rods.

Napier may have worked largely in isolation, but he had contact with Tycho Brahe who corresponded with his friend John Craig. Craig certainly announced the discovery of logarithms to Brahe in the 1590s (the name itself came later); there is a story from Anthony à Wood, perhaps not well substantiated, that Napier had a hint from Craig that Longomontanus, a follower of Brahe, was working in a similar direction. Craig had notes on a method of Paul Wittich that used trigonometric identities to reduce a multiplication formula for the sine function to additions.

===Trigonometry===
When one of the angles, say &quot;C&quot;, of a spherical triangle is equal to &quot;&quot;/2 the various identities given above are considerably simplified. There are ten identities relating three elements chosen from the set &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot;.

Napier provided an elegant mnemonic aid for the ten independent equations: the mnemonic is called Napier&#x27;s circle or Napier&#x27;s pentagon (when the circle in the above figure, right, is replaced by a pentagon).

First, write the six parts of the triangle (three vertex angles, three arc angles for the sides) in the order they occur around any circuit of the triangle: for the triangle shown above left, going clockwise starting with a gives &quot;aCbAcB&quot;. Next replace the parts that are not adjacent to C (that is &quot;A, c, B&quot;) by their complements and then delete the angle C from the list. The remaining parts can then be drawn as five ordered, equal slices of a pentagram, or circle, as shown in the above figure (right). For any choice of three contiguous parts, one (the &quot;middle&quot; part) will be adjacent to two parts and opposite the other two parts. The ten Napier&#x27;s Rules are given by

* sine of the middle part = the product of the tangents of the adjacent parts
* sine of the middle part = the product of the cosines of the opposite parts

The key for remembering which trigonometric function goes with which part is to look at the first vowel of the kind of part: middle parts take the sine, adjacent parts take the tangent, and opposite parts take the cosine. For an example, starting with the sector containing formula_1 we have:

:formula_2
The full set of rules for the right spherical triangle is (Todhunter, Art.62)

formula_3 
A quadrantal spherical triangle is defined to be a spherical triangle in which one of the sides subtends an angle of &#x27;/2 radians at the centre of the sphere: on the unit sphere the side has length &#x27;/2. In the case that the side &quot;c&quot; has length &#x27;/2 on the unit sphere the equations governing the remaining sides and angles may be obtained by applying the rules for the right spherical triangle of the previous section to the polar triangle &quot;A&#x27;B&#x27;C&#x27;&quot; with sides &quot;a&#x27;,b&#x27;,c&#x27;&quot; such that &quot;A&#x27;&quot; = &#x27; − &quot;a&quot;,  &quot;a = &#x27; − &quot;A&quot; etc. The results are:

formula_4

Logarithm 

Given a positive real number &quot;b&quot; such that &quot;b&quot; ≠ 1, the &quot;logarithm&quot; of a positive real number &quot;x&quot; with respect to base &quot;b&quot; is the exponent by which &quot;b&quot; must be raised to yield &quot;x&quot;. In other words, the logarithm of &quot;x&quot; to base &quot;b&quot; is the unique real number &quot;y&quot; such that &quot;b&quot;&quot;y&quot; = &quot;x&quot;.

The logarithm is denoted &quot;log&quot;b&quot; &quot;x&quot;&quot; (pronounced as &quot;the logarithm of &quot;x&quot; to base &quot;b&quot;&quot;, &quot;the base-&quot;b&quot; logarithm of &quot;x&quot;&quot;, or most commonly &quot;the log, base &quot;b&quot;, of &quot;x&quot;&quot;).

An equivalent and more succinct definition is that the function formula_5 is the inverse function to the function formula_6

==Theology==
Napier had an interest in the &quot;Book of Revelation&quot;, from his student days at St Salvator&#x27;s College, St Andrews. Under the influence of the sermons of Christopher Goodman, he developed a strongly anti-papal reading, going as far as to say that the Pope was the Antichrist in some of his writings.

Napier regarded &quot;A Plaine Discovery of the Whole Revelation of St. John&quot; (1593) as his most important work. It was written in English, unlike his other publications, in order to reach the widest audience and so that, according to Napier, &quot;the simple of this island may be instructed&quot;. &quot;A Plaine Discovery&quot; used mathematical analysis of the &quot;Book of Revelation&quot; to attempt to predict the date of the Apocalypse. Napier identified events in chronological order which he believed were parallels to events described in the &quot;Book of Revelation&quot; believing that &quot;Revelation&quot;&#x27;s structure implied that the prophecies would be fulfilled incrementally. In this work Napier dated the seventh trumpet to 1541, and predicted the end of the world would occur in either 1688 or 1700. Napier did not believe that people could know the true date of the Apocalypse, but claimed that since the Bible contained so many clues about the end, God wanted the Church to know when the end was coming.

In his dedication of the &quot;Plaine Discovery&quot; to James VI, dated 29 Jan 1594, Napier urged the king to see &quot;that justice be done against the enemies of God&#x27;s church,&quot; and counselled the King &quot;to reform the universal enormities of his country, and first to begin at his own house, family, and court.&quot; The volume includes nine pages of Napier&#x27;s English verse. It met with success at home and abroad. In 1600 Michiel Panneel produced a Dutch translation, and this reached a second edition in 1607. In 1602 the work appeared at La Rochelle in a French version, by Georges Thomson, revised by Napier, and that also went through several editions (1603, 1605, and 1607). A new edition of the English original was called for in 1611, when it was revised and corrected by the author, and enlarged by the addition of &quot;With a resolution of certain doubts, moved by some well affected brethren.&quot;; this appeared simultaneously at Edinburgh and London. The author stated that he still intended to publish a Latin edition, but it never appeared. A German translation, by Leo de Dromna, of the first part of Napier&#x27;s work appeared at Gera in 1611, and of the whole by Wolfgang Meyer at Frankfurt-am-Main, in 1615. Among Napier&#x27;s followers was Matthew Cotterius (Matthieu Cottière).

==Interest in the occult==
In addition to his mathematical and religious interests, Napier was often perceived as a magician, and is thought to have dabbled in alchemy and necromancy. It was said that he would travel about with a black spider in a small box, and that his black cockerel was his familiar spirit.

Some of Napier&#x27;s neighbours accused him of being a sorcerer and in league with the devil, believing that all of the time he spent in his study was being used to learn the black art. These rumours were stoked when Napier used his black cockerel to catch a thief. Napier told his servants to go into a darkened room and pet the cockerel, claiming the bird would crow if they were the one who stole his property. Unbeknownst to the servants, Napier had covered the bird with soot and when the servants emerged from the room, Napier inspected their hands to find the one who had been too afraid to touch the rooster.

Another act which Napier is reported to have carried out, which may have seemed mystical to the locals, was when Napier removed the pigeons from his estate since they were eating his grain. Napier caught the pigeons by strewing grain laced with alcohol throughout the field and then capturing the pigeons once they were too drunk to fly away.

A contract still exists for a treasure hunt, made between Napier and Robert Logan of Restalrig. Napier was to search Fast Castle for treasure allegedly hidden there, wherein it is stated that Napier should &quot;do his utmost diligence to search and seek out, and by all craft and ingine to find out the same, or make it sure that no such thing has been there.&quot; This contract was never fulfilled by Napier, and no gold was found when the Edinburgh Archaeological Field society excavated the castle between 1971 and 1986.

==Influence==
Among Napier&#x27;s early followers were the instrument makers Edmund Gunter and John Speidell. The development of logarithms is given credit as the largest single factor in the general adoption of decimal arithmetic. The &quot;Trissotetras&quot; (1645) of Thomas Urquhart builds on Napier&#x27;s work, in trigonometry.

Henry Briggs was an early adopter of the Napierian logarithm. He later computed a new table of logarithms to base 10, accurate to 14 decimal places.

==Eponyms==
An alternative unit to the decibel used in electrical engineering, the neper, is named after Napier, as is Edinburgh Napier University in Edinburgh, Scotland.

The crater Neper on the Moon is named after him.

In French, Spanish and Portuguese, the natural logarithm is named after him (respectively, &quot;Logarithme Népérien&quot; and &quot;Logaritmos Neperianos&quot; for Spanish and Portuguese). In Finnish and Italian, the mathematical constant &quot;e&quot; is named after him (&quot;Neperin luku&quot; and &quot;Numero di Nepero&quot;).

==Family==
In 1572, Napier married 16-year-old Elizabeth, daughter of James Stirling, the 4th Laird of Keir and of Cadder. They had two children. Elizabeth died in 1579, and Napier then married Agnes Chisholm, with whom he had ten more children.

Napier&#x27;s father-in-law, Sir James Chisholm of Cromlix, was one of many excommunicated by the General Assembly of the Presbyterian party following the Spanish blanks plot. Napier sat on the General Assembly that excommunicated the plotters, and petitioned the King James VI and I to enforce the punishment on the plotters, but was ultimately ignored since the King believed the ministers were acting cruelly, and was in favor of pursuing policies of more appeasement.

His half-brother (through his father&#x27;s remarriage) was Alexander Napier, Lord Laurieston.

==List of works==
*(1593) &quot;A Plaine Discovery of the Whole Revelation of St. John&quot;
*(1614) &quot;Mirifici logarithmorum canonis descriptio &quot; – Edward Wright&#x27;s English translation was published in 1616.
*(1617) &quot;Rabdologiæ seu Numerationis per Virgulas libri duo&quot; (Google Books link)(published posthumously) Rabdology (Wikipedia)
*(1619) &quot;Mirifici logarithmorum canonis constructio&quot; –written before the &quot;Descriptio&quot;, but published posthumously by his son Robert. Translated into English in 1889.
*(1839) &quot;De arte logistica&quot;

==See also==
*List of colleges and universities named after people
*Location arithmetic
*Napier&#x27;s analogies
*Napierian logarithm
*Rabdology

==Notes==
==References==
*Diploudis, Alexandros. Undusting Napier&#x27;s Bones. Heriot-Watt University, 1997
*&quot;John Napier.&quot; &quot;Math &amp; Mathematicians: The History of Math Discoveries around the World.&quot; 2 vols. U*X*L, 1999
*John Napier &quot;The History of Computing Project&quot;
*John Napier—Short biography and translation of work on logarithms 
*Intro to Spherical Trig. Includes discussion of The Napier circle and Napier&#x27;s rules
*EEBO (Early English Books Online) has electronic copies of some of his work, in facsimiles of editions of Napier&#x27;s time (subscription or Athens login required)
*Mirifici logarithmorum canonis descriptio &quot;Descriptio&quot; &quot;De Arte Logistica&quot; English Translation by Ian Bruce

Attribution

==Further reading==
* , the 1889 English translation.

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="0" end="25" title="John Napier" label="John Napier of Merchiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="30" end="39" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="43" end="56" title="John Napier" label="Ioannes Neper"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="101" end="122" title="John Napier" label="Marvellous Merchiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="160" end="173" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="175" end="184" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="190" end="200" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515878" start="217" end="222" title="Laird" label="Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921454" start="226" end="236" title="Merchiston" label="Merchiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="286" end="295" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358538" start="335" end="354" title="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones" label="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q427968" start="392" end="405" title="decimal point" label="decimal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921452" start="464" end="480" title="Merchiston Castle" label="Merchiston Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="484" end="493" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277357" start="528" end="555" title="Edinburgh Napier University" label="Edinburgh Napier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756122" start="587" end="605" title="St Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Parish Church" label="St Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786468" start="672" end="692" title="Archibald Napier (landowner)" label="Sir Archibald Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197522" start="787" end="803" title="Francis Bothwell" label="Francis Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678762" start="821" end="834" title="Adam Bothwell" label="Adam Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502743" start="850" end="866" title="Bishop of Orkney" label="Bishop of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595430" start="1085" end="1123" title="St Salvator&amp;#x27;s College, St Andrews" label="St Salvator&amp;#x27;s College, St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1706" end="1712" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1716" end="1724" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q17747128" start="2155" end="2163" title="Gartness, Stirling" label="Gartness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921452" start="2242" end="2259" title="Merchiston Castle" label="Merchiston Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q852908" start="2400" end="2410" title="Royal Mile" label="Royal Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q368027" start="2572" end="2586" title="Burning glass" label="burning mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="2725" end="2729" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921452" start="2741" end="2758" title="Merchiston Castle" label="Merchiston Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749813" start="2798" end="2806" title="kirkyard" label="kirkyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="2810" end="2818" title="High Kirk of St Giles" label="St Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138911" start="2889" end="2905" title="Parliament House, Edinburgh" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756122" start="2981" end="3013" title="St Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Parish Church" label="St Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257608" start="3644" end="3660" title="prosthaphaeresis" label="prosthaphaeresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107644956" start="4086" end="4127" title="Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio" label="Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="4230" end="4247" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="4252" end="4274" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q46463" start="4323" end="4345" title="spherical trigonometry" label="spherical trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358538" start="4548" end="4567" title="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones" label="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249900" start="4572" end="4582" title="Promptuary" label="Promptuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q788375" start="4672" end="4687" title="Gresham College" label="Gresham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q335086" start="4725" end="4737" title="Henry Briggs (mathematician)" label="Henry Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="4871" end="4919" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="mathematical constant now known as &amp;quot;e&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q122392" start="5144" end="5159" title="Jacob Bernoulli" label="Jacob Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="5311" end="5331" title="exponential notation" label="exponential notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="5442" end="5451" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128030" start="5453" end="5461" title="dynamics (mechanics)" label="dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="5482" end="5489" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23696" start="5539" end="5551" title="Simon Stevin" label="Simon Stevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172008" start="5593" end="5602" title="full stop" label="full stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516846" start="5649" end="5671" title="Lattice multiplication" label="Lattice multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q8763" start="5681" end="5690" title="Fibonacci" label="Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358538" start="5740" end="5759" title="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones" label="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="5883" end="5894" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227473" start="5928" end="5938" title="John Craig (physician)" label="John Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q691873" start="6068" end="6082" title="Anthony à Wood" label="Anthony à Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q729315" start="6155" end="6168" title="Longomontanus" label="Longomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q88089" start="6258" end="6270" title="Paul Wittich" label="Paul Wittich"/>
<link wikidata="Q273008" start="6281" end="6305" title="trigonometric identities" label="trigonometric identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="6349" end="6362" title="sine function" label="sine function"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="6727" end="6739" title="Mnemonic" label="mnemonic aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="8876" end="8887" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="8941" end="8950" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q191884" start="9645" end="9661" title="inverse function" label="inverse function"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="9738" end="9756" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595430" start="9789" end="9827" title="St Salvator&amp;#x27;s College, St Andrews" label="St Salvator&amp;#x27;s College, St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112414" start="9867" end="9886" title="Christopher Goodman" label="Christopher Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="9977" end="9987" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="10453" end="10463" title="Apocalypse" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916053" start="10747" end="10766" title="the seventh trumpet" label="the seventh trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="11111" end="11119" title="James VI" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11498" end="11513" title="Michiel Panneel" label="Michiel Panneel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="11616" end="11627" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11652" end="11667" title="Georges Thomson" label="Georges Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12158" end="12171" title="Leo de Dromna" label="Leo de Dromna"/>
<link wikidata="Q89262" start="12259" end="12273" title="Wolfgang Meyer" label="Wolfgang Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="12277" end="12294" title="Frankfurt-am-Main" label="Frankfurt-am-Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791641" start="12358" end="12375" title="Matthieu Cottière" label="Matthieu Cottière"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="12539" end="12546" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="12551" end="12561" title="necromancy" label="necromancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="12657" end="12665" title="cockerel" label="cockerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q386905" start="12674" end="12689" title="familiar spirit" label="familiar spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12281707" start="13685" end="13698" title="Treasure hunting" label="treasure hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346977" start="13724" end="13749" title="Robert Logan of Restalrig" label="Robert Logan of Restalrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557884" start="13772" end="13783" title="Fast Castle" label="Fast Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726699" start="14259" end="14272" title="Edmund Gunter" label="Edmund Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984704" start="14277" end="14290" title="John Speidell" label="John Speidell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="14394" end="14412" title="decimal arithmetic" label="decimal arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067648" start="14453" end="14468" title="Thomas Urquhart" label="Thomas Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="14502" end="14514" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="14706" end="14713" title="decibel" label="decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="14722" end="14744" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q50094" start="14750" end="14755" title="neper" label="neper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277357" start="14786" end="14813" title="Edinburgh Napier University" label="Edinburgh Napier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977728" start="14850" end="14855" title="Neper (crater)" label="Neper"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="14928" end="14945" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="15129" end="15142" title="E (mathematical constant)" label="&amp;quot;e&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515878" start="15318" end="15323" title="Laird" label="Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383800" start="15327" end="15331" title="Keir House" label="Keir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463586" start="15339" end="15345" title="Cadder" label="Cadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573331" start="15626" end="15645" title="Spanish blanks plot" label="Spanish blanks plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="15740" end="15754" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q71860103" start="16004" end="16037" title="Alexander Napier, Lord Laurieston" label="Alexander Napier, Lord Laurieston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294162" start="16198" end="16211" title="Edward Wright (mathematician)" label="Edward Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428999" start="16377" end="16398" title="Rabdology" label="Rabdology (Wikipedia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610678" start="16638" end="16690" title="List of colleges and universities named after people" label="List of colleges and universities named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664794" start="16692" end="16711" title="Location arithmetic" label="Location arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16713" end="16736" title="Spherical trigonometry#Napier&amp;#x27;s analogies" label="Napier&amp;#x27;s analogies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575737" start="16738" end="16757" title="Napierian logarithm" label="Napierian logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428999" start="16759" end="16768" title="Rabdology" label="Rabdology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15995" wikidata="Q454743" url="?curid=15995" title="Johann Heinrich Alsted">
<text>Johann Heinrich Alsted (March 1588 – November 9, 1638), &quot;the true parent of all the Encyclopædias&quot;,&lt;ref name=&quot;s:Budget of Paradoxes/O&quot;&gt;.&lt;/ref&gt; was a German-born Transylvanian Saxon Calvinist minister and academic, known for his varied interests: in Ramism and Lullism, pedagogy and encyclopedias, theology and millenarianism. His contemporaries noted that an anagram of Alstedius was &quot;sedulitas&quot;, meaning &quot;hard work&quot; in Latin.

== Life ==
Alsted was born in Mittenaar. He was educated at Herborn Academy in the state of Hesse, studying under Johannes Piscator. From 1606 he was at the University of Marburg, taught by Rudolf Goclenius, Gregorius Schönfeld and Raphaël Egli. The following year he went to Basel, where his teachers were Leonhardt Zubler for mathematics, Amandus Polanus von Polansdorf for theology, and Johann Buxtorf. From about 1608 he returned to the Herborn Academy to teach as professor of philosophy and theology.

Alsted was later in exile from the Thirty Years&#x27; War in Transylvania, where he remained for the rest of his life. In 1629 he left war-torn Germany for Weißenburg (now Alba Iulia in Romania) to found a Calvinist Academy: the context was that the Transylvanian royal family had just returned from Unitarianism to Calvinism, and Alsted and Johannes Bisterfeld were German professors brought in to improve standards. Among the students there was János Apáczai Csere.

Alsted died in Alba Iulia in 1638.

==Works==

=== Encyclopedist ===

Alsted has been called &#x27;one of the most important encyclopedists of all time&#x27;. He was a prolific writer, and his &quot;Encyclopaedia&quot; (1630) long had a high reputation. It was preceded by shorter works, including the 1608 &quot;Encyclopaedia cursus philosophici&quot;. His major encyclopedia of 1630, the &quot;Encyclopaedia, Septem Tomis Distincta&quot;, was divided into 35 books, and had 48 synoptical tables as well as an index. Alsted described it as &quot;a methodical systemization of all things which ought to be learned by men in this life. In short, it is the totality of knowledge.&quot; In its time it was praised by Bernard Lamy and Cotton Mather, and it informed the work of Alsted&#x27;s student John Amos Comenius. An unfinished encyclopedic project by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz began as a plan to expand and modernize it, and the famous diarist Samuel Pepys purchased a copy in 1660—thirty years after its initial publication. Although Jacob Thomasius criticised it for plagiarism for verbatim copying without acknowledgment, Augustus De Morgan later called it &quot;the true parent of all the Encyclopædias, or collections of treatises, or works in which that character predominates&quot;.

&quot;The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy&quot;, p. 632, in the context of Calvinist metaphysics, states

&quot;In the works of authors like Clemens Timpler of Heidelberg and Steinfurt, Bartolomaeus Keckermann of Heidelberg and Danzig, and Johann Heinrich Alsted of Herborn there appeared a new, unified vision of the encyclopaedia of the scientific disciplines in which ontology had the role of assigning to each of the particular sciences its proper domain.&quot;

In his &quot;The New England Mind&quot;, Perry Miller writes about the &quot;Encyclopaedia&quot;:

:&quot;It was indeed nothing short of a summary, in sequential and numbered paragraphs, of everything that the mind of European man had yet conceived or discovered. The works of over five hundred authors, from Aristotle to James I, were digested and methodized, including those of Aquinas, Scotus, and medieval theology, as also those of medieval science, such as &quot;De Natura Rerum&quot;.&quot;

It was reissued as a 4-volume facsimile reprint, edited by W. Schmidt-Biggemann (Fromann-Holzboog Press, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, 1989–1990).

==== Alstedius&#x27; Encyclopedia Biblica ====
In 1610, Alstedius published the first edition of his Encyclopedia. In 1630, he published a second edition in a much more comprehensive form, in two large folio volumes. In the second edition, he professes to reduce the several branches of art and science then known and studied into a system. In this work, and his Encyclopedia Biblica, he tries to prove that the foundation and materials of the whole can be found in the Sacred Scriptures. The first four books contain an exposition of the various subjects to be discussed. He devotes six books to philology, ten to speculative philosophy, and four to practical matters. Then follow three on theology, jurisprudence, and medicine; three on mechanical arts, and five on history, chronology, and miscellanies. This work exhibited a great improvement on other published works that purported to be encyclopedias in the latter half of the 16th and the first half of the 17th centuries.

=== Logician ===
Alsted published &quot;Logicae Systema Harmonicum&quot; (1614). In writing a semi-Ramist encyclopedia, he then applied his conception of logic to the sum of human knowledge. To do that, he added the Lullist topical art of memory to Ramist topical logic, indeed reversing one of the original conceptions of Ramus. He had a reputation in his own time as a distinctive methodologist. John Prideaux in 1639 asked:

Q. Is it true that the seven dialectical theories of method in use today, to wit, i) the Aristotelian, 2) the Lullian, 3) the Ramistic, 4) the Mixt, whether indeed in the manner of Keckermann or of Alsted, 5) the Forensic of Hotman, 6) the Jesuitic, and 7) the Socinian, differ mostly in respect to manner of treatment, not in respect to 
purpose?

To which the pupil&#x27;s answer was to be &quot;yes&quot;; as it was to be to the question &quot;Is it true that a Mixt ought to be preferred to a Peripatetic, a Ramist, a Lullian, and the others?&quot; A &quot;Mixt&quot; took elements from both Aristotle and Ramus; Philippo-Ramists, who blended Melanchthon with Ramus, were a type of &quot;Mixt&quot;; &quot;Systematics&quot; were &quot;Mixts&quot; who followed Keckermann in a belief in system, as Alsted did.

=== Theologian ===
From his Transylvanian period dates Alsted&#x27;s &quot;Prodromus&quot; (printed 1641, but dated 1635). The &quot;Prodromus&quot; was a Calvinist refutation of one of the most influential anti-Trinitarian works, &quot;De vera religione&quot; of Johannes Völkel. This work was a compendium of the arguments of Völkel&#x27;s teacher Fausto Sozzini, figurehead of the Polish Unitarian movement.

== Publications ==
Alsted is now remembered as an encyclopedist, and for his millenarian views. His approach to the encyclopedia took two decades of preliminaries, and was an effort of integration of tools and theories to hand.

In 1609 Alsted published &quot;Clavis artis Lullianae&quot;. In 1610 he published the &quot;Artificium perorandi&quot; of Giordano Bruno; and in the same year the &quot;Panacea philosophica&quot;, an attempt to find the common ground in the work of Aristotle, Raymond Lull, and Petrus Ramus. In 1612 Alsted edited the &quot;Explanatio&quot; of Bernard de Lavinheta, a Lullist work. In 1613 he published an edition of the &quot;Systema systematum&quot; of Bartholomäus Keckermann. &quot;Theologia naturalis&quot; (1615) was an apologetical work of natural theology.

* &quot;Clavis artis lullianae&quot; (1609).
* &quot;Panacea philosophica&quot; (1610).
* &quot;Metaphysica, tribus libris tractata&quot; (1613).
* &quot;Methodus admirandorum mathematicorum completens novem libris matheseos universae&quot; (1613) Herbornae Nassoviarum:Johann Heinrich Alsted
* &quot;Logicae Systema Harmonicum&quot; (1614).
* &quot; Theologia naturalis&quot; (1615).
* &quot;Cursus Philosophici Encyclopediae Libris XXVII&quot;, 1620.
* &quot;Methodus sacrosanctae theologiae octo libris tradita in Quorum&quot; Hanau:Konrad Eifried
* &quot;Encyclopaedia septem tomis distincta: 1. Praecognita disciplinarum; 2. Philologia; 3. Philosophia theoretica; 4. Philosophia practica; 5. Tres superiores facultates; 6. Artes mechanicae; 7. Farragines disciplinarum&quot; (1630).
* &quot;Templum musicum&quot; (1664), , 93 pp.

== See also ==
* &quot;Encyclopaedia Cursus Philosophici&quot;
* Wikipedia

== References ==
* Walter J. Ong (2005), &quot;Ramus, Method, and the Decay of Dialogue. From the Art of Discourse to the Art of Reason&quot;, Harvard University Press, 1958.

== Notes ==
==Further reading==

* Cole, Percival R. (Percival Richard), 1879-1948 &quot;A neglected educator: Johann Heinrich Alsted&quot; Sydney : W.A. Gullick 1910
* Hotson, Howard &amp; Maria Rosa Antognazza (eds.), &quot;Alsted and Leibniz: on God, the Magistrate, and the Millennium&quot;, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1999.
* Hotson, Howard. &quot;Johann Heinrich Alsted 1588-1638: Between Renaissance, Reformation, and Universal Reform&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000.
* Hotson, Howard. &quot;Paradise Postponed. Johann Heinrich Alsted and the Birth of Calvinist Millenarianism&quot;, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2000.
* McMahon, William. &quot;The Semantics of Johann Alsted&quot;, in D. Cram, A. R. Linn, E. Nowak (eds.), &quot;History of Linguistics, 1996. Vol. 2: From Classical to Contemporary Linguistics&quot;, Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 1999, pp. 123–129.


==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q454743" start="0" end="22" title="Johann Heinrich Alsted" label="Johann Heinrich Alsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="89" end="102" title="Encyclopedia" label="Encyclopædias"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="181" end="187" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="193" end="212" title="Transylvanian Saxon" label="Transylvanian Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="213" end="222" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q354433" start="281" end="287" title="Ramism" label="Ramism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925505" start="292" end="299" title="Lullism" label="Lullism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="301" end="309" title="pedagogy" label="pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="314" end="326" title="encyclopedia" label="encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="342" end="356" title="millenarianism" label="millenarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q624070" start="510" end="519" title="Mittenaar" label="Mittenaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623512" start="540" end="555" title="Herborn Academy" label="Herborn Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="572" end="577" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q76141" start="594" end="611" title="Johannes Piscator" label="Johannes Piscator"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="637" end="658" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64272" start="670" end="686" title="Rudolf Goclenius" label="Rudolf Goclenius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="688" end="707" title="Gregorius Schönfeld" label="Gregorius Schönfeld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="712" end="724" title="Raphaël Egli" label="Raphaël Egli"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="756" end="761" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="787" end="803" title="Leonhardt Zubler" label="Leonhardt Zubler"/>
<link wikidata="Q454349" start="821" end="851" title="Amandus Polanus von Polansdorf" label="Amandus Polanus von Polansdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q71599" start="870" end="884" title="Johann Buxtorf" label="Johann Buxtorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="962" end="972" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="977" end="985" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1023" end="1045" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="1049" end="1061" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="1144" end="1154" title="Alba Iulia" label="Weißenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1174" end="1181" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q324149" start="1330" end="1349" title="Johannes Bisterfeld" label="Johannes Bisterfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q774310" start="1435" end="1454" title="János Apáczai Csere" label="János Apáczai Csere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="1582" end="1595" title="encyclopedist" label="encyclopedist"/>
<link wikidata="Q277219" start="2171" end="2183" title="Bernard Lamy (mathematician)" label="Bernard Lamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380719" start="2188" end="2201" title="Cotton Mather" label="Cotton Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735" start="2253" end="2271" title="John Amos Comenius" label="John Amos Comenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="2311" end="2336" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="2404" end="2416" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q67323" start="2495" end="2510" title="Jacob Thomasius" label="Jacob Thomasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="2529" end="2539" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208448" start="2585" end="2603" title="Augustus De Morgan" label="Augustus De Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2838" end="2859" title="Calvinist metaphysics" label="Calvinist metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q110847" start="2904" end="2919" title="Clemens Timpler" label="Clemens Timpler"/>
<link wikidata="Q67136" start="2949" end="2972" title="Bartolomaeus Keckermann" label="Bartolomaeus Keckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219277" start="3271" end="3283" title="Perry Miller" label="Perry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4893" end="4919" title="Logicae Systema Harmonicum" label="Logicae Systema Harmonicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q354433" start="4952" end="4958" title="Ramism" label="Ramist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5020" end="5042" title="sum of human knowledge" label="sum of human knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758418" start="5077" end="5098" title="topical art of memory" label="topical art of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824864" start="5109" end="5122" title="topical logic" label="topical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253415" start="5251" end="5264" title="John Prideaux" label="John Prideaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q561737" start="5506" end="5512" title="François Hotman" label="Hotman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5898" end="5914" title="Philippo-Ramists" label="Philippo-Ramists"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="5928" end="5939" title="Melanchthon" label="Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="6302" end="6318" title="anti-Trinitarian" label="anti-Trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217047" start="6359" end="6374" title="Johannes Völkel" label="Johannes Völkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q505037" start="6445" end="6459" title="Fausto Sozzini" label="Fausto Sozzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q749576" start="6479" end="6495" title="Polish Brethren" label="Polish Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="6858" end="6872" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="6985" end="6994" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="6996" end="7008" title="Raymond Lull" label="Raymond Lull"/>
<link wikidata="Q376124" start="7014" end="7026" title="Petrus Ramus" label="Petrus Ramus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893786" start="7080" end="7100" title="Bernard de Lavinheta" label="Bernard de Lavinheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q67136" start="7191" end="7214" title="Bartholomäus Keckermann" label="Bartholomäus Keckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129353" start="7283" end="7299" title="natural theology" label="natural theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18998" start="7550" end="7571" title="Herborn, Hesse" label="Herbornae Nassoviarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802" start="7832" end="7837" title="Hanau" label="Hanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q353932" start="8161" end="8194" title="Encyclopaedia Cursus Philosophici" label="Encyclopaedia Cursus Philosophici"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="8203" end="8212" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q722347" start="8233" end="8246" title="Walter J. Ong" label="Walter J. Ong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28925077" start="8580" end="8601" title="Maria Rosa Antognazza" label="Maria Rosa Antognazza"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="15996" wikidata="Q2725" url="?curid=15996" title="July 22">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 838 – Battle of Anzen: The Byzantine emperor Theophilos suffers a heavy defeat by the Abbasids.
*1099 – First Crusade: Godfrey of Bouillon is elected the first Defender of the Holy Sepulchre of The Kingdom of Jerusalem.
*1209 – Massacre at Béziers: The first major military action of the Albigensian Crusade.
*1298 – Wars of Scottish Independence: Battle of Falkirk: King Edward I of England and his longbowmen defeat William Wallace and his Scottish schiltrons outside the town of Falkirk.
*1342 – St. Mary Magdalene&#x27;s flood is the worst such event on record for central Europe.
*1443 – Battle of St. Jakob an der Sihl in the Old Zürich War. 
*1456 – Ottoman wars in Europe: Siege of Belgrade: John Hunyadi, Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary, defeats Mehmet II of the Ottoman Empire.
*1484 – Battle of Lochmaben Fair: A 500-man raiding party led by Alexander Stewart, Duke of Albany and James Douglas, 9th Earl of Douglas are defeated by Scots forces loyal to Albany&#x27;s brother James III of Scotland; Douglas is captured.
*1499 – Battle of Dornach: The Swiss decisively defeat the army of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor.
*1587 – Roanoke Colony: A second group of English settlers arrives on Roanoke Island off North Carolina to re-establish the deserted colony.
*1594 – The Dutch city of Groningen defended by the Spanish and besieged by a Dutch and English army under Maurice of Orange, capitulates.
*1598 – William Shakespeare&#x27;s play, &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, is entered on the &quot;Stationers&#x27; Register&quot;. By decree of Queen Elizabeth, the &quot;Stationers&#x27; Register&quot; licensed printed works, giving the Crown tight control over all published material.
===1601–1900===
*1686 – Albany, New York is formally chartered as a municipality by Governor Thomas Dongan.
*1706 – The Acts of Union 1707 are agreed upon by commissioners from the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland, which, when passed by each country&#x27;s Parliament, leads to the creation of the Kingdom of Great Britain.
*1793 – Alexander Mackenzie reaches the Pacific Ocean becoming the first recorded human to complete a transcontinental crossing of North America.
*1796 – Surveyors of the Connecticut Land Company name an area in Ohio &quot;Cleveland&quot; after Gen. Moses Cleaveland, the superintendent of the surveying party.
*1797 – Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife: Battle between Spanish and British naval forces during the French Revolutionary Wars. During the Battle, Rear-Admiral Nelson is wounded in the arm and the arm had to be partially amputated.
*1802 – Emperor Gia Long conquers Hanoi and unified Viet Nam, which had experienced centuries of feudal warfare.
*1805 – Napoleonic Wars: War of the Third Coalition: Battle of Cape Finisterre: An inconclusive naval action is fought between a combined French and Spanish fleet under Admiral Pierre-Charles Villeneuve of France and a British fleet under Admiral Robert Calder.
*1812 – Napoleonic Wars: Peninsular War: Battle of Salamanca: British forces led by Arthur Wellesley (later the Duke of Wellington) defeat French troops near Salamanca, Spain.
*1833 – The Slavery Abolition Act passes in the British House of Commons, initiating the gradual abolition of slavery in most parts of the British Empire.
*1864 – American Civil War: Battle of Atlanta: Outside Atlanta, Confederate General John Bell Hood leads an unsuccessful attack on Union troops under General William T. Sherman on Bald Hill.
*1893 – Katharine Lee Bates writes &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; after admiring the view from the top of Pikes Peak near Colorado Springs, Colorado.
*1894 – The first ever motor race is held in France between the cities of Paris and Rouen. The fastest finisher was the Comte Jules-Albert de Dion, but the &quot;official&quot; victory was awarded to Albert Lemaître driving his three-horsepower petrol engined Peugeot.
===1901–present===
*1916 – Preparedness Day Bombing: In San Francisco, a bomb explodes on Market Street during a parade, killing ten and injuring 40.
*1921 – Rif War: The Spanish Army suffers its worst military defeat in modern times to the Berbers of the Rif region of Spanish Morocco.
*1933 – Aviator Wiley Post returns to Floyd Bennett Field in New York City, completing the first solo flight around the world in seven days, 18 hours and 49 minutes.
*1936 – Spanish Civil War: The Popular Executive Committee of Valencia takes power in the Valencian Community.
*1937 – New Deal: The United States Senate votes down President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s proposal to add more justices to the Supreme Court of the United States.
*1942 – The United States government begins compulsory civilian gasoline rationing due to the wartime demands.
* 1942 – &quot;Grossaktion Warsaw&quot;: The systematic deportation of Jews from the Warsaw ghetto begins.
*1943 – World War II: Allied forces capture Palermo during the Allied invasion of Sicily.
* 1943 – World War II: Axis occupation forces violently disperse a massive protest in Athens, killing 22.
*1944 – The Polish Committee of National Liberation publishes its manifesto, starting the period of Communist rule in Poland.
*1946 – King David Hotel bombing: A Zionist underground organisation, the Irgun, bombs the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, site of the civil administration and military headquarters for Mandatory Palestine, resulting in 91 deaths.
*1951 – Soviet space dogs: Dezik and Tsygan were launched into a sub-orbital spaceflight from Kapustin Yar and became the first dogs to fly in space and the first to safely return.
*1962 – Mariner program: &quot;Mariner 1&quot; spacecraft flies erratically several minutes after launch and has to be destroyed.
*1963 – Crown Colony of Sarawak gains self-governance.
*1973 – Pan Am Flight 816 crashes after takeoff from Faa&#x27;a International Airport in Papeete, French Polynesia, killing 78.
*1976 – Japan completes its last reparation to the Philippines for war crimes committed during imperial Japan&#x27;s conquest of the country in the Second World War.
*1977 – Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping is restored to power.
*1981 – The first game of the 1981 South Africa rugby union tour of New Zealand and the United States is held in Gisborne, New Zealand. 
*1983 – Martial law in Poland is officially revoked.
*1990 – Greg LeMond, an American road racing cyclist, wins his third Tour de France after leading the majority of the race. It was LeMond&#x27;s second consecutive Tour de France victory.
*1992 – Near Medellín, Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar escapes from his luxury prison fearing extradition to the United States.
*1993 – Great Flood of 1993: Levees near Kaskaskia, Illinois rupture, forcing the entire town to evacuate by barges operated by the Army Corps of Engineers.
*1997 – The second Blue Water Bridge opens between Port Huron, Michigan and Sarnia, Ontario.
*2003 – Members of 101st Airborne of the United States, aided by Special Forces, attack a compound in Iraq, killing Saddam Hussein&#x27;s sons Uday and Qusay, along with Mustapha Hussein, Qusay&#x27;s 14-year-old son, and a bodyguard.
*2005 – Jean Charles de Menezes is killed by police as the hunt begins for the London Bombers responsible for the 7 July 2005 London bombings and the 21 July 2005 London bombings.
*2011 – Norway attacks: A bomb explodes, targeted at government buildings in central Oslo, followed by a massacre at a youth camp on the island of Utøya.
*2012 – Syrian civil war: The People&#x27;s Protection Units (YPG) captured the cities of Serê Kaniyê and Dirbêsiyê, during clashes with pro-government forces in Al-Hasakah.
*2013 – Dingxi earthquakes: A series of earthquakes in Dingxi, China, kills at least 89 people and injures more than 500 others.
*2019 – Chandrayaan-2, the second lunar exploration mission developed by Indian Space Research Organisation after Chandrayaan-1 is launched from Satish Dhawan Space Centre in a GSLV Mark III M1. It consists of a lunar orbiter, and also included the &quot;Vikram&quot; lander, and the &quot;Pragyan&quot; lunar rover.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1210 – Joan of England, Queen of Scotland (d. 1238)
*1437 – John Scrope, 5th Baron Scrope of Bolton, English Baron (d. 1498)
*1476 – Zhu Youyuan, Ming Dynasty politician (d. 1519)
*1478 – Philip I of Castile (d. 1506)
*1531 – Leonhard Thurneysser, scholar at the court of the Elector of Brandenburg (d. 1595)
*1535 – Katarina Stenbock, queen of Gustav I of Sweden (d. 1621)
*1552 – Anthony Browne, Sheriff of Surrey and Kent (d. 1592)
* 1552 – Mary Wriothesley, Countess of Southampton, Lady of English peer and others (d. 1607)
*1559 – Lawrence of Brindisi, Italian priest and saint (d. 1619)
===1601–1900===
*1615 – Marguerite of Lorraine, princess of Lorraine, duchess of Orléans (d. 1672)
*1618 – Johan Nieuhof, Dutch traveler (d. 1672)
*1621 – Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury, English politician, Lord Chancellor of the United Kingdom (d. 1683)
*1630 – Madame de Brinvilliers, French aristocrat (d. 1676)
*1647 – Margaret Mary Alacoque, French nun, mystic and saint (d. 1690)
*1651 – Ferdinand Tobias Richter, Austrian organist and composer (d. 1711)
*1711 – Georg Wilhelm Richmann, German-Russian physicist and academic (d. 1753)
*1713 – Jacques-Germain Soufflot, French architect, designed the Panthéon (d. 1780)
*1733 – Mikhail Shcherbatov, Russian philosopher and historian (d. 1790)
*1755 – Gaspard de Prony, French mathematician and engineer (d. 1839)
*1784 – Friedrich Bessel, German mathematician and astronomer (d. 1846)
*1820 – Oliver Mowat, Canadian politician, 3rd Premier of Ontario, 8th Lieutenant Governor of Ontario (d. 1903)
*1839 – Jakob Hurt, Estonian theologist and linguist (d. 1907)
*1844 – William Archibald Spooner, English priest and scholar (d. 1930)
*1848 – Adolphus Frederick V, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (d. 1914)
*1849 – Emma Lazarus, American poet and educator (d. 1887)
*1856 – Octave Hamelin, French philosopher (d. 1907)
*1862 – Cosmo Duff-Gordon, Scottish fencer (d. 1931)
*1863 – Alec Hearne, English cricketer (d. 1952)
*1878 – Janusz Korczak, Polish pediatrician and author (d. 1942)
*1881 – Augusta Fox Bronner, American psychologist, specialist in juvenile psychology (d. 1966)
*1882 – Edward Hopper, American painter and etcher (d. 1967)
*1884 – Odell Shepard, American poet and politician, 66th Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut (d. 1967)
*1886 – Hella Wuolijoki, Estonian-Finnish author (d. 1954)
*1887 – Gustav Ludwig Hertz, German physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1975)
*1888 – Kirk Bryan, American geologist and academic (d. 1950)
* 1888 – Selman Waksman, Jewish-American biochemist and microbiologist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1973)
*1889 – James Whale, English director (d. 1957)
*1890 – Rose Kennedy, American philanthropist (d. 1995)
*1892 – Jack MacBryan, English cricketer and field hockey player (d. 1983)
*1893 – Jesse Haines, American baseball player and coach (d. 1978)
* 1893 – Karl Menninger, American psychiatrist and author (d. 1990)
*1895 – León de Greiff, Colombian poet, journalist, and diplomat (d. 1976)
*1898 – Stephen Vincent Benét, American poet, short story writer, and novelist (d. 1943)
*1899 – Sobhuza II of Swaziland (d. 1982)
===1901–present===
*1908 – Amy Vanderbilt, American author (d. 1974)
*1909 – Licia Albanese, Italian-American soprano and actress (d. 2014)
* 1909 – Dorino Serafini, Italian racing driver (d. 2000)
*1910 – Ruthie Tompson, American animator and artist (d. 2021)
*1913 – Gorni Kramer, Italian bassist, songwriter, and bandleader (d. 1995)
*1915 – Shaista Suhrawardy Ikramullah, Indian-Pakistani politician and diplomat (d. 2000)
*1916 – Gino Bianco, Brazilian racing driver (d. 1984)
* 1916 – Marcel Cerdan, French boxer (d. 1949)
*1921 – William Roth, American lawyer and politician (d. 2003)
*1923 – Bob Dole, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (d. 2021)
* 1923 – César Fernández Ardavín, Spanish director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2012)
* 1923 – The Fabulous Moolah, American wrestler (d. 2007)
*1924 – Margaret Whiting, American singer (d. 2011)
*1925 – Jack Matthews, American author, playwright, and academic (d. 2013)
* 1925 – Joseph Sargent, American actor, director, and producer (d. 2014)
*1926 – Bryan Forbes, English actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2013)
* 1926 – Wolfgang Iser, German scholar, literary theorist (d. 2007)
*1927 – Johan Ferner, Norwegian sailor (d. 2015)
*1928 – Orson Bean, American actor (d. 2020)
* 1928 – Jimmy Hill, English footballer, manager, and sportscaster (d. 2015)
* 1928 – Per Højholt, Danish poet (d. 2004)
*1929 – John Barber, English racing driver (d. 2015)
* 1929 – Leonid Stolovich, Russian-Estonian philosopher and academic (d. 2013)
* 1929 – Neil Welliver, American painter (d. 2005)
* 1929 – Baselios Thomas I, Indian bishop (d. 2024)
*1931 – Leo Labine, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2005)
*1932 – Oscar de la Renta, Dominican-American fashion designer (d. 2014)
* 1932 – Tom Robbins, American novelist (d. 2025)
*1934 – Junior Cook, American saxophonist (d. 1992) 
* 1934 – Louise Fletcher, American actress (d. 2022)
* 1934 – Leon Rotman, Romanian canoeist
*1935 – Tom Cartwright, English-Welsh cricketer and coach (d. 2007)
*1936 – Don Patterson, American organist (d. 1988) 
* 1936 – Harold Rhodes, English cricketer
* 1936 – Geraldine Claudette Darden, American mathematician
*1937 – Chuck Jackson, American R&amp;B singer and songwriter (d. 2023)
* 1937 – Yasuhiro Kojima, Japanese-American wrestler and manager (d. 1999)
* 1937 – John Price, English cricketer
* 1937 – Vasant Ranjane, Indian cricketer (d. 2011)
*1938 – Terence Stamp, English actor
*1940 – Judith Walzer Leavitt, American historian and academic
* 1940 – Alex Trebek, Canadian-American game show host and producer (d. 2020)
*1941 – Estelle Bennett, American singer (d. 2009)
* 1941 – Vaughn Bodē, American illustrator (d. 1975)
* 1941 – George Clinton, American singer-songwriter and producer
* 1941 – David M. Kennedy, American historian and author
*1942 – Michael Abney-Hastings, 14th Earl of Loudoun, English-Australian politician (d. 2012)
* 1942 – Peter Habeler, Austrian mountaineer and skier
* 1942 – Les Johns, Australian rugby league player and coach
*1943 – Masaru Emoto, Japanese author and activist (d. 2014)
* 1943 – Kay Bailey Hutchison, American lawyer and politician
* 1943 – Bobby Sherman, American singer-songwriter and actor
*1944 – Rick Davies, English singer-songwriter and keyboard player 
*1944 – Peter Jason, American actor (d. 2025)
* 1944 – Sparky Lyle, American baseball player and manager
* 1944 – Anand Satyanand, New Zealand lawyer, judge, and politician, 19th Governor-General of New Zealand
*1945 – Philip Cohen, English biochemist and academic
*1946 – Danny Glover, American actor, director, and producer
* 1946 – Paul Schrader, American director and screenwriter
* 1946 – Rolando Joven Tria Tirona, Filipino archbishop
* 1946 – Johnson Toribiong, Palauan lawyer and politician, 7th President of Palau
*1947 – Albert Brooks, American actor, comedian, director, and screenwriter
* 1947 – Gilles Duceppe, Canadian politician
* 1947 – Don Henley, American singer-songwriter and drummer
*1948 – Neil Hardwick, British–Finnish theatre and television director
* 1948 – S. E. Hinton, American author 
*1949 – Alan Menken, American pianist and composer
* 1949 – Lasse Virén, Finnish runner and police officer
*1951 – Richard Bennett, American guitarist and producer 
* 1951 – J. V. Cain, American football player (d. 1979)
* 1951 – Patriarch Daniel of Romania
* 1951 – Tisa Farrow, American actress and model (d. 2024)
*1953 – Brian Howe, English singer-songwriter (d. 2020)
*1954 – Al Di Meola, American guitarist, songwriter, and producer 
* 1954 – Steve LaTourette, American lawyer and politician (d. 2016)
* 1954 – Lonette McKee, American actress and singer
*1955 – Richard J. Corman, American businessman, founded the R.J. Corman Railroad Group (d. 2013)
* 1955 – Willem Dafoe, American actor
*1956 – Mick Pointer, English neo-progressive rock drummer
* 1956 – Scott Sanderson, American baseball player and sportscaster (d. 2019)
*1957 – Dave Stieb, American baseball player
*1958 – Tatsunori Hara, Japanese baseball player and coach
* 1958 – David Von Erich, American wrestler (d. 1984)
*1960 – Jon Oliva, American singer-songwriter and keyboard player 
* 1960 – John Leguizamo, Colombian-American actor, producer, and screenwriter
*1961 – Calvin Fish, English racing driver and sportscaster
* 1961 – Keith Sweat, American singer-songwriter and producer 
*1962 – Steve Albini, American record producer and musician (d. 2024)
* 1962 – Alvin Robertson, American basketball player
* 1962 – Martine St. Clair, Canadian singer and actress
*1963 – Emilio Butragueño, Spanish footballer
* 1963 – Emily Saliers, American singer-songwriter and musician 
*1964 – Will Calhoun, American rock drummer
* 1964 – Bonnie Langford, English actress and dancer
* 1964 – David Spade, American actor, producer, and screenwriter
*1965 – Derrick Dalley, Canadian educator and politician
* 1965 – Shawn Michaels, American wrestler, trainer, and actor
* 1965 – Richard B. Poore, New Zealand humanitarian
* 1965 – Doug Riesenberg, American football player and coach
*1966 – Tim Brown, American football player and manager
*1967 – Lauren Booth, English journalist and activist
* 1967 – Rhys Ifans, Welsh actor 
*1969 – Rebecca Kiessling, American attorney and anti-abortion activist
* 1969 – Despina Vandi, German-Greek singer and actress
*1970 – Jason Becker, American guitarist and songwriter 
* 1970 – Steve Carter, Australian rugby league player 
* 1970 – Sergei Zubov, Russian ice hockey player and coach
*1972 – Franco Battaini, Italian motorcycle racer
* 1972 – Colin Ferguson, Canadian actor, director, and producer
* 1972 – Seth Fisher, American illustrator (d. 2006)
* 1972 – Keyshawn Johnson, American football player and sportscaster
*1973 – Brian Chippendale, American singer and drummer 
* 1973 – Mike Sweeney, American baseball player and sportscaster
* 1973 – Ece Temelkuran, Turkish journalist and author
* 1973 – Rufus Wainwright, American-Canadian singer-songwriter
*1974 – Franka Potente, German actress 
*1977 – Ezio Galon, Italian rugby player
* 1977 – Ingo Hertzsch, German footballer
* 1977 – Gustavo Nery, Brazilian footballer
*1978 – Runako Morton, Nevisian cricketer (d. 2012)
* 1978 – Dennis Rommedahl, Danish footballer
*1979 – Lucas Luhr, German racing driver
* 1979 – Yadel Martí, Cuban baseball player
*1980 – Dirk Kuyt, Dutch footballer
* 1980 – Scott Dixon, New Zealand racing driver 
* 1980 – Kate Ryan, Belgian singer-songwriter
* 1980 – Tablo, South Korean-Canadian rapper
*1982 – Nuwan Kulasekara, Sri Lankan cricketer
*1983 – Aldo de Nigris, Mexican footballer
* 1983 – Dries Devenyns, Belgian cyclist
* 1983 – Steven Jackson, American football player
* 1983 – Andreas Ulvo, Norwegian pianist 
*1984 – Stewart Downing, English footballer
*1985 – Jessica Abbott, Australian swimmer
* 1985 – Takudzwa Ngwenya, Zimbabwean-American rugby player
* 1985 – Akira Tozawa, Japanese wrestler
*1986 – Stevie Johnson, American football player
* 1986 – Colin de Grandhomme, Zimbabwean-New Zealand cricketer
*1987 – Denis Gargaud Chanut, French slalom canoeist
* 1987 – Charlotte Kalla, Swedish skier
*1988 – William Buick, Norwegian-British flat jockey
* 1988 – Paul Coutts, Scottish footballer
* 1988 – George Santos, American politician
* 1988 – Thomas Kraft, German footballer
* 1988 – Sercan Temizyürek, Turkish footballer
*1989 – Israel Adesanya, New Zealand mixed martial artist and kickboxer
* 1989 – Keegan Allen, American actor, photographer and musician
*1991 – Taylor Lewan, American football player
* 1991 – Matty James, English footballer
* 1991 – Tomi Juric, Australian footballer
*1992 – Anja Aguilar, Filipino actress and singer
* 1992 – Selena Gomez, American singer and actress
* 1992 – Carolin Schnarre, German Paralympic equestrian
*1993 – Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, Kyrgyzstani-American terrorist
*1995 – Ezekiel Elliott, American football player
* 1995 – Armaan Malik, Indian playback singer, composer and songwriter
* 1995 – Jonathan Owens, American football player
*1996 – Kevin Fiala, Swiss ice hockey player
* 1996 – Skyler Gisondo, American actor
*1998 – Marc Cucurella, Spanish footballer
* 1998 – Larray, American YouTuber
* 1998 – Madison Pettis, American actress
* 1998 – Federico Valverde, Uruguayan footballer
* 1998 – Sahaphap Wongratch, Thai actor, model, and singer
*1999 – Sidney Chu, Hong Kong skater
* 1999 – Jason Robertson, American ice hockey player
*2000 – Garrett Wilson, American football player
*2002 – Prince Felix of Denmark
*2006 – Javon Walton, American actor and boxer
*2013 – Prince George of Wales
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 698 – Wu Chengsi, nephew of Chinese sovereign Wu Zetian
*1258 – Meinhard I, Count of Gorizia-Tyrol (b. c. 1200)
*1274 – Henry I of Navarre, Count of Champagne and Brie and King of Navarre
*1298 – Sir John de Graham, Scottish soldier at the Battle of Falkirk
*1362 – Louis, Count of Gravina (b. 1324)
*1376 – Simon Langham, Archbishop of Canterbury (b. 1310)
*1387 – Frans Ackerman, Flemish politician (b. 1330)
*1461 – Charles VII of France (b. 1403)
*1525 – Richard Wingfield, English courtier and diplomat, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (b. 1426)
*1540 – John Zápolya, Hungarian king (b. 1487)
*1550 – Jorge de Lencastre, Duke of Coimbra (b. 1481)
*1581 – Richard Cox, English bishop (b. 1500)
===1601–1900===
*1619 – Lawrence of Brindisi, Italian priest and saint (b. 1559)
*1645 – Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares, Spanish statesman (b. 1587)
*1676 – Pope Clement X (b. 1590)
*1726 – Hugh Drysdale, English-American politician, Colonial Governor of Virginia
*1734 – Peter King, 1st Baron King, English lawyer and politician, Lord Chancellor of England (b. 1669)
*1789 – Joseph Foullon de Doué, French politician, Controller-General of Finances (b. 1715)
*1802 – Marie François Xavier Bichat, French anatomist and physiologist (b. 1771)
*1824 – Thomas Macnamara Russell, English admiral
*1826 – Giuseppe Piazzi, Italian mathematician and astronomer (b. 1746)
*1832 – Napoleon II, French emperor (b. 1811)
*1833 – Joseph Forlenze, Italian ophthalmologist and surgeon (b. 1757)
*1864 – James B. McPherson, American general (b. 1828)
*1869 – John A. Roebling, German-American engineer, designed the Brooklyn Bridge (b. 1806)
===1901–present===
*1902 – Mieczysław Halka-Ledóchowski, Polish cardinal (b. 1822)
*1903 – Cassius Marcellus Clay, American publisher, lawyer, and politician, United States Ambassador to Russia (b. 1810)
*1904 – Wilson Barrett, English actor and playwright (b. 1846)
*1906 – William Snodgrass, Canadian minister and academic (b. 1827)
*1908 – Randal Cremer, English politician, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1828)
*1915 – Sandford Fleming, Scottish-Canadian engineer and inventor, developed Standard time (b. 1827)
*1916 – James Whitcomb Riley, American poet and author (b. 1849)
*1918 – Indra Lal Roy, Indian lieutenant and first Indian fighter aircraft pilot (b. 1898)
*1920 – William Kissam Vanderbilt, American businessman and horse breeder (b. 1849)
*1922 – Jōkichi Takamine, Japanese-American chemist and academic (b. 1854)
*1932 – J. Meade Falkner, English author and poet (b. 1858)
* 1932 – Reginald Fessenden, Canadian inventor and academic (b. 1866)
* 1932 – Errico Malatesta, Italian activist and author (b. 1853)
* 1932 – Flo Ziegfeld, American actor and producer (b. 1867)
*1934 – John Dillinger, American gangster (b. 1903)
*1937 – Ted McDonald, Australian cricketer and footballer (b. 1891)
*1940 – George Fuller, Australian politician, 22nd Premier of New South Wales (b. 1861)
* 1940 – Albert Young, American boxer and promoter (b. 1877)
*1948 – Rūdolfs Jurciņš, Latvian basketball player (b. 1909) 
*1950 – William Lyon Mackenzie King, Canadian economist and politician, 10th Prime Minister of Canada (b. 1874)
*1958 – Mikhail Zoshchenko, Ukrainian-Russian soldier and author (b. 1895)
*1967 – Carl Sandburg, American poet and historian (b. 1878)
*1968 – Giovannino Guareschi, Italian journalist and cartoonist (b. 1908)
*1970 – George Johnston, Australian journalist and author (b. 1912)
*1974 – Wayne Morse, American lawyer and politician (b. 1900)
*1979 – J. V. Cain, American football player (b. 1951)
* 1979 – Sándor Kocsis, Hungarian footballer and manager (b. 1929)
*1986 – Floyd Gottfredson, American author and illustrator (b. 1905)
* 1986 – Ede Staal, Dutch singer-songwriter (b. 1941)
*1987 – Fahrettin Kerim Gökay, Turkish physician and politician, Turkish Minister of Health (b. 1900)
*1990 – Manuel Puig, Argentinian author, playwright, and screenwriter (b. 1932)
* 1990 – Eduard Streltsov, Soviet footballer (b. 1937)
*1992 – David Wojnarowicz, American painter, photographer, and activist (b. 1954)
*1995 – Harold Larwood, English-Australian cricketer (b. 1904)
*1996 – Rob Collins, English keyboard player (b. 1956)
*1998 – Fritz Buchloh, German footballer and coach (b. 1909)
*2000 – Eric Christmas, English-born Canadian actor (b. 1916)
* 2000 – Carmen Martín Gaite, Spanish author, poet, and playwright (b. 1925)
* 2000 – Raymond Lemieux, Canadian chemist and academic (b. 1920)
* 2000 – Claude Sautet, French director and screenwriter (b. 1924)
*2001 – Indro Montanelli, Italian journalist and historian (b. 1909)
*2004 – Sacha Distel, French singer and guitarist (b. 1933)
* 2004 – Illinois Jacquet, American saxophonist and composer (b. 1922)
*2005 – Eugene Record, American singer-songwriter and producer (b. 1940)
*2006 – Dika Newlin, American composer, singer-songwriter, and pianist (b. 1923)
* 2006 – José Antonio Delgado, Venezuelan mountaineer (b. 1965)
*2007 – Mike Coolbaugh, American baseball player and coach (b. 1972)
* 2007 – Jarrod Cunningham, New Zealand rugby player (b. 1968)
* 2007 – László Kovács, Hungarian-American director and cinematographer (b. 1933)
* 2007 – Rollie Stiles, American baseball player (b. 1906)
*2008 – Estelle Getty, American actress (b. 1923)
*2009 – Richard M. Givan, American lawyer and judge (b. 1921)
* 2009 – Peter Krieg, German director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1947)
*2010 – Kenny Guinn, American banker and politician, 27th Governor of Nevada (b. 1936)
*2011 – Linda Christian, Mexican-American actress (b. 1923)
* 2011 – Cees de Wolf, Dutch footballer (b. 1945)
*2012 – Ding Guangen, Chinese engineer and politician (b. 1929)
* 2012 – George Armitage Miller, American psychologist and academic (b. 1920)
* 2012 – Frank Pierson, American director and screenwriter (b. 1925)
*2013 – Natalie de Blois, American architect, co-designed the Lever House (b. 1921)
* 2013 – Dennis Farina, American policeman and actor (b. 1944)
* 2013 – Lawrie Reilly, Scottish footballer (b. 1928)
* 2013 – Rosalie E. Wahl, American lawyer and judge (b. 1924)
*2014 – Johann Breyer, German SS officer (b. 1925)
* 2014 – Louis Lentin, Irish director and producer (b. 1933)
* 2014 – Nitzan Shirazi, Israeli footballer and manager (b. 1971)
*2018 – Frank Havens, American canoeist (b. 1924)
*2022 – Maria Petri, English association football supporter (b. 1939)
*2024 – Mark Carnevale, American golfer and radio commentator (b. 1960)
*2024 – Duke Fakir, American singer (b. 1935)
*2024 – John Mayall, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1933)
==Holidays and observances==
*Birthday of the Late King Sobhuza (Eswatini)
*Christian feast day:
**Abd-al-Masih
**Joseph of Tiberias (or of Palestine)
**Markella
**Mary Magdalene
**Nohra (Maronite Church)
**July 22 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Earliest day on which Parents&#x27; Day can fall, while 28 July is the latest; celebrated on the fourth Sunday in July. (United States)
*National Press Day (Azerbaijan)
*Pi Approximation Day, &quot;see also March 14&quot;
*Ratcatcher&#x27;s Day
*Revolution Day (The Gambia)
*Sarawak Independence Day (Sarawak, Malaysia)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23838" start="28" end="31" title="838" label="838"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639273" start="34" end="49" title="Battle of Anzen" label="Battle of Anzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60199" start="73" end="83" title="Theophilos (emperor)" label="Theophilos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="114" end="122" title="Abbasids" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q19496" start="125" end="129" title="1099" label="1099"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="132" end="145" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q76721" start="147" end="166" title="Godfrey of Bouillon" label="Godfrey of Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="204" end="218" title="Holy Sepulchre" label="Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="226" end="246" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249" start="249" end="253" title="1209" label="1209"/>
<link wikidata="Q941312" start="256" end="275" title="Massacre at Béziers" label="Massacre at Béziers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="316" end="335" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563" start="338" end="342" title="1298" label="1298"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="345" end="374" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q589318" start="376" end="393" title="Battle of Falkirk" label="Battle of Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="400" end="419" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729167" start="428" end="438" title="longbowmen" label="longbowmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="446" end="461" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754114" start="479" end="488" title="schiltron" label="schiltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q623687" start="510" end="517" title="Falkirk" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069" start="520" end="524" title="1342" label="1342"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883854" start="527" end="558" title="St. Mary Magdalene&amp;#x27;s flood" label="St. Mary Magdalene&amp;#x27;s flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417" start="614" end="618" title="1443" label="1443"/>
<link wikidata="Q451404" start="621" end="652" title="Battle of St. Jakob an der Sihl" label="Battle of St. Jakob an der Sihl"/>
<link wikidata="Q438252" start="660" end="674" title="Old Zürich War" label="Old Zürich War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517" start="678" end="682" title="1456" label="1456"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="685" end="707" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="Ottoman wars in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q244980" start="709" end="726" title="Siege of Belgrade (1456)" label="Siege of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q242688" start="728" end="740" title="John Hunyadi" label="John Hunyadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="756" end="774" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="784" end="793" title="Mehmet II" label="Mehmet II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="801" end="815" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639" start="818" end="822" title="1484" label="1484"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871583" start="825" end="849" title="Battle of Lochmaben Fair" label="Battle of Lochmaben Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372616" start="882" end="915" title="Alexander Stewart, Duke of Albany" label="Alexander Stewart, Duke of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q684463" start="920" end="954" title="James Douglas, 9th Earl of Douglas" label="James Douglas, 9th Earl of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="1015" end="1036" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708" start="1060" end="1064" title="1499" label="1499"/>
<link wikidata="Q251597" start="1067" end="1084" title="Battle of Dornach" label="Battle of Dornach"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="1090" end="1095" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="1126" end="1158" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744" start="1161" end="1165" title="1587" label="1587"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="1168" end="1182" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="1230" end="1244" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1249" end="1263" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777" start="1302" end="1306" title="1594" label="1594"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="1327" end="1336" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="1408" end="1425" title="Maurice of Orange" label="Maurice of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800" start="1441" end="1445" title="1598" label="1598"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1448" end="1467" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="1487" end="1509" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133775" start="1541" end="1566" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664" start="1747" end="1751" title="1686" label="1686"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="1754" end="1770" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789018" start="1823" end="1836" title="Thomas Dongan" label="Thomas Dongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835" start="1839" end="1843" title="1706" label="1706"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="1850" end="1868" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1911" end="1929" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1938" end="1957" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2042" end="2066" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="2069" end="2073" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="2076" end="2095" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818" start="2215" end="2219" title="1796" label="1796"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161562" start="2239" end="2263" title="Connecticut Land Company" label="Connecticut Land Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2280" end="2284" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2291" end="2300" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324749" start="2318" end="2334" title="Moses Cleaveland" label="Moses Cleaveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="2380" end="2384" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q543154" start="2387" end="2419" title="Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife (1797)" label="Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="2480" end="2505" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="2539" end="2545" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883" start="2612" end="2616" title="1802" label="1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q210417" start="2627" end="2635" title="Gia Long" label="Gia Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="2645" end="2650" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="2663" end="2671" title="Viet Nam" label="Viet Nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898" start="2725" end="2729" title="1805" label="1805"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2732" end="2747" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q249232" start="2749" end="2775" title="War of the Third Coalition" label="War of the Third Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001479" start="2777" end="2802" title="Battle of Cape Finisterre (1805)" label="Battle of Cape Finisterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q315255" start="2901" end="2926" title="Pierre-Charles Villeneuve" label="Pierre-Charles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q714425" start="2971" end="2984" title="Robert Calder" label="Robert Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="2987" end="2991" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="3011" end="3025" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q708580" start="3027" end="3046" title="Battle of Salamanca" label="Battle of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="3070" end="3086" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Arthur Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="3144" end="3153" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="3163" end="3167" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="3174" end="3195" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="Slavery Abolition Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="3210" end="3234" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3272" end="3279" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3301" end="3315" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="3318" end="3322" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3325" end="3343" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374330" start="3345" end="3362" title="Battle of Atlanta" label="Battle of Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="3372" end="3379" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="3381" end="3392" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q553533" start="3401" end="3415" title="John Bell Hood" label="John Bell Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="3448" end="3453" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="3475" end="3493" title="William T. Sherman" label="William T. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="3509" end="3513" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363035" start="3516" end="3535" title="Katharine Lee Bates" label="Katharine Lee Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q463167" start="3549" end="3570" title="America the Beautiful" label="America the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q665321" start="3617" end="3627" title="Pikes Peak" label="Pikes Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="3633" end="3659" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="3662" end="3666" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089270" start="3735" end="3750" title="Paris–Rouen (motor race)" label="Paris and Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q971548" start="3787" end="3807" title="Jules-Albert de Dion" label="Jules-Albert de Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710713" start="3861" end="3876" title="Albert Lemaître" label="Albert Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="3921" end="3928" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="3950" end="3954" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139084" start="3957" end="3981" title="Preparedness Day Bombing" label="Preparedness Day Bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3986" end="3999" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q248284" start="4020" end="4033" title="Market Street (San Francisco)" label="Market Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="4081" end="4085" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q766437" start="4088" end="4095" title="Rif War" label="Rif War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="4101" end="4113" title="Spanish Army" label="Spanish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138460" start="4126" end="4147" title="Battle of Annual" label="worst military defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="4171" end="4178" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="4186" end="4189" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="4200" end="4215" title="Spanish Morocco" label="Spanish Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="4218" end="4222" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q264389" start="4233" end="4243" title="Wiley Post" label="Wiley Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430350" start="4255" end="4274" title="Floyd Bennett Field" label="Floyd Bennett Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="4384" end="4388" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="4391" end="4408" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348551" start="4414" end="4453" title="Popular Executive Committee of Valencia" label="Popular Executive Committee of Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720" start="4473" end="4492" title="Valencian Community" label="Valencian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="4495" end="4499" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="4502" end="4510" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4516" end="4536" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4558" end="4579" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302931" start="4599" end="4616" title="Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937" label="add more justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4624" end="4658" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="4661" end="4665" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="4724" end="4732" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="4733" end="4742" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q965477" start="4786" end="4804" title="Grossaktion Warsaw" label="Grossaktion Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="4879" end="4883" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4886" end="4898" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="4941" end="4966" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="4991" end="4995" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628599" start="5035" end="5050" title="22 July 1943 Athens protest" label="massive protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="5054" end="5060" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="5075" end="5079" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q40147" start="5086" end="5125" title="Polish Committee of National Liberation" label="Polish Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q387927" start="5140" end="5149" title="PKWN Manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="5174" end="5198" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Communist rule in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="5201" end="5205" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814446" start="5208" end="5232" title="King David Hotel bombing" label="King David Hotel bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="5274" end="5279" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375672" start="5291" end="5307" title="King David Hotel" label="King David Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="5311" end="5320" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="5385" end="5404" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="5431" end="5435" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q327132" start="5438" end="5455" title="Soviet space dogs" label="Soviet space dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156826" start="5457" end="5473" title="Dezik and Tsygan" label="Dezik and Tsygan"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="5495" end="5518" title="sub-orbital spaceflight" label="sub-orbital spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q753201" start="5524" end="5536" title="Kapustin Yar" label="Kapustin Yar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="5612" end="5616" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q202894" start="5619" end="5634" title="Mariner program" label="Mariner program"/>
<link wikidata="Q213499" start="5642" end="5651" title="Mariner 1" label="Mariner 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="5742" end="5746" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="5749" end="5772" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Crown Colony of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="5779" end="5794" title="self-governance" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="5797" end="5801" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129577" start="5804" end="5821" title="Pan Am Flight 816" label="Pan Am Flight 816"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049719" start="5849" end="5881" title="Faa&amp;#x27;a International Airport" label="Faa&amp;#x27;a International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q130800" start="5885" end="5892" title="Papeete" label="Papeete"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="5894" end="5910" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="5925" end="5929" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5975" end="5986" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175954" start="6019" end="6088" title="Japanese occupation of the Philippines" label="imperial Japan&amp;#x27;s conquest of the country in the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="6091" end="6095" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="6113" end="6126" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="6150" end="6154" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535458" start="6179" end="6250" title="1981 South Africa rugby union tour of New Zealand and the United States" label="1981 South Africa rugby union tour of New Zealand and the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="6287" end="6291" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="6294" end="6315" title="Martial law in Poland" label="Martial law in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="6340" end="6344" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q312697" start="6347" end="6358" title="Greg LeMond" label="Greg LeMond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="6528" end="6532" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="6540" end="6548" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="6550" end="6558" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543769" start="6560" end="6569" title="drug lord" label="drug lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q187447" start="6570" end="6583" title="Pablo Escobar" label="Pablo Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="6658" end="6662" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742723" start="6665" end="6684" title="Great Flood of 1993" label="Great Flood of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="6686" end="6691" title="Levee" label="Levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q999403" start="6698" end="6717" title="Kaskaskia, Illinois" label="Kaskaskia, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="6789" end="6812" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="6815" end="6819" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q885931" start="6833" end="6850" title="Blue Water Bridge" label="Blue Water Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000222" start="6865" end="6885" title="Port Huron, Michigan" label="Port Huron, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34106" start="6890" end="6905" title="Sarnia, Ontario" label="Sarnia, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="6908" end="6912" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="6926" end="6940" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7009" end="7013" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="7023" end="7037" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q311916" start="7050" end="7054" title="Uday Hussein" label="Uday"/>
<link wikidata="Q336347" start="7059" end="7064" title="Qusay Hussein" label="Qusay"/>
<link wikidata="Q336347" start="7077" end="7093" title="Mustapha Hussein" label="Mustapha Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="7143" end="7147" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q559142" start="7150" end="7183" title="Death of Jean Charles de Menezes" label="Jean Charles de Menezes is killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="7256" end="7283" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870041" start="7292" end="7320" title="21 July 2005 London bombings" label="21 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="7323" end="7327" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q79967" start="7330" end="7344" title="2011 Norway attacks" label="Norway attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="7407" end="7411" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106357" start="7469" end="7474" title="Utøya" label="Utøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="7477" end="7481" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="7484" end="7500" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syrian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q277036" start="7506" end="7536" title="People&amp;#x27;s Protection Units" label="People&amp;#x27;s Protection Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023330" start="7566" end="7577" title="Ras al-Ayn, al-Hasakah" label="Serê Kaniyê"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419911" start="7582" end="7591" title="Al-Darbasiyah" label="Dirbêsiyê"/>
<link wikidata="Q233914" start="7638" end="7648" title="Al-Hasakah Governorate" label="Al-Hasakah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="7651" end="7655" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q14168886" start="7658" end="7676" title="2013 Dingxi earthquakes" label="Dingxi earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186006" start="7705" end="7711" title="Dingxi" label="Dingxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7713" end="7718" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="7780" end="7784" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q325065" start="7787" end="7800" title="Chandrayaan-2" label="Chandrayaan-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="7852" end="7886" title="Indian Space Research Organisation" label="Indian Space Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49011" start="7893" end="7906" title="Chandrayaan-1" label="Chandrayaan-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q640273" start="7924" end="7950" title="Satish Dhawan Space Centre" label="Satish Dhawan Space Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360911" start="7956" end="7969" title="GSLV Mark III" label="GSLV Mark III"/>
<link wikidata="Q763288" start="8047" end="8053" title="Lander (spacecraft)" label="lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250" start="8124" end="8128" title="1210" label="1210"/>
<link wikidata="Q242287" start="8131" end="8165" title="Joan of England, Queen of Scotland" label="Joan of England, Queen of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374" start="8177" end="8181" title="1437" label="1437"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257143" start="8184" end="8223" title="John Scrope, 5th Baron Scrope of Bolton" label="John Scrope, 5th Baron Scrope of Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611" start="8250" end="8254" title="1476" label="1476"/>
<link wikidata="Q912267" start="8257" end="8268" title="Zhu Youyuan" label="Zhu Youyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617" start="8305" end="8309" title="1478" label="1478"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="8312" end="8331" title="Philip I of Castile" label="Philip I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431" start="8343" end="8347" title="1531" label="1531"/>
<link wikidata="Q86769" start="8350" end="8370" title="Leonhard Thurneysser" label="Leonhard Thurneysser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453" start="8434" end="8438" title="1535" label="1535"/>
<link wikidata="Q256139" start="8441" end="8458" title="Katarina Stenbock" label="Katarina Stenbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="8469" end="8487" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav I of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565" start="8499" end="8503" title="1552" label="1552"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772159" start="8506" end="8520" title="Anthony Browne (1552–1592)" label="Anthony Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780992" start="8568" end="8609" title="Mary Wriothesley, Countess of Southampton" label="Mary Wriothesley, Countess of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609" start="8654" end="8658" title="1559" label="1559"/>
<link wikidata="Q313803" start="8661" end="8681" title="Lawrence of Brindisi" label="Lawrence of Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784" start="8735" end="8739" title="1615" label="1615"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125417" start="8742" end="8764" title="Marguerite of Lorraine" label="Marguerite of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801" start="8818" end="8822" title="1618" label="1618"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123800" start="8825" end="8838" title="Johan Nieuhof" label="Johan Nieuhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812" start="8866" end="8870" title="1621" label="1621"/>
<link wikidata="Q336002" start="8873" end="8919" title="Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="8941" end="8978" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856" start="8990" end="8994" title="1630" label="1630"/>
<link wikidata="Q268516" start="8997" end="9019" title="Madame de Brinvilliers" label="Madame de Brinvilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935" start="9050" end="9054" title="1647" label="1647"/>
<link wikidata="Q235853" start="9057" end="9079" title="Margaret Mary Alacoque" label="Margaret Mary Alacoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956" start="9121" end="9125" title="1651" label="1651"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443916" start="9128" end="9152" title="Ferdinand Tobias Richter" label="Ferdinand Tobias Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866" start="9196" end="9200" title="1711" label="1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q63217" start="9203" end="9225" title="Georg Wilhelm Richmann" label="Georg Wilhelm Richmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="9276" end="9280" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q550244" start="9283" end="9307" title="Jacques-Germain Soufflot" label="Jacques-Germain Soufflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q188856" start="9340" end="9348" title="Panthéon" label="Panthéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972" start="9360" end="9364" title="1733" label="1733"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701180" start="9367" end="9386" title="Mikhail Shcherbatov" label="Mikhail Shcherbatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627" start="9433" end="9437" title="1755" label="1755"/>
<link wikidata="Q451608" start="9440" end="9456" title="Gaspard de Prony" label="Gaspard de Prony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752" start="9503" end="9507" title="1784" label="1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="9510" end="9526" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Friedrich Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973" start="9575" end="9579" title="1820" label="1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387837" start="9582" end="9594" title="Oliver Mowat" label="Oliver Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="9621" end="9639" title="Premier of Ontario" label="Premier of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544432" start="9645" end="9675" title="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario" label="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="9687" end="9691" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395650" start="9694" end="9704" title="Jakob Hurt" label="Jakob Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633" start="9750" end="9754" title="1844" label="1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605890" start="9757" end="9782" title="William Archibald Spooner" label="William Archibald Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647" start="9822" end="9826" title="1848" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q361740" start="9829" end="9885" title="Adolphus Frederick V, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Adolphus Frederick V, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="9897" end="9901" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q240959" start="9904" end="9916" title="Emma Lazarus" label="Emma Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676" start="9956" end="9960" title="1856" label="1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577106" start="9963" end="9977" title="Octave Hamelin" label="Octave Hamelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="10009" end="10013" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q969969" start="10016" end="10033" title="Cosmo Duff-Gordon" label="Cosmo Duff-Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="10062" end="10066" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527674" start="10069" end="10080" title="Alec Hearne" label="Alec Hearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="10111" end="10115" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q152441" start="10118" end="10132" title="Janusz Korczak" label="Janusz Korczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="10176" end="10180" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q28839244" start="10183" end="10202" title="Augusta Fox Bronner" label="Augusta Fox Bronner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="10272" end="10276" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q203401" start="10279" end="10292" title="Edward Hopper" label="Edward Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="10333" end="10337" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349133" start="10340" end="10353" title="Odell Shepard" label="Odell Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535014" start="10390" end="10424" title="Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut" label="Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="10436" end="10440" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q465937" start="10443" end="10458" title="Hella Wuolijoki" label="Hella Wuolijoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="10495" end="10499" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q57070" start="10502" end="10521" title="Gustav Ludwig Hertz" label="Gustav Ludwig Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="10554" end="10565" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="10586" end="10590" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652135" start="10593" end="10603" title="Kirk Bryan (geologist)" label="Kirk Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232308" start="10656" end="10670" title="Selman Waksman" label="Selman Waksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="10719" end="10730" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="10751" end="10755" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q381831" start="10758" end="10769" title="James Whale" label="James Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="10799" end="10803" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q236540" start="10806" end="10818" title="Rose Kennedy" label="Rose Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="10855" end="10859" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535036" start="10862" end="10875" title="Jack MacBryan" label="Jack MacBryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="10930" end="10934" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651169" start="10937" end="10949" title="Jesse Haines" label="Jesse Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080926" start="11005" end="11019" title="Karl Menninger" label="Karl Menninger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="11065" end="11069" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494262" start="11072" end="11086" title="León de Greiff" label="León de Greiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="11140" end="11144" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348138" start="11147" end="11168" title="Stephen Vincent Benét" label="Stephen Vincent Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="11229" end="11233" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q379576" start="11236" end="11246" title="Sobhuza II" label="Sobhuza II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="11290" end="11294" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749431" start="11297" end="11311" title="Amy Vanderbilt" label="Amy Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="11340" end="11344" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q239886" start="11347" end="11361" title="Licia Albanese" label="Licia Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q172185" start="11419" end="11434" title="Dorino Serafini" label="Dorino Serafini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="11469" end="11473" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q24661076" start="11476" end="11490" title="Ruthie Tompson" label="Ruthie Tompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="11532" end="11536" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q912564" start="11539" end="11551" title="Gorni Kramer" label="Gorni Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="11608" end="11612" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199082" start="11615" end="11644" title="Shaista Suhrawardy Ikramullah" label="Shaista Suhrawardy Ikramullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="11698" end="11702" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q172337" start="11705" end="11716" title="Gino Bianco" label="Gino Bianco"/>
<link wikidata="Q347201" start="11761" end="11774" title="Marcel Cerdan" label="Marcel Cerdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="11800" end="11804" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400609" start="11807" end="11819" title="William Roth" label="William Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="11863" end="11867" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="11870" end="11878" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q269507" start="11940" end="11963" title="César Fernández Ardavín" label="César Fernández Ardavín"/>
<link wikidata="Q256279" start="12029" end="12048" title="The Fabulous Moolah" label="The Fabulous Moolah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="12079" end="12083" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q289108" start="12086" end="12102" title="Margaret Whiting" label="Margaret Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="12131" end="12135" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113929" start="12138" end="12151" title="Jack Matthews (author)" label="Jack Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707954" start="12214" end="12228" title="Joseph Sargent" label="Joseph Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="12280" end="12284" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q850385" start="12287" end="12299" title="Bryan Forbes" label="Bryan Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60486" start="12372" end="12385" title="Wolfgang Iser" label="Wolfgang Iser"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="12432" end="12436" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736809" start="12439" end="12451" title="Johan Ferner" label="Johan Ferner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="12481" end="12485" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120700" start="12488" end="12498" title="Orson Bean" label="Orson Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608520" start="12534" end="12544" title="Jimmy Hill" label="Jimmy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350383" start="12611" end="12622" title="Per Højholt" label="Per Højholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="12647" end="12651" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q173968" start="12654" end="12665" title="John Barber (racing driver)" label="John Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737105" start="12708" end="12724" title="Leonid Stolovich" label="Leonid Stolovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989468" start="12787" end="12800" title="Neil Welliver" label="Neil Welliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q335035" start="12838" end="12855" title="Baselios Thomas I" label="Baselios Thomas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="12882" end="12886" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229568" start="12889" end="12899" title="Leo Labine" label="Leo Labine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="12939" end="12943" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q288029" start="12946" end="12963" title="Oscar de la Renta" label="Oscar de la Renta"/>
<link wikidata="Q452404" start="13020" end="13031" title="Tom Robbins" label="Tom Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="13062" end="13066" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q352191" start="13069" end="13080" title="Junior Cook" label="Junior Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q182372" start="13123" end="13138" title="Louise Fletcher" label="Louise Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380634" start="13176" end="13187" title="Leon Rotman" label="Leon Rotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="13208" end="13212" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530682" start="13215" end="13229" title="Tom Cartwright" label="Tom Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="13276" end="13280" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239391" start="13283" end="13296" title="Don Patterson (organist)" label="Don Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12989562" start="13336" end="13349" title="Harold Rhodes (cricketer)" label="Harold Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030058" start="13378" end="13404" title="Geraldine Claudette Darden" label="Geraldine Claudette Darden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="13430" end="13434" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662572" start="13437" end="13450" title="Chuck Jackson" label="Chuck Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274973" start="13510" end="13525" title="Yasuhiro Kojima" label="Yasuhiro Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253386" start="13585" end="13595" title="John Price (cricketer, born 1937)" label="John Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916335" start="13624" end="13638" title="Vasant Ranjane" label="Vasant Ranjane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="13668" end="13672" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="13675" end="13688" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="13705" end="13709" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303734" start="13712" end="13733" title="Judith Walzer Leavitt" label="Judith Walzer Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q929985" start="13776" end="13787" title="Alex Trebek" label="Alex Trebek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="13846" end="13850" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310868" start="13853" end="13868" title="Estelle Bennett" label="Estelle Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004726" start="13905" end="13916" title="Vaughn Bodē" label="Vaughn Bodē"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="13958" end="13972" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q204166" start="14023" end="14039" title="David M. Kennedy (historian)" label="David M. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="14072" end="14076" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307975" start="14079" end="14123" title="Michael Abney-Hastings, 14th Earl of Loudoun" label="Michael Abney-Hastings, 14th Earl of Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q495503" start="14174" end="14187" title="Peter Habeler" label="Peter Habeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529640" start="14229" end="14238" title="Les Johns" label="Les Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14282" end="14286" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q205058" start="14289" end="14301" title="Masaru Emoto" label="Masaru Emoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q239928" start="14351" end="14371" title="Kay Bailey Hutchison" label="Kay Bailey Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908012" start="14413" end="14426" title="Bobby Sherman" label="Bobby Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="14466" end="14470" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q560040" start="14473" end="14484" title="Rick Davies" label="Rick Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076016" start="14541" end="14552" title="Peter Jason" label="Peter Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573735" start="14588" end="14599" title="Sparky Lyle" label="Sparky Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q485733" start="14647" end="14662" title="Anand Satyanand" label="Anand Satyanand"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="14712" end="14743" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="14745" end="14749" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183365" start="14752" end="14764" title="Philip Cohen (British biochemist)" label="Philip Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="14799" end="14803" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q192165" start="14806" end="14818" title="Danny Glover" label="Danny Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="14868" end="14881" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419064" start="14927" end="14952" title="Rolando Joven Tria Tirona" label="Rolando Joven Tria Tirona"/>
<link wikidata="Q57471" start="14983" end="15000" title="Johnson Toribiong" label="Johnson Toribiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q878329" start="15037" end="15055" title="President of Palau" label="President of Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="15057" end="15061" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q356303" start="15064" end="15077" title="Albert Brooks" label="Albert Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q205319" start="15141" end="15155" title="Gilles Duceppe" label="Gilles Duceppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q316454" start="15186" end="15196" title="Don Henley" label="Don Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15238" end="15242" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737046" start="15245" end="15258" title="Neil Hardwick" label="Neil Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q117425" start="15317" end="15329" title="S. E. Hinton" label="S. E. Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15349" end="15353" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q317272" start="15356" end="15367" title="Alan Menken" label="Alan Menken"/>
<link wikidata="Q52611" start="15408" end="15419" title="Lasse Virén" label="Lasse Virén"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="15456" end="15460" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065445" start="15463" end="15478" title="Richard Bennett (guitarist)" label="Richard Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156834" start="15522" end="15532" title="J. V. Cain" label="J. V. Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q443453" start="15578" end="15605" title="Patriarch Daniel of Romania" label="Patriarch Daniel of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991790" start="15615" end="15626" title="Tisa Farrow" label="Tisa Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="15666" end="15670" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498066" start="15673" end="15683" title="Brian Howe (singer)" label="Brian Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="15722" end="15726" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q165634" start="15729" end="15740" title="Al Di Meola" label="Al Di Meola"/>
<link wikidata="Q973330" start="15797" end="15813" title="Steve LaTourette" label="Steve LaTourette"/>
<link wikidata="Q538542" start="15865" end="15878" title="Lonette McKee" label="Lonette McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="15909" end="15913" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326712" start="15916" end="15933" title="Richard J. Corman" label="Richard J. Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273365" start="15969" end="15995" title="R.J. Corman Railroad Group" label="R.J. Corman Railroad Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188772" start="16015" end="16027" title="Willem Dafoe" label="Willem Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="16045" end="16049" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q387226" start="16052" end="16064" title="Mick Pointer" label="Mick Pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476304" start="16112" end="16127" title="Scott Sanderson (baseball)" label="Scott Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="16182" end="16186" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017273" start="16189" end="16199" title="Dave Stieb" label="Dave Stieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16227" end="16231" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q845089" start="16234" end="16248" title="Tatsunori Hara" label="Tatsunori Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139951" start="16294" end="16309" title="David Von Erich" label="David Von Erich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16340" end="16344" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="16347" end="16356" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q295233" start="16415" end="16429" title="John Leguizamo" label="John Leguizamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="16485" end="16489" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024387" start="16492" end="16503" title="Calvin Fish" label="Calvin Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q946728" start="16553" end="16564" title="Keith Sweat" label="Keith Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="16608" end="16612" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="16615" end="16627" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q449245" start="16686" end="16701" title="Alvin Robertson" label="Alvin Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295847" start="16739" end="16756" title="Martine St. Clair" label="Martine St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="16787" end="16791" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q41235" start="16794" end="16811" title="Emilio Butragueño" label="Emilio Butragueño"/>
<link wikidata="Q256038" start="16841" end="16854" title="Emily Saliers" label="Emily Saliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="16898" end="16902" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568279" start="16905" end="16917" title="Will Calhoun" label="Will Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942381" start="16950" end="16965" title="Bonnie Langford" label="Bonnie Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q298658" start="17003" end="17014" title="David Spade" label="David Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="17060" end="17064" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262999" start="17067" end="17081" title="Derrick Dalley" label="Derrick Dalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="17125" end="17139" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323868" start="17188" end="17204" title="Richard B. Poore" label="Richard B. Poore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300856" start="17240" end="17255" title="Doug Riesenberg" label="Doug Riesenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="17293" end="17297" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q245633" start="17300" end="17309" title="Tim Brown (American football)" label="Tim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17349" end="17353" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983881" start="17356" end="17368" title="Lauren Booth" label="Lauren Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q215017" start="17411" end="17421" title="Rhys Ifans" label="Rhys Ifans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="17437" end="17441" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q28382532" start="17444" end="17461" title="Rebecca Kiessling" label="Rebecca Kiessling"/>
<link wikidata="Q235949" start="17517" end="17530" title="Despina Vandi" label="Despina Vandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="17565" end="17569" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q314245" start="17572" end="17584" title="Jason Becker" label="Jason Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612172" start="17630" end="17642" title="Steve Carter (rugby league)" label="Steve Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q606201" start="17685" end="17697" title="Sergei Zubov" label="Sergei Zubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="17736" end="17740" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274324" start="17743" end="17758" title="Franco Battaini" label="Franco Battaini"/>
<link wikidata="Q516082" start="17794" end="17808" title="Colin Ferguson (actor)" label="Colin Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274751" start="17858" end="17869" title="Seth Fisher" label="Seth Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081596" start="17911" end="17927" title="Keyshawn Johnson" label="Keyshawn Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="17972" end="17976" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924872" start="17979" end="17996" title="Brian Chippendale" label="Brian Chippendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307322" start="18036" end="18048" title="Mike Sweeney" label="Mike Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093684" start="18101" end="18115" title="Ece Temelkuran" label="Ece Temelkuran"/>
<link wikidata="Q192402" start="18156" end="18172" title="Rufus Wainwright" label="Rufus Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="18211" end="18215" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q65105" start="18218" end="18232" title="Franka Potente" label="Franka Potente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="18251" end="18255" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062836" start="18258" end="18268" title="Ezio Galon" label="Ezio Galon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462258" start="18300" end="18313" title="Ingo Hertzsch" label="Ingo Hertzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q562347" start="18342" end="18354" title="Gustavo Nery" label="Gustavo Nery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="18378" end="18382" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379616" start="18385" end="18398" title="Runako Morton" label="Runako Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207665" start="18438" end="18454" title="Dennis Rommedahl" label="Dennis Rommedahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="18475" end="18479" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q69787" start="18482" end="18492" title="Lucas Luhr" label="Lucas Luhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917063" start="18524" end="18535" title="Yadel Martí" label="Yadel Martí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="18560" end="18564" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q294214" start="18567" end="18576" title="Dirk Kuyt" label="Dirk Kuyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q465201" start="18604" end="18615" title="Scott Dixon" label="Scott Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193600" start="18653" end="18662" title="Kate Ryan" label="Kate Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18800" start="18699" end="18704" title="Tablo" label="Tablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="18736" end="18740" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533953" start="18743" end="18759" title="Nuwan Kulasekara" label="Nuwan Kulasekara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="18783" end="18787" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q926266" start="18790" end="18804" title="Aldo de Nigris" label="Aldo de Nigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q738281" start="18834" end="18848" title="Dries Devenyns" label="Dries Devenyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062417" start="18875" end="18889" title="Steven Jackson" label="Steven Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973200" start="18925" end="18937" title="Andreas Ulvo" label="Andreas Ulvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="18959" end="18963" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q202312" start="18966" end="18981" title="Stewart Downing" label="Stewart Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="19003" end="19007" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145842" start="19010" end="19024" title="Jessica Abbott" label="Jessica Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019466" start="19054" end="19070" title="Takudzwa Ngwenya" label="Takudzwa Ngwenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829075" start="19114" end="19126" title="Akira Tozawa" label="Akira Tozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="19147" end="19151" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612949" start="19154" end="19168" title="Stevie Johnson" label="Stevie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145709" start="19204" end="19223" title="Colin de Grandhomme" label="Colin de Grandhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="19259" end="19263" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022693" start="19266" end="19286" title="Denis Gargaud Chanut" label="Denis Gargaud Chanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q233270" start="19320" end="19335" title="Charlotte Kalla" label="Charlotte Kalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="19352" end="19356" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428581" start="19359" end="19372" title="William Buick" label="William Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q655488" start="19413" end="19424" title="Paul Coutts" label="Paul Coutts"/>
<link wikidata="Q115170395" start="19455" end="19468" title="George Santos" label="George Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44834" start="19499" end="19511" title="Thomas Kraft" label="Thomas Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453011" start="19540" end="19557" title="Sercan Temizyürek" label="Sercan Temizyürek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="19579" end="19583" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050195" start="19586" end="19601" title="Israel Adesanya" label="Israel Adesanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358888" start="19659" end="19671" title="Keegan Allen" label="Keegan Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="19716" end="19720" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690040" start="19723" end="19735" title="Taylor Lewan" label="Taylor Lewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q755567" start="19771" end="19782" title="Matty James" label="Matty James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818846" start="19812" end="19822" title="Tomi Juric" label="Tomi Juric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="19847" end="19851" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765688" start="19854" end="19866" title="Anja Aguilar" label="Anja Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83287" start="19905" end="19917" title="Selena Gomez" label="Selena Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q68322819" start="19956" end="19972" title="Carolin Schnarre" label="Carolin Schnarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="20004" end="20008" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835959" start="20011" end="20028" title="Dzhokhar Tsarnaev" label="Dzhokhar Tsarnaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="20062" end="20066" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619019" start="20069" end="20084" title="Ezekiel Elliott" label="Ezekiel Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792489" start="20120" end="20132" title="Armaan Malik" label="Armaan Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q61959593" start="20191" end="20205" title="Jonathan Owens" label="Jonathan Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="20233" end="20237" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989104" start="20240" end="20251" title="Kevin Fiala" label="Kevin Fiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190692" start="20286" end="20300" title="Skyler Gisondo" label="Skyler Gisondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="20318" end="20322" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082505" start="20325" end="20339" title="Marc Cucurella" label="Marc Cucurella"/>
<link wikidata="Q96312253" start="20369" end="20375" title="Larray" label="Larray"/>
<link wikidata="Q234633" start="20404" end="20418" title="Madison Pettis" label="Madison Pettis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19509544" start="20446" end="20463" title="Federico Valverde" label="Federico Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q105296109" start="20495" end="20513" title="Sahaphap Wongratch" label="Sahaphap Wongratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="20546" end="20550" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389503" start="20553" end="20563" title="Sidney Chu" label="Sidney Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83617451" start="20591" end="20606" title="Jason Robertson (ice hockey)" label="Jason Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="20636" end="20640" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q104524010" start="20643" end="20657" title="Garrett Wilson" label="Garrett Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="20685" end="20689" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004751" start="20692" end="20715" title="Prince Felix of Denmark" label="Prince Felix of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="20717" end="20721" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q106988918" start="20724" end="20736" title="Javon Walton" label="Javon Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="20764" end="20768" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q13590412" start="20771" end="20793" title="Prince George of Wales" label="Prince George of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23491" start="20822" end="20825" title="698" label="698"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358866" start="20828" end="20838" title="Wu Chengsi" label="Wu Chengsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="20850" end="20857" title="History of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="20868" end="20877" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506" start="20879" end="20883" title="1258" label="1258"/>
<link wikidata="Q570577" start="20886" end="20920" title="Meinhard I, Count of Gorizia-Tyrol" label="Meinhard I, Count of Gorizia-Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="20935" end="20939" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q366919" start="20942" end="20960" title="Henry I of Navarre" label="Henry I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q668079" start="20962" end="20980" title="Count of Champagne" label="Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193411" start="20985" end="20989" title="Brie" label="Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="20994" end="21009" title="King of Navarre" label="King of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563" start="21011" end="21015" title="1298" label="1298"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265546" start="21022" end="21036" title="John de Graham" label="John de Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="21081" end="21085" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q631524" start="21088" end="21111" title="Louis, Count of Gravina" label="Louis, Count of Gravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282" start="21123" end="21127" title="1376" label="1376"/>
<link wikidata="Q709017" start="21130" end="21143" title="Simon Langham" label="Simon Langham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="21145" end="21169" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="21181" end="21185" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594530" start="21188" end="21202" title="Frans Ackerman" label="Frans Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532" start="21234" end="21238" title="1461" label="1461"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="21241" end="21262" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314" start="21274" end="21278" title="1525" label="1525"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330041" start="21281" end="21298" title="Richard Wingfield" label="Richard Wingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="21331" end="21367" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482" start="21379" end="21383" title="1540" label="1540"/>
<link wikidata="Q32607" start="21386" end="21398" title="John Zápolya" label="John Zápolya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557" start="21426" end="21430" title="1550" label="1550"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663119" start="21433" end="21468" title="Jorge de Lencastre, Duke of Coimbra" label="Jorge de Lencastre, Duke of Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717" start="21480" end="21484" title="1581" label="1581"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430663" start="21487" end="21498" title="Richard Cox (bishop)" label="Richard Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804" start="21542" end="21546" title="1619" label="1619"/>
<link wikidata="Q313803" start="21549" end="21569" title="Lawrence of Brindisi" label="Lawrence of Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925" start="21607" end="21611" title="1645" label="1645"/>
<link wikidata="Q371833" start="21614" end="21654" title="Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares" label="Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628" start="21685" end="21689" title="1676" label="1676"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="21692" end="21706" title="Pope Clement X" label="Pope Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936" start="21718" end="21722" title="1726" label="1726"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142241" start="21725" end="21738" title="Hugh Drysdale" label="Hugh Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611796" start="21769" end="21798" title="Colonial Governor of Virginia" label="Colonial Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977" start="21800" end="21804" title="1734" label="1734"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175194" start="21807" end="21833" title="Peter King, 1st Baron King" label="Peter King, 1st Baron King"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="21866" end="21892" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772" start="21904" end="21908" title="1789" label="1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411844" start="21911" end="21933" title="Joseph Foullon de Doué" label="Joseph Foullon de Doué"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638620" start="21954" end="21984" title="Controller-General of Finances" label="Controller-General of Finances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883" start="21996" end="22000" title="1802" label="1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q333489" start="22003" end="22031" title="Marie François Xavier Bichat" label="Marie François Xavier Bichat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994" start="22078" end="22082" title="1824" label="1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792351" start="22085" end="22109" title="Thomas Macnamara Russell" label="Thomas Macnamara Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="22128" end="22132" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q14280" start="22135" end="22150" title="Giuseppe Piazzi" label="Giuseppe Piazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="22200" end="22204" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723" start="22207" end="22218" title="Napoleon II" label="Napoleon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="22246" end="22250" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221054" start="22253" end="22268" title="Joseph Forlenze" label="Joseph Forlenze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="22317" end="22321" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354905" start="22324" end="22342" title="James B. McPherson" label="James B. McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720" start="22372" end="22376" title="1869" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q77237" start="22379" end="22395" title="John A. Roebling" label="John A. Roebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="22436" end="22451" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="22482" end="22486" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q712071" start="22489" end="22517" title="Mieczysław Halka-Ledóchowski" label="Mieczysław Halka-Ledóchowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="22546" end="22550" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q706363" start="22553" end="22575" title="Cassius Marcellus Clay (politician)" label="Cassius Marcellus Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q124605090" start="22621" end="22655" title="United States Ambassador to Russia" label="United States Ambassador to Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="22667" end="22671" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208122" start="22674" end="22688" title="Wilson Barrett" label="Wilson Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="22730" end="22734" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018588" start="22737" end="22754" title="William Snodgrass (minister)" label="William Snodgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="22798" end="22802" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q189841" start="22805" end="22818" title="Randal Cremer" label="Randal Cremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="22840" end="22851" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="22872" end="22876" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q41411" start="22879" end="22895" title="Sandford Fleming" label="Sandford Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777301" start="22948" end="22961" title="Standard time" label="Standard time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="22973" end="22977" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q770177" start="22980" end="23000" title="James Whitcomb Riley" label="James Whitcomb Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="23038" end="23042" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151522" start="23045" end="23058" title="Indra Lal Roy" label="Indra Lal Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="23129" end="23133" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812538" start="23136" end="23161" title="William Kissam Vanderbilt" label="William Kissam Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="23213" end="23217" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q910647" start="23220" end="23236" title="Takamine Jōkichi" label="Jōkichi Takamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="23288" end="23292" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676368" start="23295" end="23311" title="J. Meade Falkner" label="J. Meade Falkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q334347" start="23356" end="23374" title="Reginald Fessenden" label="Reginald Fessenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q215673" start="23426" end="23442" title="Errico Malatesta" label="Errico Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q95024" start="23491" end="23503" title="Florenz Ziegfeld Jr." label="Flo Ziegfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="23544" end="23548" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q243918" start="23551" end="23565" title="John Dillinger" label="John Dillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="23596" end="23600" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693504" start="23603" end="23615" title="Ted McDonald" label="Ted McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="23664" end="23668" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539523" start="23671" end="23684" title="George Fuller (Australian politician)" label="George Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="23714" end="23740" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831661" start="23760" end="23772" title="Albert Young (boxer)" label="Albert Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="23813" end="23817" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679406" start="23820" end="23835" title="Rūdolfs Jurciņš" label="Rūdolfs Jurciņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="23875" end="23879" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="23882" end="23909" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="William Lyon Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="23951" end="23975" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="23987" end="23991" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q360507" start="23994" end="24012" title="Mikhail Zoshchenko" label="Mikhail Zoshchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="24062" end="24066" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q193608" start="24069" end="24082" title="Carl Sandburg" label="Carl Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="24123" end="24127" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q378639" start="24130" end="24150" title="Giovannino Guareschi" label="Giovannino Guareschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="24197" end="24201" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541147" start="24204" end="24219" title="George Johnston (novelist)" label="George Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="24265" end="24269" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q676399" start="24272" end="24283" title="Wayne Morse" label="Wayne Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="24327" end="24331" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156834" start="24334" end="24344" title="J. V. Cain" label="J. V. Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q295265" start="24390" end="24403" title="Sándor Kocsis" label="Sándor Kocsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="24449" end="24453" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q552422" start="24456" end="24473" title="Floyd Gottfredson" label="Floyd Gottfredson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810851" start="24526" end="24535" title="Ede Staal" label="Ede Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="24572" end="24576" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089549" start="24579" end="24600" title="Fahrettin Kerim Gökay" label="Fahrettin Kerim Gökay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294365" start="24636" end="24662" title="Ministry of Health (Turkey)" label="Turkish Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="24674" end="24678" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q284560" start="24681" end="24692" title="Manuel Puig" label="Manuel Puig"/>
<link wikidata="Q369974" start="24762" end="24778" title="Eduard Streltsov" label="Eduard Streltsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="24809" end="24813" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q952233" start="24816" end="24833" title="David Wojnarowicz" label="David Wojnarowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="24891" end="24895" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107240" start="24898" end="24912" title="Harold Larwood" label="Harold Larwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="24954" end="24958" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340039" start="24961" end="24972" title="Rob Collins (musician)" label="Rob Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="25009" end="25013" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q677534" start="25016" end="25029" title="Fritz Buchloh" label="Fritz Buchloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="25070" end="25074" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056247" start="25077" end="25091" title="Eric Christmas" label="Eric Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q268582" start="25140" end="25159" title="Carmen Martín Gaite" label="Carmen Martín Gaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q513043" start="25217" end="25232" title="Raymond Lemieux" label="Raymond Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q106669" start="25283" end="25296" title="Claude Sautet" label="Claude Sautet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="25342" end="25346" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q327914" start="25349" end="25365" title="Indro Montanelli" label="Indro Montanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="25411" end="25415" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q370928" start="25418" end="25430" title="Sacha Distel" label="Sacha Distel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658835" start="25479" end="25495" title="Illinois Jacquet" label="Illinois Jacquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="25542" end="25546" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407675" start="25549" end="25562" title="Eugene Record" label="Eugene Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="25615" end="25619" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225258" start="25622" end="25633" title="Dika Newlin" label="Dika Newlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291415" start="25704" end="25724" title="José Antonio Delgado" label="José Antonio Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="25760" end="25764" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q491939" start="25767" end="25781" title="Mike Coolbaugh" label="Mike Coolbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161063" start="25837" end="25854" title="Jarrod Cunningham" label="Jarrod Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q498696" start="25900" end="25913" title="László Kovács (cinematographer)" label="László Kovács"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740006" start="25982" end="25995" title="Rollie Stiles" label="Rollie Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="26033" end="26037" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q232827" start="26040" end="26053" title="Estelle Getty" label="Estelle Getty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="26083" end="26087" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327544" start="26090" end="26106" title="Richard M. Givan" label="Richard M. Givan"/>
<link wikidata="Q98332" start="26153" end="26164" title="Peter Krieg" label="Peter Krieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="26221" end="26225" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q672428" start="26228" end="26239" title="Kenny Guinn" label="Kenny Guinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q878598" start="26278" end="26296" title="Governor of Nevada" label="Governor of Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="26308" end="26312" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q236164" start="26315" end="26330" title="Linda Christian" label="Linda Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530469" start="26376" end="26388" title="Cees de Wolf" label="Cees de Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="26418" end="26422" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274102" start="26425" end="26437" title="Ding Guangen" label="Ding Guangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q670658" start="26490" end="26512" title="George Armitage Miller" label="George Armitage Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336850" start="26568" end="26581" title="Frank Pierson" label="Frank Pierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="26629" end="26633" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429753" start="26636" end="26652" title="Natalie de Blois" label="Natalie de Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821821" start="26690" end="26701" title="Lever House" label="Lever House"/>
<link wikidata="Q352935" start="26721" end="26734" title="Dennis Farina" label="Dennis Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056144" start="26784" end="26797" title="Lawrie Reilly" label="Lawrie Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367188" start="26838" end="26853" title="Rosalie E. Wahl" label="Rosalie E. Wahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="26892" end="26896" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q17407651" start="26899" end="26912" title="Johann Breyer" label="Johann Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="26921" end="26923" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687651" start="26951" end="26963" title="Louis Lentin" label="Louis Lentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041634" start="27012" end="27026" title="Nitzan Shirazi" label="Nitzan Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="27070" end="27074" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443403" start="27077" end="27089" title="Frank Havens (canoeist)" label="Frank Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="27120" end="27124" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q113291276" start="27127" end="27138" title="Maria Petri" label="Maria Petri"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="27190" end="27194" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767003" start="27197" end="27211" title="Mark Carnevale" label="Mark Carnevale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184511" start="27269" end="27279" title="Duke Fakir" label="Duke Fakir"/>
<link wikidata="Q316282" start="27315" end="27326" title="John Mayall" label="John Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257842" start="27419" end="27452" title="Birthday of the Late King Sobhuza" label="Birthday of the Late King Sobhuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="27454" end="27462" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="27475" end="27484" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664523" start="27488" end="27500" title="Abd-al-Masih (martyr)" label="Abd-al-Masih"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851930" start="27503" end="27539" title="Joseph of Tiberias" label="Joseph of Tiberias (or of Palestine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12872901" start="27542" end="27550" title="Saint Markella" label="Markella"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="27553" end="27567" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401963" start="27570" end="27575" title="Saint Nohra" label="Nohra"/>
<link wikidata="Q64900" start="27577" end="27592" title="Maronite Church" label="Maronite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851091" start="27596" end="27632" title="July 22 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="July 22 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q497023" start="27656" end="27673" title="Parents&amp;#x27; Day" label="Parents&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q933504" start="27771" end="27789" title="National Press Day" label="National Press Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="27791" end="27801" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179736" start="27804" end="27824" title="Pi Approximation Day" label="Pi Approximation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404" start="27841" end="27849" title="March 14" label="March 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295501" start="27857" end="27878" title="Ratcatcher&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Ratcatcher&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401474" start="27880" end="27907" title="Revolution Day (The Gambia)" label="Revolution Day (The Gambia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055499" start="27909" end="27933" title="Sarawak Independence Day" label="Sarawak Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="27935" end="27942" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="27944" end="27952" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
</links>
</doc>
