<doc id="19053" wikidata="Q7946" url="?curid=19053" title="Mineral">
<text>In geology and mineralogy, a mineral or mineral species is, broadly speaking, a solid substance with a fairly well-defined chemical composition and a specific crystal structure that occurs naturally in pure form.

The geological definition of mineral normally excludes compounds that occur only in living organisms. However, some minerals are often biogenic (such as calcite) or organic compounds in the sense of chemistry (such as mellite). Moreover, living organisms often synthesize inorganic minerals (such as hydroxylapatite) that also occur in rocks.

The concept of mineral is distinct from rock, which is any bulk solid geologic material that is relatively homogeneous at a large enough scale. A rock may consist of one type of mineral or may be an aggregate of two or more different types of minerals, spacially segregated into distinct phases.

Some natural solid substances without a definite crystalline structure, such as opal or obsidian, are more properly called mineraloids. If a chemical compound occurs naturally with different crystal structures, each structure is considered a different mineral species. Thus, for example, quartz and stishovite are two different minerals consisting of the same compound, silicon dioxide.

The International Mineralogical Association (IMA) is the generally recognized standard body for the definition and nomenclature of mineral species. , the IMA recognizes 6,118 official mineral species.

The chemical composition of a named mineral species may vary somewhat due to the inclusion of small amounts of impurities. Specific varieties of a species sometimes have conventional or official names of their own. For example, amethyst is a purple variety of the mineral species quartz. Some mineral species can have variable proportions of two or more chemical elements that occupy equivalent positions in the mineral&#x27;s structure; for example, the formula of mackinawite is given as , meaning , where &quot;x&quot; is a variable number between 0 and 9. Sometimes a mineral with variable composition is split into separate species, more or less arbitrarily, forming a mineral group; that is the case of the silicates , the olivine group.

Besides the essential chemical composition and crystal structure, the description of a mineral species usually includes its common physical properties such as habit, hardness, lustre, diaphaneity, colour, streak, tenacity, cleavage, fracture, system, zoning, parting, specific gravity, magnetism, fluorescence, radioactivity, as well as its taste or smell and its reaction to acid.

Minerals are classified by key chemical constituents; the two dominant systems are the Dana classification and the Strunz classification. Silicate minerals comprise approximately 90% of the Earth&#x27;s crust. Other important mineral groups include the native elements (made up of a single pure element) and compounds (combinations of multiple elements) namely sulfides (e.g. Galena &quot;PbS&quot;), oxides (e.g. quartz &quot;SiO2&quot;), halides (e.g. rock salt &quot;NaCl&quot;), carbonates (e.g. calcite &quot;CaCO3&quot;), sulfates (e.g. gypsum &quot;CaSO4·2H2O&quot;), silicates (e.g. orthoclase &quot;KAlSi3O8&quot;), molybdates (e.g. wulfenite &quot;PbMoO4&quot;) and phosphates (e.g. pyromorphite &quot;Pb5(PO4)3Cl&quot;).
==Definitions==

===International Mineralogical Association===
The International Mineralogical Association has established the following requirements for a substance to be considered a distinct mineral:

# &quot;It must be a naturally occurring substance formed by natural geological processes&quot;, on Earth or other extraterrestrial bodies. This excludes compounds directly and exclusively generated by human activities () or in living beings (), such as tungsten carbide, urinary calculi, calcium oxalate crystals in plant tissues, and seashells. However, substances with such origins may qualify if geological processes were involved in their genesis (as is the case of evenkite, derived from plant material; or taranakite, from bat guano; or alpersite, from mine tailings). Hypothetical substances are also excluded, even if they are predicted to occur in inaccessible natural environments like the Earth&#x27;s core or other planets.
# &quot;It must be a solid substance in its natural occurrence.&quot; A major exception to this rule is native mercury: it is still classified as a mineral by the IMA, even though crystallizes only below −39 °C, because it was included before the current rules were established. Water and carbon dioxide are not considered minerals, even though they are often found as inclusions in other minerals; but water ice is considered a mineral.
# &quot;It must have a well-defined crystallographic structure&quot;; or, more generally, an ordered atomic arrangement. This property implies several macroscopic physical properties, such as crystal form, hardness, and cleavage. It excludes ozokerite, limonite, obsidian and many other amorphous (non-crystalline) materials that occur in geologic contexts.
# &quot;It must have a fairly well defined chemical composition&quot;. However, certain crystalline substances with a fixed structure but variable composition may be considered single mineral species. A common class of examples are solid solutions such as mackinawite, (Fe, Ni)9S8, which is mostly a ferrous sulfide with a significant fraction of iron atoms replaced by nickel atoms. Other examples include layered crystals with variable layer stacking, or crystals that differ only in the regular arrangement of vacancies and substitutions. On the other hand, some substances that have a continuous series of compositions, may be arbitrarily split into several minerals. The typical example is the olivine group (Mg, Fe)2SiO4, whose magnesium-rich and iron-rich end-members are considered separate minerals (forsterite and fayalite).

The details of these rules are somewhat controversial. For instance, there have been several recent proposals to classify amorphous substances as minerals, but they have not been accepted by the IMA.

The IMA is also reluctant to accept minerals that occur naturally only in the form of nanoparticles a few hundred atoms across, but has not defined a minimum crystal size.

Some authors require the material to be a stable or metastable solid at room temperature (25 °C). However, the IMA only requires that the substance be stable enough for its structure and composition to be well-determined. For example, it recognizes meridianiite (a naturally occurring hydrate of magnesium sulfate) as a mineral, even though it is formed and stable only below 2 °C.

, 6,118 mineral species are approved by the IMA. They are most commonly named after a person, followed by discovery location; names based on chemical composition or physical properties are the two other major groups of mineral name etymologies. Most names end in &quot;-ite&quot;; the exceptions are usually names that were well-established before the organization of mineralogy as a discipline, for example galena and diamond.

===Biogenic minerals===
A topic of contention among geologists and mineralogists has been the IMA&#x27;s decision to exclude biogenic crystalline substances. For example, Lowenstam (1981) stated that &quot;organisms are capable of forming a diverse array of minerals, some of which cannot be formed inorganically in the biosphere.&quot;

Skinner (2005) views all solids as potential minerals and includes biominerals in the mineral kingdom, which are those that are created by the metabolic activities of organisms. Skinner expanded the previous definition of a mineral to classify &quot;element or compound, amorphous or crystalline, formed through &quot;biogeochemical &quot; processes,&quot; as a mineral.

Recent advances in high-resolution genetics and X-ray absorption spectroscopy are providing revelations on the biogeochemical relations between microorganisms and minerals that may shed new light on this question. For example, the IMA-commissioned &quot;Working Group on Environmental Mineralogy and Geochemistry &quot; deals with minerals in the hydrosphere, atmosphere, and biosphere. The group&#x27;s scope includes mineral-forming microorganisms, which exist on nearly every rock, soil, and particle surface spanning the globe to depths of at least 1600 metres below the sea floor and 70 kilometres into the stratosphere (possibly entering the mesosphere).

Biogeochemical cycles have contributed to the formation of minerals for billions of years. Microorganisms can precipitate metals from solution, contributing to the formation of ore deposits. They can also catalyze the dissolution of minerals.

Prior to the International Mineralogical Association&#x27;s listing, over 60 biominerals had been discovered, named, and published. These minerals (a sub-set tabulated in Lowenstam (1981)) are considered minerals proper according to Skinner&#x27;s (2005) definition. These biominerals are not listed in the International Mineral Association official list of mineral names; however, many of these biomineral representatives are distributed amongst the 78 mineral classes listed in the Dana classification scheme.

Skinner&#x27;s (2005) definition of a mineral takes this matter into account by stating that a mineral can be crystalline or amorphous. Although biominerals are not the most common form of minerals, they help to define the limits of what constitutes a mineral proper. Nickel&#x27;s (1995) formal definition explicitly mentioned crystallinity as a key to defining a substance as a mineral. A 2011 article defined icosahedrite, an aluminium-iron-copper alloy, as a mineral; named for its unique natural icosahedral symmetry, it is a quasicrystal. Unlike a true crystal, quasicrystals are ordered but not periodic.

==Rocks, ores, and gems==

A rock is an aggregate of one or more minerals or mineraloids. Some rocks, such as limestone or quartzite, are composed primarily of one mineral – calcite or aragonite in the case of limestone, and quartz in the latter case. Other rocks can be defined by relative abundances of key (essential) minerals; a granite is defined by proportions of quartz, alkali feldspar, and plagioclase feldspar. The other minerals in the rock are termed &quot;accessory minerals&quot;, and do not greatly affect the bulk composition of the rock. Rocks can also be composed entirely of non-mineral material; coal is a sedimentary rock composed primarily of organically derived carbon.

In rocks, some mineral species and groups are much more abundant than others; these are termed the &quot;rock-forming minerals&quot;. The major examples of these are quartz, the feldspars, the micas, the amphiboles, the pyroxenes, the olivines, and calcite; except for the last one, all of these minerals are silicates. Overall, around 150 minerals are considered particularly important, whether in terms of their abundance or aesthetic value in terms of collecting.

Commercially valuable minerals and rocks, other than gemstones, metal ores, or mineral fuels, are referred to as &quot;industrial minerals&quot;. For example, muscovite, a white mica, can be used for windows (sometimes referred to as isinglass), as a filler, or as an insulator.

Ores are minerals that have a high concentration of a certain element, typically a metal. Examples are cinnabar (HgS), an ore of mercury; sphalerite (ZnS), an ore of zinc; cassiterite (SnO2), an ore of tin; and colemanite, an ore of boron.

&quot;Gems&quot; are minerals with an ornamental value, and are distinguished from non-gems by their beauty, durability, and usually, rarity. There are about 20 mineral species that qualify as gem minerals, which constitute about 35 of the most common gemstones. Gem minerals are often present in several varieties, and so one mineral can account for several different gemstones; for example, ruby and sapphire are both corundum, Al2O3.

== Etymology ==
The first known use of the word &quot;mineral&quot; in the English language (Middle English) was the 15th century. The word came from , from , mine, ore.

The word &quot;species&quot; comes from the Latin &quot;species&quot;, &quot;a particular sort, kind, or type with distinct look, or appearance&quot;.

==Chemistry==

The abundance and diversity of minerals is controlled directly by their chemistry, in turn dependent on elemental abundances in the Earth. The majority of minerals observed are derived from the Earth&#x27;s crust. Eight elements account for most of the key components of minerals, due to their abundance in the crust. These eight elements, summing to over 98% of the crust by weight, are, in order of decreasing abundance: oxygen, silicon, aluminium, iron, magnesium, calcium, sodium and potassium. Oxygen and silicon are by far the two most important – oxygen composes 47% of the crust by weight, and silicon accounts for 28%.

The minerals that form are those that are most stable at the temperature and pressure of formation, within the limits imposed by the bulk chemistry of the parent body. For example, in most igneous rocks, the aluminium and alkali metals (sodium and potassium) that are present are primarily found in combination with oxygen, silicon, and calcium as feldspar minerals. However, if the rock is unusually rich in alkali metals, there will not be enough aluminium to combine with all the sodium as feldspar, and the excess sodium will form sodic amphiboles such as riebeckite. If the aluminium abundance is unusually high, the excess aluminium will form muscovite or other aluminium-rich minerals. If silicon is deficient, part of the feldspar will be replaced by feldspathoid minerals. Precise predictions of which minerals will be present in a rock of a particular composition formed at a particular temperature and pressure requires complex thermodynamic calculations. However, approximate estimates may be made using relatively simple rules of thumb, such as the CIPW norm, which gives reasonable estimates for volcanic rock formed from dry magma.

The chemical composition may vary between end member species of a solid solution series. For example, the plagioclase feldspars comprise a continuous series from sodium-rich end member albite (NaAlSi3O8) to calcium-rich anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8) with four recognized intermediate varieties between them (given in order from sodium- to calcium-rich): oligoclase, andesine, labradorite, and bytownite. Other examples of series include the olivine series of magnesium-rich forsterite and iron-rich fayalite, and the wolframite series of manganese-rich hübnerite and iron-rich ferberite.

Chemical substitution and coordination polyhedra explain this common feature of minerals. In nature, minerals are not pure substances, and are contaminated by whatever other elements are present in the given chemical system. As a result, it is possible for one element to be substituted for another. Chemical substitution will occur between ions of a similar size and charge; for example, K+ will not substitute for Si4+ because of chemical and structural incompatibilities caused by a big difference in size and charge. A common example of chemical substitution is that of Si4+ by Al3+, which are close in charge, size, and abundance in the crust. In the example of plagioclase, there are three cases of substitution. Feldspars are all framework silicates, which have a silicon-oxygen ratio of 2:1, and the space for other elements is given by the substitution of Si4+ by Al3+ to give a base unit of [AlSi3O8]−; without the substitution, the formula would be charge-balanced as SiO2, giving quartz. The significance of this structural property will be explained further by coordination polyhedra. The second substitution occurs between Na+ and Ca2+; however, the difference in charge has to accounted for by making a second substitution of Si4+ by Al3+.

Coordination polyhedra are geometric representations of how a cation is surrounded by an anion. In mineralogy, coordination polyhedra are usually considered in terms of oxygen, due its abundance in the crust. The base unit of silicate minerals is the silica tetrahedron – one Si4+ surrounded by four O2−. An alternate way of describing the coordination of the silicate is by a number: in the case of the silica tetrahedron, the silicon is said to have a coordination number of 4. Various cations have a specific range of possible coordination numbers; for silicon, it is almost always 4, except for very high-pressure minerals where the compound is compressed such that silicon is in six-fold (octahedral) coordination with oxygen. Bigger cations have a bigger coordination numbers because of the increase in relative size as compared to oxygen (the last orbital subshell of heavier atoms is different too). Changes in coordination numbers leads to physical and mineralogical differences; for example, at high pressure, such as in the mantle, many minerals, especially silicates such as olivine and garnet, will change to a perovskite structure, where silicon is in octahedral coordination. Other examples are the aluminosilicates kyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite (polymorphs, since they share the formula Al2SiO5), which differ by the coordination number of the Al3+; these minerals transition from one another as a response to changes in pressure and temperature. In the case of silicate materials, the substitution of Si4+ by Al3+ allows for a variety of minerals because of the need to balance charges.

Because the eight most common elements make up over 98% of the Earth&#x27;s crust, the small quantities of the other elements that are typically present are substituted into the common rock-forming minerals. The distinctive minerals of most elements are quite rare, being found only where these elements have been concentrated by geological processes, such as hydrothermal circulation, to the point where they can no longer be accommodated in common minerals.

Changes in temperature and pressure and composition alter the mineralogy of a rock sample. Changes in composition can be caused by processes such as weathering or metasomatism (hydrothermal alteration). Changes in temperature and pressure occur when the host rock undergoes tectonic or magmatic movement into differing physical regimes. Changes in thermodynamic conditions make it favourable for mineral assemblages to react with each other to produce new minerals; as such, it is possible for two rocks to have an identical or a very similar bulk rock chemistry without having a similar mineralogy. This process of mineralogical alteration is related to the rock cycle. An example of a series of mineral reactions is illustrated as follows.

Orthoclase feldspar (KAlSi3O8) is a mineral commonly found in granite, a plutonic igneous rock. When exposed to weathering, it reacts to form kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4, a sedimentary mineral, and silicic acid):

:2 KAlSi3O8 + 5 H2O + 2 H+ → Al2Si2O5(OH)4 + 4 H2SiO3 + 2 K+

Under low-grade metamorphic conditions, kaolinite reacts with quartz to form pyrophyllite (Al2Si4O10(OH)2):

:Al2Si2O5(OH)4 + SiO2 → Al2Si4O10(OH)2 + H2O

As metamorphic grade increases, the pyrophyllite reacts to form kyanite and quartz:

:Al2Si4O10(OH)2 → Al2SiO5 + 3 SiO2 + H2O

Alternatively, a mineral may change its crystal structure as a consequence of changes in temperature and pressure without reacting. For example, quartz will change into a variety of its SiO2 polymorphs, such as tridymite and cristobalite at high temperatures, and coesite at high pressures.

==Physical properties==
Classifying minerals ranges from simple to difficult. A mineral can be identified by several physical properties, some of them being sufficient for full identification without equivocation. In other cases, minerals can only be classified by more complex optical, chemical or X-ray diffraction analysis; these methods, however, can be costly and time-consuming. Physical properties applied for classification include crystal structure and habit, hardness, lustre, diaphaneity, colour, streak, cleavage and fracture, and specific gravity. Other less general tests include fluorescence, phosphorescence, magnetism, radioactivity, tenacity (response to mechanical induced changes of shape or form), piezoelectricity and reactivity to dilute acids.

===Crystal structure and habit===

Crystal structure results from the orderly geometric spatial arrangement of atoms in the internal structure of a mineral. This crystal structure is based on regular internal atomic or ionic arrangement that is often expressed in the geometric form that the crystal takes. Even when the mineral grains are too small to see or are irregularly shaped, the underlying crystal structure is always periodic and can be determined by X-ray diffraction. Minerals are typically described by their symmetry content. Crystals are restricted to 32 point groups, which differ by their symmetry. These groups are classified in turn into more broad categories, the most encompassing of these being the six crystal families.

These families can be described by the relative lengths of the three crystallographic axes, and the angles between them; these relationships correspond to the symmetry operations that define the narrower point groups. They are summarized below; a, b, and c represent the axes, and α, β, γ represent the angle opposite the respective crystallographic axis (e.g. α is the angle opposite the a-axis, the angle between the b and c axes):

The hexagonal crystal family is also split into two crystal &quot;systems&quot; – the trigonal, which has a three-fold axis of symmetry, and the hexagonal, which has a six-fold axis of symmetry.

Chemistry and crystal structure together define a mineral. With a restriction to 32 point groups, minerals of different chemistry may have identical crystal structure. For example, halite (NaCl), galena (PbS), and periclase (MgO) all belong to the hexaoctahedral point group (isometric family), as they have a similar stoichiometry between their different constituent elements. In contrast, polymorphs are groupings of minerals that share a chemical formula but have a different structure. For example, pyrite and marcasite, both iron sulfides, have the formula FeS2; however, the former is isometric while the latter is orthorhombic. This polymorphism extends to other sulfides with the generic AX2 formula; these two groups are collectively known as the pyrite and marcasite groups.

Polymorphism can extend beyond pure symmetry content. The aluminosilicates are a group of three minerals – kyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite – which share the chemical formula Al2SiO5. Kyanite is triclinic, while andalusite and sillimanite are both orthorhombic and belong to the dipyramidal point group. These differences arise corresponding to how aluminium is coordinated within the crystal structure. In all minerals, one aluminium ion is always in six-fold coordination with oxygen. Silicon, as a general rule, is in four-fold coordination in all minerals; an exception is a case like stishovite (SiO2, an ultra-high pressure quartz polymorph with rutile structure). In kyanite, the second aluminium is in six-fold coordination; its chemical formula can be expressed as Al[6]Al[6]SiO5, to reflect its crystal structure. Andalusite has the second aluminium in five-fold coordination (Al[6]Al[5]SiO5) and sillimanite has it in four-fold coordination (Al[6]Al[4]SiO5).

Differences in crystal structure and chemistry greatly influence other physical properties of the mineral. The carbon allotropes diamond and graphite have vastly different properties; diamond is the hardest natural substance, has an adamantine lustre, and belongs to the isometric crystal family, whereas graphite is very soft, has a greasy lustre, and crystallises in the hexagonal family. This difference is accounted for by differences in bonding. In diamond, the carbons are in sp3 hybrid orbitals, which means they form a framework where each carbon is covalently bonded to four neighbours in a tetrahedral fashion; on the other hand, graphite is composed of sheets of carbons in sp2 hybrid orbitals, where each carbon is bonded covalently to only three others. These sheets are held together by much weaker van der Waals forces, and this discrepancy translates to large macroscopic differences.

Twinning is the intergrowth of two or more crystals of a single mineral species. The geometry of the twinning is controlled by the mineral&#x27;s symmetry. As a result, there are several types of twins, including contact twins, reticulated twins, geniculated twins, penetration twins, cyclic twins, and polysynthetic twins. Contact, or simple twins, consist of two crystals joined at a plane; this type of twinning is common in spinel. Reticulated twins, common in rutile, are interlocking crystals resembling netting. Geniculated twins have a bend in the middle that is caused by start of the twin. Penetration twins consist of two single crystals that have grown into each other; examples of this twinning include cross-shaped staurolite twins and Carlsbad twinning in orthoclase. Cyclic twins are caused by repeated twinning around a rotation axis. This type of twinning occurs around three, four, five, six, or eight-fold axes, and the corresponding patterns are called threelings, fourlings, fivelings, sixlings, and eightlings. Sixlings are common in aragonite. Polysynthetic twins are similar to cyclic twins through the presence of repetitive twinning; however, instead of occurring around a rotational axis, polysynthetic twinning occurs along parallel planes, usually on a microscopic scale.

Crystal habit refers to the overall shape of the aggregate crystal of any mineral. Several terms are used to describe this property. Common habits include acicular, which describes needle-like crystals as in natrolite; dendritic (tree-pattern) is common in native copper or native gold with a groundmass (matrix); equant, which is typical of garnet; prismatic (elongated in one direction) as seen in kunzite or stibnite; botryoidal (like a bunch of grapes) seen in chalcedony; fibrous, which has fibre-like crystals as seen in wollastonite; tabular, which differs from bladed habit in that the former is platy whereas the latter has a defined elongation as seen in muscovite; and massive, which has no definite shape as seen in carnallite. Related to crystal form, the quality of crystal faces is diagnostic of some minerals, especially with a petrographic microscope. Euhedral crystals have a defined external shape, while anhedral crystals do not; those intermediate forms are termed subhedral.

===Hardness===
The hardness of a mineral defines how much it can resist scratching or indentation. This physical property is controlled by the chemical composition and crystalline structure of a mineral. 

The most commonly used scale of measurement is the ordinal Mohs hardness scale, which measures resistance to scratching. Defined by ten indicators, a mineral with a higher index scratches those below it. The scale ranges from talc, a phyllosilicate, to diamond, a carbon polymorph that is the hardest natural material. The scale is provided below:

A mineral&#x27;s hardness is a function of its structure. Hardness is not necessarily constant for all crystallographic directions; crystallographic weakness renders some directions softer than others. An example of this hardness variability exists in kyanite, which has a Mohs hardness of 5 parallel to [001] but 7 parallel to [100].

Other scales include these;
*Shore&#x27;s hardness test, which measures the endurance of a mineral based on the indentation of a spring-loaded contraption.
*The Rockwell scale
*The Vickers hardness test
*The Brinell scale

===Lustre and diaphaneity===
Lustre indicates how light reflects from the mineral&#x27;s surface, with regards to its quality and intensity. There are numerous qualitative terms used to describe this property, which are split into metallic and non-metallic categories. Metallic and sub-metallic minerals have high reflectivity like metal; examples of minerals with this lustre are galena and pyrite. Non-metallic lustres include: adamantine, such as in diamond; vitreous, which is a glassy lustre very common in silicate minerals; pearly, such as in talc and apophyllite; resinous, such as members of the garnet group; silky which is common in fibrous minerals such as asbestiform chrysotile.

The diaphaneity of a mineral describes the ability of light to pass through it. Transparent minerals do not diminish the intensity of light passing through them. An example of a transparent mineral is muscovite (potassium mica); some varieties are sufficiently clear to have been used for windows. Translucent minerals allow some light to pass, but less than those that are transparent. Jadeite and nephrite (mineral forms of jade are examples of minerals with this property). Minerals that do not allow light to pass are called opaque.

The diaphaneity of a mineral depends on the thickness of the sample. When a mineral is sufficiently thin (e.g., in a thin section for petrography), it may become transparent even if that property is not seen in a hand sample. In contrast, some minerals, such as hematite or pyrite, are opaque even in thin-section.

===Colour and streak===


Colour is the most obvious property of a mineral, but it is often non-diagnostic. It is caused by electromagnetic radiation interacting with electrons (except in the case of incandescence, which does not apply to minerals). Two broad classes of elements (idiochromatic and allochromatic) are defined with regards to their contribution to a mineral&#x27;s colour: Idiochromatic elements are essential to a mineral&#x27;s composition; their contribution to a mineral&#x27;s colour is diagnostic. Examples of such minerals are malachite (green) and azurite (blue). In contrast, allochromatic elements in minerals are present in trace amounts as impurities. An example of such a mineral would be the ruby and sapphire varieties of the mineral corundum.
The colours of pseudochromatic minerals are the result of interference of light waves. Examples include labradorite and bornite.

In addition to simple body colour, minerals can have various other distinctive optical properties, such as play of colours, asterism, chatoyancy, iridescence, tarnish, and pleochroism. Several of these properties involve variability in colour. Play of colour, such as in opal, results in the sample reflecting different colours as it is turned, while pleochroism describes the change in colour as light passes through a mineral in a different orientation. Iridescence is a variety of the play of colours where light scatters off a coating on the surface of crystal, cleavage planes, or off layers having minor gradations in chemistry. In contrast, the play of colours in opal is caused by light refracting from ordered microscopic silica spheres within its physical structure. Chatoyancy (&quot;cat&#x27;s eye&quot;) is the wavy banding of colour that is observed as the sample is rotated; asterism, a variety of chatoyancy, gives the appearance of a star on the mineral grain. The latter property is particularly common in gem-quality corundum.
The streak of a mineral refers to the colour of a mineral in powdered form, which may or may not be identical to its body colour. The most common way of testing this property is done with a streak plate, which is made out of porcelain and coloured either white or black. The streak of a mineral is independent of trace elements or any weathering surface. A common example of this property is illustrated with hematite, which is coloured black, silver or red in hand sample, but has a cherry-red to reddish-brown streak; or with chalcopyrite, which is brassy golden in colour and leaves a black streak. Streak is more often distinctive for metallic minerals, in contrast to non-metallic minerals whose body colour is created by allochromatic elements. Streak testing is constrained by the hardness of the mineral, as those harder than 7 powder the &quot;streak plate&quot; instead.

===Cleavage, parting, fracture, and tenacity===
By definition, minerals have a characteristic atomic arrangement. Weakness in this crystalline structure causes planes of weakness, and the breakage of a mineral along such planes is termed cleavage. The quality of cleavage can be described based on how cleanly and easily the mineral breaks; common descriptors, in order of decreasing quality, are &quot;perfect&quot;, &quot;good&quot;, &quot;distinct&quot;, and &quot;poor&quot;. In particularly transparent minerals, or in thin-section, cleavage can be seen as a series of parallel lines marking the planar surfaces when viewed from the side. Cleavage is not a universal property among minerals; for example, quartz, consisting of extensively interconnected silica tetrahedra, does not have a crystallographic weakness which would allow it to cleave. In contrast, micas, which have perfect basal cleavage, consist of sheets of silica tetrahedra which are very weakly held together.

As cleavage is a function of crystallography, there are a variety of cleavage types. Cleavage occurs typically in either one, two, three, four, or six directions. Basal cleavage in one direction is a distinctive property of the micas. Two-directional cleavage is described as prismatic, and occurs in minerals such as the amphiboles and pyroxenes. Minerals such as galena or halite have cubic (or isometric) cleavage in three directions, at 90°; when three directions of cleavage are present, but not at 90°, such as in calcite or rhodochrosite, it is termed rhombohedral cleavage. Octahedral cleavage (four directions) is present in fluorite and diamond, and sphalerite has six-directional dodecahedral cleavage.

Minerals with many cleavages might not break equally well in all of the directions; for example, calcite has good cleavage in three directions, but gypsum has perfect cleavage in one direction, and poor cleavage in two other directions. Angles between cleavage planes vary between minerals. For example, as the amphiboles are double-chain silicates and the pyroxenes are single-chain silicates, the angle between their cleavage planes is different. The pyroxenes cleave in two directions at approximately 90°, whereas the amphiboles distinctively cleave in two directions separated by approximately 120° and 60°. The cleavage angles can be measured with a contact goniometer, which is similar to a protractor.

Parting, sometimes called &quot;false cleavage&quot;, is similar in appearance to cleavage but is instead produced by structural defects in the mineral, as opposed to systematic weakness. Parting varies from crystal to crystal of a mineral, whereas all crystals of a given mineral will cleave if the atomic structure allows for that property. In general, parting is caused by some stress applied to a crystal. The sources of the stresses include deformation (e.g. an increase in pressure), exsolution, or twinning. Minerals that often display parting include the pyroxenes, hematite, magnetite, and corundum.

When a mineral is broken in a direction that does not correspond to a plane of cleavage, it is termed to have been fractured. There are several types of uneven fracture. The classic example is conchoidal fracture, like that of quartz; rounded surfaces are created, which are marked by smooth curved lines. This type of fracture occurs only in very homogeneous minerals. Other types of fracture are fibrous, splintery, and hackly. The latter describes a break along a rough, jagged surface; an example of this property is found in native copper.

Tenacity is related to both cleavage and fracture. Whereas fracture and cleavage describes the surfaces that are created when a mineral is broken, tenacity describes how resistant a mineral is to such breaking. Minerals can be described as brittle, ductile, malleable, sectile, flexible, or elastic.

===Specific gravity===

Specific gravity numerically describes the density of a mineral. The dimensions of density are mass divided by volume with units: kg/m3 or g/cm3. Specific gravity is defined as the density of the mineral divided by the density of water at 4 °C and thus is a dimensionless quantity, identical in all unit systems. It can be measured as the quotient of the mass of the sample and difference between the weight of the sample in air and its corresponding weight in water. Among most minerals, this property is not diagnostic. Rock forming minerals – typically silicates or occasionally carbonates – have a specific gravity of 2.5–3.5.

High specific gravity is a diagnostic property of a mineral. A variation in chemistry (and consequently, mineral class) correlates to a change in specific gravity. Among more common minerals, oxides and sulfides tend to have a higher specific gravity as they include elements with higher atomic mass. A generalization is that minerals with metallic or adamantine lustre tend to have higher specific gravities than those having a non-metallic to dull lustre. For example, hematite, Fe2O3, has a specific gravity of 5.26 while galena, PbS, has a specific gravity of 7.2–7.6, which is a result of their high iron and lead content, respectively. A very high specific gravity is characteristic of native metals; for example, kamacite, an iron-nickel alloy common in iron meteorites has a specific gravity of 7.9, and gold has an observed specific gravity between 15 and 19.3.

===Other properties===

Other properties can be used to diagnose minerals. These are less general, and apply to specific minerals.

Dropping dilute acid (often 10% HCl) onto a mineral aids in distinguishing carbonates from other mineral classes. The acid reacts with the carbonate ([CO3]2−) group, which causes the affected area to effervesce, giving off carbon dioxide gas. This test can be further expanded to test the mineral in its original crystal form or powdered form. An example of this test is done when distinguishing calcite from dolomite, especially within the rocks (limestone and dolomite respectively). Calcite immediately effervesces in acid, whereas acid must be applied to powdered dolomite (often to a scratched surface in a rock), for it to effervesce. Zeolite minerals will not effervesce in acid; instead, they become frosted after 5–10 minutes, and if left in acid for a day, they dissolve or become a silica gel.

Magnetism is a very conspicuous property of a few minerals. Among common minerals, magnetite exhibits this property strongly, and magnetism is also present, albeit not as strongly, in pyrrhotite and ilmenite. Some minerals exhibit electrical properties – for example, quartz is piezoelectric – but electrical properties are rarely used as diagnostic criteria for minerals because of incomplete data and natural variation.

Minerals can also be tested for taste or smell. Halite, NaCl, is table salt; its potassium-bearing counterpart, sylvite, has a pronounced bitter taste. Sulfides have a characteristic smell, especially as samples are fractured, reacting, or powdered.

Radioactivity is a rare property found in minerals containing radioactive elements. The radioactive elements could be a defining constituent, such as uranium in uraninite, autunite, and carnotite, or present as trace impurities, as in zircon. The decay of a radioactive element damages the mineral crystal structure rendering it locally amorphous (metamict state); the optical result, termed a &quot;radioactive halo&quot; or &quot;pleochroic halo&quot;, is observable with various techniques, such as thin-section petrography.

==Classification==

===Earliest classifications===

In 315 BCE, Theophrastus presented his classification of minerals in his treatise &quot;On Stones&quot;. His classification was influenced by the ideas of his teachers Plato and Aristotle. Theophrastus classified minerals as stones, earths or metals.

Georgius Agricola&#x27;s classification of minerals in his book &quot;De Natura Fossilium&quot;, published in 1546, divided minerals into three types of substance: simple (stones, earths, metals, and congealed juices), compound (intimately mixed) and composite (separable).

===Linnaeus===
An early classification of minerals was given by Carl Linnaeus in his seminal 1735 book &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;. He divided the natural world into three kingdoms – plants, animals, and minerals – and classified each with the same hierarchy. In descending order, these were Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Tribe, Genus, and Species. However, while his system was justified by Charles Darwin&#x27;s theory of species formation and has been largely adopted and expanded by biologists in the following centuries (who still use his Greek- and Latin-based binomial naming scheme), it had little success among mineralogists (although each distinct mineral is still formally referred to as a mineral &quot;species&quot;).

===Modern classification===
Minerals are classified by variety, species, series and group, in order of increasing generality. The basic level of definition is that of mineral species, each of which is distinguished from the others by unique chemical and physical properties. For example, quartz is defined by its formula, SiO2, and a specific crystalline structure that distinguishes it from other minerals with the same chemical formula (termed polymorphs). When there exists a range of composition between two minerals species, a mineral series is defined. For example, the biotite series is represented by variable amounts of the endmembers phlogopite, siderophyllite, annite, and eastonite. In contrast, a mineral group is a grouping of mineral species with some common chemical properties that share a crystal structure. The pyroxene group has a common formula of XY(Si,Al)2O6, where X and Y are both cations, with X typically bigger than Y; the pyroxenes are single-chain silicates that crystallize in either the orthorhombic or monoclinic crystal systems. Finally, a mineral variety is a specific type of mineral species that differs by some physical characteristic, such as colour or crystal habit. An example is amethyst, which is a purple variety of quartz.

Two common classifications, Dana and Strunz, are used for minerals; both rely on composition, specifically with regards to important chemical groups, and structure. James Dwight Dana, a leading geologist of his time, first published his &quot;System of Mineralogy&quot; in 1837; , it is in its eighth edition. The Dana classification assigns a four-part number to a mineral species. Its class number is based on important compositional groups; the type gives the ratio of cations to anions in the mineral, and the last two numbers group minerals by structural similarity within a given type or class. The less commonly used Strunz classification, named for German mineralogist Karl Hugo Strunz, is based on the Dana system, but combines both chemical and structural criteria, the latter with regards to distribution of chemical bonds.

As the composition of the Earth&#x27;s crust is dominated by silicon and oxygen, silicates are by far the most important class of minerals in terms of rock formation and diversity. However, non-silicate minerals are of great economic importance, especially as ores. Non-silicate minerals are subdivided into several other classes by their dominant chemistry, which includes native elements, sulfides, halides, oxides and hydroxides, carbonates and nitrates, borates, sulfates, phosphates, and organic compounds. Most non-silicate mineral species are rare (constituting in total 8% of the Earth&#x27;s crust), although some are relatively common, such as calcite, pyrite, magnetite, and hematite. There are two major structural styles observed in non-silicates: close-packing and silicate-like linked tetrahedra. Close-packed structures are a way to densely pack atoms while minimizing interstitial space. Hexagonal close-packing involves stacking layers where every other layer is the same (&quot;ababab&quot;), whereas cubic close-packing involves stacking groups of three layers (&quot;abcabcabc&quot;). Analogues to linked silica tetrahedra include (sulfate), (phosphate), (arsenate), and (vanadate) structures. The non-silicates have great economic importance, as they concentrate elements more than the silicate minerals do.

The largest grouping of minerals by far are the silicates; most rocks are composed of greater than 95% silicate minerals, and over 90% of the Earth&#x27;s crust is composed of these minerals. The two main constituents of silicates are silicon and oxygen, which are the two most abundant elements in the Earth&#x27;s crust. Other common elements in silicate minerals correspond to other common elements in the Earth&#x27;s crust, such as aluminium, magnesium, iron, calcium, sodium, and potassium. Some important rock-forming silicates include the feldspars, quartz, olivines, pyroxenes, amphiboles, garnets, and micas.

===Silicates===
The base unit of a silicate mineral is the [SiO4]4− tetrahedron. In the vast majority of cases, silicon is in four-fold or tetrahedral coordination with oxygen. In very high-pressure situations, silicon will be in six-fold or octahedral coordination, such as in the perovskite structure or the quartz polymorph stishovite (SiO2). In the latter case, the mineral no longer has a silicate structure, but that of rutile (TiO2), and its associated group, which are simple oxides. These silica tetrahedra are then polymerized to some degree to create various structures, such as one-dimensional chains, two-dimensional sheets, and three-dimensional frameworks. The basic silicate mineral where no polymerization of the tetrahedra has occurred requires other elements to balance out the base 4- charge. In other silicate structures, different combinations of elements are required to balance out the resultant negative charge. It is common for the Si4+ to be substituted by Al3+ because of similarity in ionic radius and charge; in those cases, the [AlO4]5− tetrahedra form the same structures as do the unsubstituted tetrahedra, but their charge-balancing requirements are different.

The degree of polymerization can be described by both the structure formed and how many tetrahedral corners (or coordinating oxygens) are shared (for aluminium and silicon in tetrahedral sites):
;Orthosilicates (or nesosilicates): Have no linking of polyhedra, thus tetrahedra share no corners.
;Disilicates (or sorosilicates): Have two tetrahedra sharing one oxygen atom.
;Inosilicates are chain silicates: Single-chain silicates have two shared corners, whereas double-chain silicates have two or three shared corners.
;Phyllosilicates: Have a sheet structure which requires three shared oxygens; in the case of double-chain silicates, some tetrahedra must share two corners instead of three as otherwise a sheet structure would result. 
;Framework silicates (or tectosilicates): Have tetrahedra that share all four corners.
;Ring silicates (or cyclosilicates): Only need tetrahedra to share two corners to form the cyclical structure.

The silicate subclasses are described below in order of decreasing polymerization.

====Tectosilicates====

Tectosilicates, also known as framework silicates, have the highest degree of polymerization. With all corners of a tetrahedra shared, the silicon:oxygen ratio becomes 1:2. Examples are quartz, the feldspars, feldspathoids, and the zeolites. Framework silicates tend to be particularly chemically stable as a result of strong covalent bonds.

Forming 12% of the Earth&#x27;s crust, quartz (SiO2) is the most abundant mineral species. It is characterized by its high chemical and physical resistivity. Quartz has several polymorphs, including tridymite and cristobalite at high temperatures, high-pressure coesite, and ultra-high pressure stishovite. The latter mineral can only be formed on Earth by meteorite impacts, and its structure has been compressed so much that it has changed from a silicate structure to that of rutile (TiO2). The silica polymorph that is most stable at the Earth&#x27;s surface is α-quartz. Its counterpart, β-quartz, is present only at high temperatures and pressures (changes to α-quartz below 573 °C at 1 bar). These two polymorphs differ by a &quot;kinking&quot; of bonds; this change in structure gives β-quartz greater symmetry than α-quartz, and they are thus also called high quartz (β) and low quartz (α).

Feldspars are the most abundant group in the Earth&#x27;s crust, at about 50%. In the feldspars, Al3+ substitutes for Si4+, which creates a charge imbalance that must be accounted for by the addition of cations. The base structure becomes either [AlSi3O8]− or [Al2Si2O8]2− There are 22 mineral species of feldspars, subdivided into two major subgroups – alkali and plagioclase – and two less common groups – celsian and banalsite. The alkali feldspars are most commonly in a series between potassium-rich orthoclase and sodium-rich albite; in the case of plagioclase, the most common series ranges from albite to calcium-rich anorthite. Crystal twinning is common in feldspars, especially polysynthetic twins in plagioclase and Carlsbad twins in alkali feldspars. If the latter subgroup cools slowly from a melt, it forms exsolution lamellae because the two components – orthoclase and albite – are unstable in solid solution. Exsolution can be on a scale from microscopic to readily observable in hand-sample; perthitic texture forms when Na-rich feldspar exsolve in a K-rich host. The opposite texture (antiperthitic), where K-rich feldspar exsolves in a Na-rich host, is very rare.

Feldspathoids are structurally similar to feldspar, but differ in that they form in Si-deficient conditions, which allows for further substitution by Al3+. As a result, feldspathoids are almost never found in association with quartz. A common example of a feldspathoid is nepheline ((Na, K)AlSiO4); compared to alkali feldspar, nepheline has an Al2O3:SiO2 ratio of 1:2, as opposed to 1:6 in alkali feldspar. Zeolites often have distinctive crystal habits, occurring in needles, plates, or blocky masses. They form in the presence of water at low temperatures and pressures, and have channels and voids in their structure. Zeolites have several industrial applications, especially in waste water treatment.

====Phyllosilicates====

Phyllosilicates consist of sheets of polymerized tetrahedra. They are bound at three oxygen sites, which gives a characteristic silicon:oxygen ratio of 2:5. Important examples include the mica, chlorite, and the kaolinite-serpentine groups. In addition to the tetrahedra, phyllosilicates have a sheet of octahedra (elements in six-fold coordination by oxygen) that balance out the basic tetrahedra, which have a negative charge (e.g. [Si4O10]4−) These tetrahedra (T) and octahedra (O) sheets are stacked in a variety of combinations to create phyllosilicate layers. Within an octahedral sheet, there are three octahedral sites in a unit structure; however, not all of the sites may be occupied. In that case, the mineral is termed dioctahedral, whereas in other case it is termed trioctahedral. The layers are weakly bound by van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonds, or sparse ionic bonds, which causes a crystallographic weakness, in turn leading to a prominent basal cleavage among the phyllosilicates.

The kaolinite-serpentine group consists of T-O stacks (the 1:1 clay minerals); their hardness ranges from 2 to 4, as the sheets are held by hydrogen bonds. The 2:1 clay minerals (pyrophyllite-talc) consist of T-O-T stacks, but they are softer (hardness from 1 to 2), as they are instead held together by van der Waals forces. These two groups of minerals are subgrouped by octahedral occupation; specifically, kaolinite and pyrophyllite are dioctahedral whereas serpentine and talc trioctahedral.

Micas are also T-O-T-stacked phyllosilicates, but differ from the other T-O-T and T-O-stacked subclass members in that they incorporate aluminium into the tetrahedral sheets (clay minerals have Al3+ in octahedral sites). Common examples of micas are muscovite, and the biotite series. Mica T-O-T layers are bonded together by metal ions, giving them a greater hardness than other phyllosilicate minerals, though they retain perfect basal cleavage. The chlorite group is related to mica group, but a brucite-like (Mg(OH)2) layer between the T-O-T stacks.

Because of their chemical structure, phyllosilicates typically have flexible, elastic, transparent layers that are electrical insulators and can be split into very thin flakes. Micas can be used in electronics as insulators, in construction, as optical filler, or even cosmetics. Chrysotile, a species of serpentine, is the most common mineral species in industrial asbestos, as it is less dangerous in terms of health than the amphibole asbestos.

====Inosilicates====

Inosilicates consist of tetrahedra repeatedly bonded in chains. These chains can be single, where a tetrahedron is bound to two others to form a continuous chain; alternatively, two chains can be merged to create double-chain silicates. Single-chain silicates have a silicon:oxygen ratio of 1:3 (e.g. [Si2O6]4−), whereas the double-chain variety has a ratio of 4:11, e.g. [Si8O22]12−. Inosilicates contain two important rock-forming mineral groups; single-chain silicates are most commonly pyroxenes, while double-chain silicates are often amphiboles. Higher-order chains exist (e.g. three-member, four-member, five-member chains, etc.) but they are rare.

The pyroxene group consists of 21 mineral species. Pyroxenes have a general structure formula of XY(Si2O6), where X is an octahedral site, while Y can vary in coordination number from six to eight. Most varieties of pyroxene consist of permutations of Ca2+, Fe2+ and Mg2+ to balance the negative charge on the backbone. Pyroxenes are common in the Earth&#x27;s crust (about 10%) and are a key constituent of mafic igneous rocks.

Amphiboles have great variability in chemistry, described variously as a &quot;mineralogical garbage can&quot; or a &quot;mineralogical shark swimming a sea of elements&quot;. The backbone of the amphiboles is the [Si8O22]12−; it is balanced by cations in three possible positions, although the third position is not always used, and one element can occupy both remaining ones. Finally, the amphiboles are usually hydrated, that is, they have a hydroxyl group ([OH]−), although it can be replaced by a fluoride, a chloride, or an oxide ion. Because of the variable chemistry, there are over 80 species of amphibole, although variations, as in the pyroxenes, most commonly involve mixtures of Ca2+, Fe2+ and Mg2+. Several amphibole mineral species can have an asbestiform crystal habit. These asbestos minerals form long, thin, flexible, and strong fibres, which are electrical insulators, chemically inert and heat-resistant; as such, they have several applications, especially in construction materials. However, asbestos are known carcinogens, and cause various other illnesses, such as asbestosis; amphibole asbestos (anthophyllite, tremolite, actinolite, grunerite, and riebeckite) are considered more dangerous than chrysotile serpentine asbestos.

====Cyclosilicates====

Cyclosilicates, or ring silicates, have a ratio of silicon to oxygen of 1:3. Six-member rings are most common, with a base structure of [Si6O18]12−; examples include the tourmaline group and beryl. Other ring structures exist, with 3, 4, 8, 9, 12 having been described. Cyclosilicates tend to be strong, with elongated, striated crystals.

Tourmalines have a very complex chemistry that can be described by a general formula XY3Z6(BO3)3T6O18V3W. The T6O18 is the basic ring structure, where T is usually Si4+, but substitutable by Al3+ or B3+. Tourmalines can be subgrouped by the occupancy of the X site, and from there further subdivided by the chemistry of the W site. The Y and Z sites can accommodate a variety of cations, especially various transition metals; this variability in structural transition metal content gives the tourmaline group greater variability in colour. Other cyclosilicates include beryl, Al2Be3Si6O18, whose varieties include the gemstones emerald (green) and aquamarine (bluish). Cordierite is structurally similar to beryl, and is a common metamorphic mineral.

====Sorosilicates====

Sorosilicates, also termed disilicates, have tetrahedron-tetrahedron bonding at one oxygen, which results in a 2:7 ratio of silicon to oxygen. The resultant common structural element is the [Si2O7]6− group. The most common disilicates by far are members of the epidote group. Epidotes are found in variety of geologic settings, ranging from mid-ocean ridge to granites to metapelites. Epidotes are built around the structure [(SiO4)(Si2O7)]10− structure; for example, the mineral &quot;species&quot; epidote has calcium, aluminium, and ferric iron to charge balance: Ca2Al2(Fe3+, Al)(SiO4)(Si2O7)O(OH). The presence of iron as Fe3+ and Fe2+ helps buffer oxygen fugacity, which in turn is a significant factor in petrogenesis.

Other examples of sorosilicates include lawsonite, a metamorphic mineral forming in the blueschist facies (subduction zone setting with low temperature and high pressure), vesuvianite, which takes up a significant amount of calcium in its chemical structure.

====Orthosilicates====

Orthosilicates consist of isolated tetrahedra that are charge-balanced by other cations. Also termed nesosilicates, this type of silicate has a silicon:oxygen ratio of 1:4 (e.g. SiO4). Typical orthosilicates tend to form blocky equant crystals, and are fairly hard. Several rock-forming minerals are part of this subclass, such as the aluminosilicates, the olivine group, and the garnet group.

The aluminosilicates –bkyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite, all Al2SiO5 – are structurally composed of one [SiO4]4− tetrahedron, and one Al3+ in octahedral coordination. The remaining Al3+ can be in six-fold coordination (kyanite), five-fold (andalusite) or four-fold (sillimanite); which mineral forms in a given environment is depend on pressure and temperature conditions. In the olivine structure, the main olivine series of (Mg, Fe)2SiO4 consist of magnesium-rich forsterite and iron-rich fayalite. Both iron and magnesium are in octahedral by oxygen. Other mineral species having this structure exist, such as tephroite, Mn2SiO4. The garnet group has a general formula of X3Y2(SiO4)3, where X is a large eight-fold coordinated cation, and Y is a smaller six-fold coordinated cation. There are six ideal endmembers of garnet, split into two group. The pyralspite garnets have Al3+ in the Y position: pyrope (Mg3Al2(SiO4)3), almandine (Fe3Al2(SiO4)3), and spessartine (Mn3Al2(SiO4)3). The ugrandite garnets have Ca2+ in the X position: uvarovite (Ca3Cr2(SiO4)3), grossular (Ca3Al2(SiO4)3) and andradite (Ca3Fe2(SiO4)3). While there are two subgroups of garnet, solid solutions exist between all six end-members.

Other orthosilicates include zircon, staurolite, and topaz. Zircon (ZrSiO4) is useful in geochronology as U6+ can substitute for Zr4+; furthermore, because of its very resistant structure, it is difficult to reset it as a chronometer. Staurolite is a common metamorphic intermediate-grade index mineral. It has a particularly complicated crystal structure that was only fully described in 1986. Topaz (Al2SiO4(F, OH)2, often found in granitic pegmatites associated with tourmaline, is a common gemstone mineral.

===Non-silicates===

====Native elements====
Native elements are those that are not chemically bonded to other elements. This mineral group includes native metals, semi-metals, and non-metals, and various alloys and solid solutions. The metals are held together by metallic bonding, which confers distinctive physical properties such as their shiny metallic lustre, ductility and malleability, and electrical conductivity. Native elements are subdivided into groups by their structure or chemical attributes.

The gold group, with a cubic close-packed structure, includes metals such as gold, silver, and copper. The platinum group is similar in structure to the gold group. The iron-nickel group is characterized by several iron-nickel alloy species. Two examples are kamacite and taenite, which are found in iron meteorites; these species differ by the amount of Ni in the alloy; kamacite has less than 5–7% nickel and is a variety of native iron, whereas the nickel content of taenite ranges from 7–37%. Arsenic group minerals consist of semi-metals, which have only some metallic traits; for example, they lack the malleability of metals. Native carbon occurs in two allotropes, graphite and diamond; the latter forms at very high pressure in the mantle, which gives it a much stronger structure than graphite.

====Sulfides====

The sulfide minerals are chemical compounds of one or more metals or semimetals with a chalcogen or pnictogen, of which sulfur is most common. Tellurium, arsenic, or selenium can substitute for the sulfur. Sulfides tend to be soft, brittle minerals with a high specific gravity. Many powdered sulfides, such as pyrite, have a sulfurous smell when powdered. Sulfides are susceptible to weathering, and many readily dissolve in water; these dissolved minerals can be later redeposited, which creates enriched secondary ore deposits. Sulfides are classified by the ratio of the metal or semimetal to the sulfur, such as M:S equal to 2:1, or 1:1. Many sulfide minerals are economically important as metal ores; examples include sphalerite (ZnS), an ore of zinc, galena (PbS), an ore of lead, cinnabar (HgS), an ore of mercury, and molybdenite (MoS2, an ore of molybdenum. Pyrite (FeS2), is the most commonly occurring sulfide, and can be found in most geological environments. It is not, however, an ore of iron, but can be instead oxidized to produce sulfuric acid. Related to the sulfides are the rare sulfosalts, in which a metallic element is bonded to sulfur and a semimetal such as antimony, arsenic, or bismuth. Like the sulfides, sulfosalts are typically soft, heavy, and brittle minerals.

====Oxides====

Oxide minerals are divided into three categories: simple oxides, hydroxides, and multiple oxides. Simple oxides are characterized by O2− as the main anion and primarily ionic bonding. They can be further subdivided by the ratio of oxygen to the cations. The periclase group consists of minerals with a 1:1 ratio. Oxides with a 2:1 ratio include cuprite (Cu2O) and water ice. Corundum group minerals have a 2:3 ratio, and includes minerals such as corundum (Al2O3), and hematite (Fe2O3). Rutile group minerals have a ratio of 1:2; the eponymous species, rutile (TiO2) is the chief ore of titanium; other examples include cassiterite (SnO2; ore of tin), and pyrolusite (MnO2; ore of manganese). In hydroxides, the dominant anion is the hydroxyl ion, OH−. Bauxites are the chief aluminium ore, and are a heterogeneous mixture of the hydroxide minerals diaspore, gibbsite, and bohmite; they form in areas with a very high rate of chemical weathering (mainly tropical conditions). Finally, multiple oxides are compounds of two metals with oxygen. A major group within this class are the spinels, with a general formula of X2+Y3+2O4. Examples of species include spinel (MgAl2O4), chromite (FeCr2O4), and magnetite (Fe3O4). The latter is readily distinguishable by its strong magnetism, which occurs as it has iron in two oxidation states (Fe2+Fe3+2O4), which makes it a multiple oxide instead of a single oxide.

====Halides====

The halide minerals are compounds in which a halogen (fluorine, chlorine, iodine, or bromine) is the main anion. These minerals tend to be soft, weak, brittle, and water-soluble. Common examples of halides include halite (NaCl, table salt), sylvite (KCl), and fluorite (CaF2). Halite and sylvite commonly form as evaporites, and can be dominant minerals in chemical sedimentary rocks. Cryolite, Na3AlF6, is a key mineral in the extraction of aluminium from bauxites; however, as the only significant occurrence at Ivittuut, Greenland, in a granitic pegmatite, was depleted, synthetic cryolite can be made from fluorite.

====Carbonates====

The carbonate minerals are those in which the main anionic group is carbonate, [CO3]2−. Carbonates tend to be brittle, many have rhombohedral cleavage, and all react with acid. Due to the last characteristic, field geologists often carry dilute hydrochloric acid to distinguish carbonates from non-carbonates. The reaction of acid with carbonates, most commonly found as the polymorph calcite and aragonite (CaCO3), relates to the dissolution and precipitation of the mineral, which is a key in the formation of limestone caves, features within them such as stalactite and stalagmites, and karst landforms. Carbonates are most often formed as biogenic or chemical sediments in marine environments. The carbonate group is structurally a triangle, where a central C4+ cation is surrounded by three O2− anions; different groups of minerals form from different arrangements of these triangles. The most common carbonate mineral is calcite, which is the primary constituent of sedimentary limestone and metamorphic marble. Calcite, CaCO3, can have a significant percentage of magnesium substituting for calcium. Under high-Mg conditions, its polymorph aragonite will form instead; the marine geochemistry in this regard can be described as an aragonite or calcite sea, depending on which mineral preferentially forms. Dolomite is a double carbonate, with the formula CaMg(CO3)2. Secondary dolomitization of limestone is common, in which calcite or aragonite are converted to dolomite; this reaction increases pore space (the unit cell volume of dolomite is 88% that of calcite), which can create a reservoir for oil and gas. These two mineral species are members of eponymous mineral groups: the calcite group includes carbonates with the general formula XCO3, and the dolomite group constitutes minerals with the general formula XY(CO3)2.

====Sulfates====
The sulfate minerals all contain the sulfate anion, [SO4]2−. They tend to be transparent to translucent, soft, and many are fragile. Sulfate minerals commonly form as evaporites, where they precipitate out of evaporating saline waters. Sulfates can also be found in hydrothermal vein systems associated with sulfides, or as oxidation products of sulfides. Sulfates can be subdivided into anhydrous and hydrous minerals. The most common hydrous sulfate by far is gypsum, CaSO4⋅2H2O. It forms as an evaporite, and is associated with other evaporites such as calcite and halite; if it incorporates sand grains as it crystallizes, gypsum can form desert roses. Gypsum has very low thermal conductivity and maintains a low temperature when heated as it loses that heat by dehydrating; as such, gypsum is used as an insulator in materials such as plaster and drywall. The anhydrous equivalent of gypsum is anhydrite; it can form directly from seawater in highly arid conditions. The barite group has the general formula XSO4, where the X is a large 12-coordinated cation. Examples include barite (BaSO4), celestine (SrSO4), and anglesite (PbSO4); anhydrite is not part of the barite group, as the smaller Ca2+ is only in eight-fold coordination.

====Phosphates====

The phosphate minerals are characterized by the tetrahedral [PO4]3− unit, although the structure can be generalized, and phosphorus is replaced by antimony, arsenic, or vanadium. The most common phosphate is the apatite group; common species within this group are fluorapatite (Ca5(PO4)3F), chlorapatite (Ca5(PO4)3Cl) and hydroxylapatite (Ca5(PO4)3(OH)). Minerals in this group are the main crystalline constituents of teeth and bones in vertebrates. The relatively abundant monazite group has a general structure of ATO4, where T is phosphorus or arsenic, and A is often a rare-earth element (REE). Monazite is important in two ways: first, as a REE &quot;sink&quot;, it can sufficiently concentrate these elements to become an ore; secondly, monazite group elements can incorporate relatively large amounts of uranium and thorium, which can be used in monazite geochronology to date the rock based on the decay of the U and Th to lead.

====Organic minerals====

The Strunz classification includes a class for organic minerals. These rare compounds contain organic carbon, but can be formed by a geologic process. For example, whewellite, CaC2O4⋅H2O is an oxalate that can be deposited in hydrothermal ore veins. While hydrated calcium oxalate can be found in coal seams and other sedimentary deposits involving organic matter, the hydrothermal occurrence is not considered to be related to biological activity.

===Recent advances===
Mineral classification schemes and their definitions are evolving to match recent advances in mineral science. Recent changes have included the addition of an organic class, in both the new Dana and the Strunz classification schemes. The organic class includes a very rare group of minerals with hydrocarbons. The IMA Commission on New Minerals and Mineral Names adopted in 2009 a hierarchical scheme for the naming and classification of mineral groups and group names and established seven commissions and four working groups to review and classify minerals into an official listing of their published names. According to these new rules, &quot;mineral species can be grouped in a number of different ways, on the basis of chemistry, crystal structure, occurrence, association, genetic history, or resource, for example, depending on the purpose to be served by the classification.&quot;

==Astrobiology==
It has been suggested that biominerals could be important indicators of extraterrestrial life and thus could play an important role in the search for past or present life on Mars. Furthermore, organic components (biosignatures) that are often associated with biominerals are believed to play crucial roles in both pre-biotic and biotic reactions.

In January 2014, NASA reported that studies by the &quot;Curiosity&quot; and &quot;Opportunity&quot; rovers on Mars would search for evidence of ancient life, including a biosphere based on autotrophic, chemotrophic and/or chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms, as well as ancient water, including fluvio-lacustrine environments (plains related to ancient rivers or lakes) that may have been habitable. The search for evidence of habitability, taphonomy (related to fossils), and organic carbon on the planet Mars became a primary NASA objective.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
==General references==
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* On the creation of new minerals by human activity.

==External links==

* Mindat mineralogical database, largest mineral database on the Internet
* &quot;Mineralogy Database&quot; by David Barthelmy (2009)
* &quot;Mineral Identification Key II&quot; Mineralogical Society of America
* &quot;American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database&quot;
* Minerals and the Origins of Life (Robert Hazen, NASA) (video, 60m, April 2014).
* The private lives of minerals: Insights from big-data mineralogy (Robert Hazen, 15 February 2017)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="3" end="10" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="15" end="25" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="29" end="36" title="Mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="40" end="55" title="Mineral" label="mineral species"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="80" end="85" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="123" end="143" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="159" end="176" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="218" end="228" title="Geology" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q289472" start="349" end="357" title="biogenic" label="biogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="367" end="374" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="379" end="395" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q419095" start="432" end="439" title="mellite" label="mellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q413478" start="514" end="529" title="hydroxylapatite" label="hydroxylapatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="598" end="602" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602076" start="757" end="766" title="aggregate (geology)" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="846" end="852" title="phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q171058" start="935" end="939" title="opal" label="opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="943" end="951" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091637" start="978" end="988" title="mineraloid" label="mineraloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="1143" end="1149" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q420620" start="1154" end="1164" title="stishovite" label="stishovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="1225" end="1240" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q268771" start="1247" end="1286" title="International Mineralogical Association" label="International Mineralogical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q375765" start="1412" end="1426" title="List of minerals recognized by the International Mineralogical Association" label="6,118 official"/>
<link wikidata="Q429795" start="1577" end="1586" title="mineral variety" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="1673" end="1681" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="1725" end="1731" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="1799" end="1816" title="chemical elements" label="chemical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q417794" start="1911" end="1922" title="mackinawite" label="mackinawite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936581" start="2119" end="2132" title="mineral group" label="mineral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="2174" end="2187" title="olivine" label="olivine group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2260" end="2292" title="Mineral identification" label="description of a mineral species"/>
<link wikidata="Q505892" start="2349" end="2354" title="crystal habit" label="habit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="2356" end="2364" title="Mohs scale of mineral hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="2366" end="2372" title="lustre (mineralogy)" label="lustre"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="2374" end="2385" title="diaphaneity" label="diaphaneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107775" start="2395" end="2401" title="streak (mineralogy)" label="streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699426" start="2403" end="2411" title="tenacity (mineralogy)" label="tenacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400" start="2413" end="2421" title="cleavage (crystal)" label="cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q488001" start="2423" end="2431" title="fracture (mineralogy)" label="fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q898786" start="2433" end="2439" title="crystal system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="2458" end="2474" title="specific gravity" label="specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="2476" end="2485" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="2487" end="2499" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="2501" end="2514" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="2566" end="2570" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q934210" start="2660" end="2679" title="Dana classification" label="Dana classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q928461" start="2688" end="2709" title="Strunz classification" label="Strunz classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="2711" end="2727" title="Silicate mineral" label="Silicate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="2763" end="2781" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q723127" start="2826" end="2841" title="native element mineral" label="native elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="2881" end="2890" title="chemical compounds" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="2934" end="2942" title="sulfide mineral" label="sulfides"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="2949" end="2971" title="galena" label="Galena &amp;quot;PbS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q945532" start="2974" end="2980" title="oxide mineral" label="oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2987" end="3010" title="quartz" label="quartz &amp;quot;SiO2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q729283" start="3013" end="3020" title="halide mineral" label="halides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="3027" end="3053" title="Rock salt" label="rock salt &amp;quot;NaCl&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073138" start="3056" end="3066" title="carbonate mineral" label="carbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="3073" end="3098" title="Calcite" label="calcite &amp;quot;CaCO3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q764802" start="3101" end="3109" title="sulfate mineral" label="sulfates"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="3116" end="3145" title="gypsum" label="gypsum &amp;quot;CaSO4·2H2O&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="3148" end="3157" title="silicate mineral" label="silicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21813710" start="3164" end="3195" title="orthoclase" label="orthoclase &amp;quot;KAlSi3O8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273039" start="3198" end="3208" title="molybdate" label="molybdates"/>
<link wikidata="Q421092" start="3215" end="3243" title="wulfenite" label="wulfenite &amp;quot;PbMoO4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092395" start="3249" end="3259" title="phosphate mineral" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q413309" start="3266" end="3302" title="pyromorphite" label="pyromorphite &amp;quot;Pb5(PO4)3Cl&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q268771" start="3372" end="3411" title="International Mineralogical Association" label="International Mineralogical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q423265" start="3763" end="3779" title="tungsten carbide" label="tungsten carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="3781" end="3796" title="kidney stone disease" label="urinary calculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q412399" start="3798" end="3813" title="calcium oxalate" label="calcium oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="3845" end="3853" title="seashell" label="seashell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13536972" start="3980" end="3988" title="evenkite" label="evenkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981032" start="4022" end="4032" title="taranakite" label="taranakite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="4039" end="4048" title="bat guano" label="bat guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q19767703" start="4053" end="4062" title="alpersite" label="alpersite"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="4357" end="4364" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="4535" end="4549" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q728944" start="4615" end="4625" title="inclusion (mineral)" label="inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="4649" end="4658" title="Ice" label="water ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q674038" start="4835" end="4846" title="macroscopic scale" label="macroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q909924" start="4926" end="4935" title="ozokerite" label="ozokerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193565" start="4937" end="4945" title="limonite" label="limonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="4947" end="4955" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="5274" end="5288" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q417794" start="5298" end="5309" title="mackinawite" label="mackinawite"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="5342" end="5349" title="iron" label="ferrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="5412" end="5418" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q899743" start="5555" end="5564" title="Vacancy defect" label="vacancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="5741" end="5748" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415037" start="5851" end="5861" title="forsterite" label="forsterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411130" start="5866" end="5874" title="fayalite" label="fayalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="6165" end="6177" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q903517" start="6294" end="6314" title="thermodynamic stability" label="stable or metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="6324" end="6340" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547694" start="6501" end="6513" title="meridianiite" label="meridianiite"/>
<link wikidata="Q288266" start="6548" end="6565" title="magnesium sulfate" label="magnesium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291565" start="6707" end="6727" title="List of minerals named after people" label="named after a person"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="7043" end="7049" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="7054" end="7061" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="7469" end="7480" title="biomineralization" label="biominerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q864379" start="7720" end="7734" title="Biogeochemistry" label="biogeochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="7809" end="7817" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q903103" start="7822" end="7851" title="X-ray absorption spectroscopy" label="X-ray absorption spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="7918" end="7931" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83169" start="8121" end="8132" title="hydrosphere" label="hydrosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="8134" end="8144" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="8150" end="8159" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="8349" end="8358" title="Seabed" label="sea floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="8386" end="8398" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q162167" start="8422" end="8432" title="mesosphere" label="mesosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q846303" start="8436" end="8456" title="Biogeochemical cycle" label="Biogeochemical cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="8546" end="8557" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="8570" end="8578" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="8613" end="8616" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="8641" end="8649" title="Catalysis" label="catalyze"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="8654" end="8665" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656448" start="9605" end="9617" title="icosahedrite" label="icosahedrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986738" start="9694" end="9714" title="icosahedral symmetry" label="icosahedral symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q263214" start="9724" end="9736" title="quasicrystal" label="quasicrystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="9835" end="9839" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="9916" end="9925" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="9929" end="9938" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="9980" end="9987" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="9991" end="10000" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="10031" end="10037" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="10139" end="10146" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="10184" end="10199" title="alkali feldspar" label="alkali feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="10205" end="10225" title="plagioclase feldspar" label="plagioclase feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="10422" end="10426" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="10678" end="10686" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="10693" end="10697" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="10704" end="10713" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="10720" end="10728" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="10735" end="10742" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662087" start="11087" end="11106" title="Industrial mineral" label="industrial minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="11127" end="11136" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="11248" end="11251" title="Ore" label="Ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="11351" end="11359" title="cinnabar" label="cinnabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="11386" end="11396" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="11420" end="11431" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293541" start="11459" end="11469" title="colemanite" label="colemanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="11481" end="11486" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="11489" end="11505" title="gemstone" label="&amp;quot;Gems&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="11882" end="11886" title="ruby" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="11891" end="11899" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="11909" end="11917" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="12002" end="12018" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="12020" end="12034" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="12459" end="12477" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="12688" end="12694" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="12696" end="12703" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="12705" end="12714" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="12716" end="12720" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="12722" end="12731" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="12733" end="12740" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="12742" end="12748" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="12753" end="12762" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q256865" start="13454" end="13464" title="riebeckite" label="riebeckite"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="13543" end="13552" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398821" start="13928" end="13942" title="rules of thumb" label="rules of thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430923" start="13956" end="13965" title="Normative mineralogy" label="CIPW norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376204" start="14084" end="14094" title="Endmember (mineralogy)" label="end member"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="14108" end="14122" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="14148" end="14159" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="14160" end="14168" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="14204" end="14210" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182264" start="14227" end="14233" title="albite" label="albite"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="14249" end="14256" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q244994" start="14262" end="14271" title="anorthite" label="anorthite"/>
<link wikidata="Q429902" start="14389" end="14399" title="oligoclase" label="oligoclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q249452" start="14401" end="14409" title="andesine" label="andesine"/>
<link wikidata="Q430062" start="14411" end="14422" title="labradorite" label="labradorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018732" start="14428" end="14437" title="bytownite" label="bytownite"/>
<link wikidata="Q541128" start="14552" end="14562" title="wolframite" label="wolframite"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="14573" end="14582" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q417421" start="14588" end="14597" title="hübnerite" label="hübnerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q417387" start="14612" end="14621" title="ferberite" label="ferberite"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="16735" end="16751" title="Atomic orbital" label="orbital subshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="16915" end="16921" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="16967" end="16974" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="16979" end="16985" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036449" start="17004" end="17024" title="perovskite structure" label="perovskite structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q193450" start="17111" end="17118" title="kyanite" label="kyanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192637" start="17120" end="17130" title="andalusite" label="andalusite"/>
<link wikidata="Q119632" start="17136" end="17147" title="sillimanite" label="sillimanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="17852" end="17876" title="hydrothermal circulation" label="hydrothermal circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="18102" end="18112" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q222814" start="18116" end="18128" title="metasomatism" label="metasomatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q222814" start="18130" end="18153" title="hydrothermal alteration" label="hydrothermal alteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="18227" end="18235" title="tectonic" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="18239" end="18247" title="magmatic" label="magmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="18301" end="18314" title="thermodynamic" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164398" start="18612" end="18622" title="rock cycle" label="rock cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21813710" start="18696" end="18706" title="Orthoclase" label="Orthoclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="18758" end="18765" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q354025" start="18769" end="18777" title="plutonic" label="plutonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="18778" end="18790" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="18838" end="18847" title="kaolinite" label="kaolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457481" start="18891" end="18903" title="silicic acid" label="silicic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="19031" end="19037" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q409470" start="19046" end="19058" title="pyrophyllite" label="pyrophyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193450" start="19188" end="19195" title="kyanite" label="kyanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="19442" end="19452" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q410893" start="19462" end="19471" title="tridymite" label="tridymite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422075" start="19476" end="19488" title="cristobalite" label="cristobalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424335" start="19515" end="19522" title="coesite" label="coesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755249" start="19821" end="19828" title="Optical mineralogy" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="19830" end="19838" title="Analytical chemistry" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="19842" end="19859" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="20137" end="20149" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192275" start="20151" end="20166" title="phosphorescence" label="phosphorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="20168" end="20177" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="20179" end="20192" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="20262" end="20278" title="piezoelectricity" label="piezoelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="20304" end="20308" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="20347" end="20364" title="Crystal structure" label="Crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="20531" end="20534" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="20773" end="20778" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527223" start="20865" end="20875" title="crystallographic restriction theorem" label="restricted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066315" start="20879" end="20894" title="Crystallographic point group" label="32 point groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="21577" end="21585" title="trigonal" label="trigonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="21868" end="21874" title="halite" label="halite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="21883" end="21889" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q426635" start="21901" end="21910" title="periclase" label="periclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="22005" end="22018" title="stoichiometry" label="stoichiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="22078" end="22088" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="22190" end="22196" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409087" start="22201" end="22210" title="marcasite" label="marcasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193450" start="22580" end="22587" title="kyanite" label="kyanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192637" start="22589" end="22599" title="andalusite" label="andalusite"/>
<link wikidata="Q119632" start="22605" end="22616" title="sillimanite" label="sillimanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q420620" start="23066" end="23076" title="stishovite" label="stishovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="23577" end="23584" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="23589" end="23597" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="24261" end="24280" title="van der Waals force" label="van der Waals force"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="24350" end="24358" title="Crystal twinning" label="Twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q413380" start="25079" end="25089" title="staurolite" label="staurolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q125958737" start="25347" end="25355" title="fiveling" label="fiveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674027" start="25808" end="25816" title="acicular (crystal habit)" label="acicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q415318" start="25861" end="25870" title="natrolite" label="natrolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q583353" start="25910" end="25923" title="native copper" label="native copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="25927" end="25938" title="Gold" label="native gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="25946" end="25965" title="Matrix (geology)" label="groundmass (matrix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="25995" end="26001" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245668" start="26003" end="26012" title="prism (geology)" label="prismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q120547" start="26053" end="26060" title="Spodumene" label="kunzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421831" start="26064" end="26072" title="stibnite" label="stibnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924035" start="26074" end="26084" title="botryoidal" label="botryoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="26118" end="26128" title="chalcedony" label="chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q423018" start="26180" end="26192" title="wollastonite" label="wollastonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="26318" end="26327" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409781" start="26381" end="26391" title="carnallite" label="carnallite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100785" start="26908" end="26915" title="Ordinal data" label="ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="27091" end="27105" title="phyllosilicate" label="phyllosilicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q849699" start="27510" end="27514" title="Miller index" label="[001"/>
<link wikidata="Q849699" start="27534" end="27538" title="Miller index" label="[100"/>
<link wikidata="Q55714258" start="27571" end="27597" title="Shore durometer" label="Shore&amp;#x27;s hardness test"/>
<link wikidata="Q502723" start="27703" end="27717" title="Rockwell scale" label="Rockwell scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="27723" end="27744" title="Vickers hardness test" label="Vickers hardness test"/>
<link wikidata="Q714750" start="27750" end="27763" title="Brinell scale" label="Brinell scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="28146" end="28152" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="28218" end="28225" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="28315" end="28319" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q261461" start="28324" end="28335" title="apophyllite" label="apophyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q118781" start="28446" end="28456" title="chrysotile" label="chrysotile"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="28463" end="28474" title="diaphaneity" label="diaphaneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="28660" end="28669" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422173" start="28846" end="28853" title="Jadeite" label="Jadeite"/>
<link wikidata="Q138979" start="28858" end="28866" title="nephrite" label="nephrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="28885" end="28889" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q542715" start="29114" end="29126" title="thin section" label="thin section"/>
<link wikidata="Q289600" start="29131" end="29142" title="petrography" label="petrography"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="29259" end="29267" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="29437" end="29462" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="29513" end="29526" title="incandescence" label="incandescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="29863" end="29872" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108212" start="29885" end="29892" title="azurite" label="azurite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="30035" end="30039" title="ruby" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="30044" end="30052" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="30078" end="30086" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="30146" end="30158" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q430062" start="30192" end="30203" title="labradorite" label="labradorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108694" start="30208" end="30215" title="bornite" label="bornite"/>
<link wikidata="Q747746" start="30342" end="30350" title="Asterism (gemmology)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068275" start="30352" end="30362" title="chatoyancy" label="chatoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="30364" end="30375" title="iridescence" label="iridescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q112895" start="30390" end="30401" title="pleochroism" label="pleochroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171058" start="30489" end="30493" title="opal" label="opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="31673" end="31681" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q111044" start="31792" end="31804" title="chalcopyrite" label="chalcopyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="33358" end="33362" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q409793" start="33661" end="33674" title="rhodochrosite" label="rhodochrosite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="33764" end="33772" title="fluorite" label="fluorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="33790" end="33800" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q583353" start="35696" end="35709" title="native copper" label="native copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="36037" end="36053" title="Specific gravity" label="Specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="36080" end="36087" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="37140" end="37148" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="37194" end="37200" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q310948" start="37361" end="37373" title="native metal" label="native metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q430026" start="37389" end="37397" title="kamacite" label="kamacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q827989" start="37430" end="37444" title="iron meteorite" label="iron meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="37689" end="37693" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="37705" end="37708" title="hydrochloric acid" label="HCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="37748" end="37757" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797526" start="37873" end="37883" title="effervesce" label="effervesce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="37896" end="37910" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="38082" end="38090" title="dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="38121" end="38130" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="38135" end="38143" title="dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181332" start="38314" end="38321" title="Zeolite" label="Zeolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q308976" start="38466" end="38476" title="silica gel" label="silica gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="38479" end="38488" title="Magnetism" label="Magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="38562" end="38571" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421944" start="38663" end="38673" title="pyrrhotite" label="pyrrhotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190729" start="38678" end="38686" title="ilmenite" label="ilmenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="38757" end="38770" title="piezoelectric" label="piezoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="38950" end="38956" title="Halite" label="Halite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409091" start="39014" end="39021" title="sylvite" label="sylvite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="39153" end="39166" title="Radioactivity" label="Radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="39303" end="39310" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="39314" end="39323" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q407345" start="39325" end="39333" title="autunite" label="autunite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409100" start="39339" end="39348" title="carnotite" label="carnotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178928" start="39388" end="39394" title="zircon" label="zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="39490" end="39499" title="amorphous" label="amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q903926" start="39501" end="39515" title="Metamictisation" label="metamict state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387546" start="39585" end="39600" title="pleochroic halo" label="pleochroic halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q542715" start="39655" end="39667" title="thin section" label="thin-section"/>
<link wikidata="Q289600" start="39668" end="39679" title="petrography" label="petrography"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="39741" end="39744" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="39746" end="39758" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="39902" end="39907" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="39912" end="39921" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="39986" end="40003" title="Georgius Agricola" label="Georgius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="40325" end="40338" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="40370" end="40385" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="40653" end="40667" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="40748" end="40757" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="40828" end="40843" title="binomial name" label="binomial naming"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="41306" end="41313" title="Chemical formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="41336" end="41357" title="Crystal structure" label="crystalline structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="41439" end="41449" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="41569" end="41576" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376204" start="41626" end="41636" title="endmembers" label="endmembers"/>
<link wikidata="Q422977" start="41637" end="41647" title="phlogopite" label="phlogopite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508426" start="41649" end="41663" title="siderophyllite" label="siderophyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618110" start="41665" end="41671" title="annite" label="annite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41677" end="41686" title="eastonite" label="eastonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="41823" end="41831" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="41925" end="41931" title="ionic radius" label="bigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q648961" start="42012" end="42024" title="orthorhombic" label="orthorhombic"/>
<link wikidata="Q624543" start="42028" end="42038" title="monoclinic" label="monoclinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="42214" end="42222" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q315366" start="42427" end="42444" title="James Dwight Dana" label="James Dwight Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q934210" start="42576" end="42595" title="Dana classification" label="Dana classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q928461" start="42886" end="42907" title="Strunz classification" label="Strunz classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q65551" start="42939" end="42955" title="Karl Hugo Strunz" label="Karl Hugo Strunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="43761" end="43767" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="43769" end="43778" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="43784" end="43792" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037840" start="43910" end="43933" title="Close-packing of equal spheres" label="Close-packed structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="44251" end="44258" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="44262" end="44271" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76388571" start="44275" end="44283" title="arsenate" label="arsenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q426228" start="44291" end="44299" title="vanadate" label="vanadate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="44477" end="44486" title="Silicate minerals" label="silicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="44976" end="44984" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="44995" end="45002" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="45005" end="45013" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="45016" end="45025" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="45028" end="45034" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="45041" end="45045" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036449" start="45331" end="45351" title="perovskite structure" label="perovskite structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q420620" start="45376" end="45386" title="stishovite" label="stishovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="45475" end="45481" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="47490" end="47498" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006122" start="47501" end="47513" title="feldspathoid" label="feldspathoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181332" start="47524" end="47531" title="zeolite" label="zeolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="47674" end="47680" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q410893" start="47834" end="47843" title="tridymite" label="tridymite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422075" start="47848" end="47860" title="cristobalite" label="cristobalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424335" start="47897" end="47904" title="coesite" label="coesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q420620" start="47930" end="47940" title="stishovite" label="stishovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="48114" end="48120" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q429534" start="48944" end="48951" title="celsian" label="celsian"/>
<link wikidata="Q806068" start="48956" end="48965" title="banalsite" label="banalsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182264" start="49068" end="49074" title="albite" label="albite"/>
<link wikidata="Q244994" start="49162" end="49171" title="anorthite" label="anorthite"/>
<link wikidata="Q407339" start="49994" end="50003" title="nepheline" label="nepheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="50642" end="50646" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="50648" end="50656" title="Chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="50666" end="50675" title="kaolinite" label="kaolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q335249" start="50676" end="50686" title="Serpentine group" label="serpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="51280" end="51300" title="van der Waals forces" label="van der Waals forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="51302" end="51315" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="51328" end="51338" title="ionic bond" label="ionic bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="52205" end="52214" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="52224" end="52231" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q419250" start="52454" end="52461" title="brucite" label="brucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="53471" end="53479" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="53521" end="53530" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803674" start="54827" end="54838" title="asbestiform" label="asbestiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q664174" start="55157" end="55167" title="asbestosis" label="asbestosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q413322" start="55189" end="55202" title="anthophyllite" label="anthophyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q423051" start="55204" end="55213" title="tremolite" label="tremolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104692" start="55215" end="55225" title="actinolite" label="actinolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q420442" start="55227" end="55236" title="grunerite" label="grunerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q256865" start="55242" end="55252" title="riebeckite" label="riebeckite"/>
<link wikidata="Q118781" start="55289" end="55299" title="chrysotile" label="chrysotile"/>
<link wikidata="Q179911" start="55516" end="55526" title="tourmaline" label="tourmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="55537" end="55542" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q410336" start="56355" end="56365" title="Cordierite" label="Cordierite"/>
<link wikidata="Q272844" start="56722" end="56729" title="epidote" label="epidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q660019" start="56833" end="56844" title="pelite" label="metapelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q898412" start="57122" end="57130" title="fugacity" label="fugacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q424354" start="57228" end="57237" title="lawsonite" label="lawsonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048428" start="57276" end="57286" title="blueschist" label="blueschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q413399" start="57360" end="57371" title="vesuvianite" label="vesuvianite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424367" start="58484" end="58493" title="tephroite" label="tephroite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421814" start="58773" end="58779" title="pyrope" label="pyrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q273663" start="58797" end="58806" title="almandine" label="almandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20653385" start="58828" end="58839" title="spessartine" label="spessartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409733" start="58908" end="58917" title="uvarovite" label="uvarovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q220373" start="58935" end="58944" title="grossular" label="grossular"/>
<link wikidata="Q280913" start="58965" end="58974" title="andradite" label="andradite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178928" start="59114" end="59120" title="zircon" label="zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q413380" start="59122" end="59132" title="staurolite" label="staurolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134985" start="59138" end="59143" title="topaz" label="topaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179911" start="59555" end="59565" title="tourmaline" label="tourmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q723127" start="59643" end="59658" title="native element minerals" label="Native elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q310948" start="59747" end="59759" title="native metal" label="native metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q430026" start="60367" end="60375" title="kamacite" label="kamacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q420547" start="60380" end="60387" title="taenite" label="taenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248028" start="60535" end="60546" title="telluric iron" label="native iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="60936" end="60952" title="sulfide minerals" label="sulfide minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q104567" start="61019" end="61028" title="chalcogen" label="chalcogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106675" start="61032" end="61041" title="pnictogen" label="pnictogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="61580" end="61595" title="sulfide mineral" label="sulfide mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="61633" end="61636" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="61656" end="61666" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="61690" end="61696" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="61720" end="61728" title="cinnabar" label="cinnabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q382994" start="61759" end="61770" title="molybdenite" label="molybdenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="61980" end="61993" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416949" start="62032" end="62042" title="Sulfosalt mineral" label="sulfosalts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="62116" end="62124" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="62126" end="62133" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="62138" end="62145" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q945532" start="62243" end="62257" title="Oxide minerals" label="Oxide minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q426635" start="62501" end="62510" title="periclase" label="periclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q407335" start="62588" end="62595" title="cuprite" label="cuprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="62690" end="62698" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="62712" end="62720" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="62830" end="62838" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="62863" end="62874" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="62889" end="62892" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q413293" start="62899" end="62909" title="pyrolusite" label="pyrolusite"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="62924" end="62933" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="62996" end="63003" title="Bauxite" label="Bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411891" start="63092" end="63100" title="diaspore" label="diaspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q408516" start="63102" end="63110" title="gibbsite" label="gibbsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409757" start="63116" end="63123" title="bohmite" label="bohmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q51875497" start="63325" end="63332" title="spinel group" label="spinels"/>
<link wikidata="Q191310" start="63399" end="63405" title="spinel" label="spinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107172" start="63417" end="63425" title="chromite" label="chromite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="63441" end="63450" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="63558" end="63573" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q729283" start="63671" end="63686" title="halide minerals" label="halide minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="63712" end="63719" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q409091" start="63908" end="63915" title="sylvite" label="sylvite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="63927" end="63935" title="fluorite" label="fluorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="63980" end="63989" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193502" start="64052" end="64060" title="Cryolite" label="Cryolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="64124" end="64131" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q950978" start="64181" end="64189" title="Ivittuut" label="Ivittuut"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="64191" end="64200" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073138" start="64312" end="64330" title="carbonate minerals" label="carbonate minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="64705" end="64714" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="64898" end="64903" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783732" start="65546" end="65555" title="aragonite sea" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018792" start="65559" end="65570" title="calcite sea" label="calcite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="65621" end="65629" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="Dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q764802" start="66165" end="66180" title="sulfate mineral" label="sulfate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="66328" end="66337" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="66623" end="66629" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q509713" start="66804" end="66816" title="Desert rose (crystal)" label="desert roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q105439" start="67061" end="67070" title="anhydrite" label="anhydrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q184196" start="67244" end="67250" title="barite" label="barite"/>
<link wikidata="Q407221" start="67260" end="67269" title="Celestine (mineral)" label="celestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156526" start="67283" end="67292" title="anglesite" label="anglesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092395" start="67426" end="67444" title="phosphate minerals" label="phosphate minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="67634" end="67641" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422011" start="67897" end="67905" title="monazite" label="monazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="67996" end="68014" title="rare-earth element" label="rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456239" start="68276" end="68298" title="monazite geochronology" label="monazite geochronology"/>
<link wikidata="" start="68434" end="68450" title="Strunz classification#Class: organic compounds" label="organic minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="68481" end="68495" title="Organic compound" label="organic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q416303" start="68551" end="68561" title="whewellite" label="whewellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="68580" end="68587" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q928461" start="69062" end="69083" title="Strunz classification" label="Strunz classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="69155" end="69167" title="hydrocarbons" label="hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="69793" end="69804" title="Biomineralization" label="biominerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="69838" end="69859" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q601319" start="69932" end="69944" title="life on Mars" label="life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335792" start="69959" end="69977" title="Organic compounds (minerals)" label="organic components"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="69979" end="69991" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915356" start="70095" end="70101" title="Biotic material" label="biotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="70165" end="70186" title="Curiosity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Curiosity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="70191" end="70214" title="Opportunity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q389459" start="70215" end="70221" title="Mars rover" label="rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="70285" end="70294" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="70304" end="70313" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q747472" start="70317" end="70327" title="chemotroph" label="chemotroph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70337" end="70358" title="Lithotroph#Chemolithotrophs" label="chemolithoautotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="70359" end="70372" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469154" start="70411" end="70441" title="Lacustrine plain" label="fluvio-lacustrine environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="70443" end="70448" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="70469" end="70474" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="70479" end="70483" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="70505" end="70514" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="70543" end="70555" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="70557" end="70566" title="taphonomy" label="taphonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="70579" end="70586" title="fossils" label="fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="70593" end="70607" title="organic carbon" label="organic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="70622" end="70626" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="70644" end="70648" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345349" start="71140" end="71152" title="Robert Hazen" label="Robert Hazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="71154" end="71158" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19054" wikidata="Q40861" url="?curid=19054" title="Marble">
<text>Marble is a metamorphic rock consisting of carbonate minerals (most commonly calcite (CaCO3) or dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) that have recrystallized under the influence of heat and pressure. It has a crystalline texture, and is typically not foliated (layered), although there are exceptions. 

In geology, the term &quot;marble&quot; refers to metamorphosed limestone, but its use in stonemasonry more broadly encompasses unmetamorphosed limestone. Marble is commonly used for sculpture and as a building material.

==Etymology==

The word &quot;marble&quot; derives from the Ancient Greek (), from (), &quot;crystalline rock, shining stone&quot;, perhaps from the verb (), &quot;to flash, sparkle, gleam&quot;; R. S. P. Beekes has suggested that a &quot;Pre-Greek origin is probable&quot;.

This stem is also the ancestor of the English word &quot;marmoreal&quot;, meaning &quot;marble-like.&quot; While the English term &quot;marble&quot; resembles the French , most other European languages (with words like &quot;marmoreal&quot;) more closely resemble the original Ancient Greek.

==Geology==

Marble is a rock resulting from metamorphism of sedimentary carbonate rocks, most commonly limestone or dolomite. Metamorphism causes variable re-crystallization of the original carbonate mineral grains. The resulting marble rock is typically composed of an interlocking mosaic of carbonate crystals. Primary sedimentary textures and structures of the original carbonate rock (protolith) have typically been modified or destroyed.

Pure white marble is the result of metamorphism of a very pure (silicate-poor) limestone or dolomite protolith. The characteristic swirls and veins of many colored marble varieties, sometimes called striations, are usually due to various mineral impurities such as clay, silt, sand, iron oxides, or chert which were originally present as grains or layers in the limestone. Green coloration is often due to serpentine resulting from originally magnesium-rich limestone or dolomite with silica impurities. These various impurities have been mobilized and recrystallized by the intense pressure and heat of the metamorphism.

== Chemistry ==

=== Degradation by acids ===
Acids react with the calcium carbonate in marble, producing carbonic acid (which decomposes quickly to CO2 and H2O) and other soluble salts :
:CaCO3(s) + 2H+(aq) → Ca2+(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O (l)

Outdoor marble statues, gravestones, or other marble structures are damaged by acid rain whether by carbonation, sulfation or the formation of &quot;black-crust&quot; (accumulation of calcium sulphate, nitrates and carbon particles). Vinegar and other acidic solutions should be avoided in the cleaning of marble products.

=== Crystallization ===
Crystallization refers to a method of imparting a glossy, more durable finish on to a marble floor (CaCO3). It involves polishing the surface with an acidic solution and a steel wool pad on a flooring machine. The chemical reaction below shows a typical process using magnesium fluorosilicate (MgSiF6) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) taking place.

:CaCO3(s) + MgSiF6(l) + 2HCl (l) → MgCl2(s) + CaSiF6(s) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)

The resulting calcium hexafluorosilicate (CaSiF6) is bonded to the surface of the marble. This is harder, more glossy and stain resistant compared to the original surface.

The other often used method of finishing marble is to polish with oxalic acid (H2C2O4), an organic acid. The resulting reaction is as follows:

:CaCO3(s) + H2C2O4(l) → CaC2O4(s) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)

In this case the calcium oxalate (CaC2O4) formed in the reaction is washed away with the slurry, leaving a surface that has not been chemically changed.

=== Microbial degradation ===
The haloalkaliphilic methylotrophic bacterium &quot;Methylophaga murata&quot; was isolated from deteriorating marble in the Kremlin. Bacterial and fungal degradation was detected in four samples of marble from Milan Cathedral; black &quot;Cladosporium&quot; attacked dried acrylic resin using melanin.

==Types and features==

=== Examples of notable marble varieties and locations ===
=== Features ===
Marble is a rock composed of calcium and magnesium carbonate, mostly white and pink. Common marble varieties are granular limestone or dolomite. The hardness of marble is very high, because the internal structure of the rock is very uniform after long-term natural aging, and the internal stress disappears, so the marble will not be deformed due to temperature, and has strong wear resistance. It is a popular building material.

The following table is a summary of the features of marble.
== Uses ==

===Sculpture===
White marble has been prized for its use in sculptures since classical times. This preference has to do with its softness, which made it easier to carve, relative isotropy and homogeneity, and a relative resistance to shattering. Also, the low index of refraction of calcite allows light to penetrate 12.7 to 38 millimeters into the stone before being scattered out, resulting in the characteristic waxy look which brings a lifelike luster to marble sculptures of any kind, which is why many sculptors preferred and still prefer marble for sculpting the human form.

===Construction===
Construction marble is a stone which is composed of calcite, dolomite or serpentine that is capable of taking a polish. More generally in construction, specifically the dimension stone trade, the term &quot;marble&quot; is used for any crystalline calcitic rock (and some non-calcitic rocks) useful as building stone. For example, Tennessee marble is really a dense granular fossiliferous gray to pink to maroon Ordovician limestone, that geologists call the Holston Formation.

Ashgabat, the capital city of Turkmenistan, was recorded in the 2013 &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot; as having the world&#x27;s highest concentration of white marble buildings.

== Production ==

The extraction of marble is performed by quarrying. Blocks are favoured for most purposes, and can be created through various techniques, including drilling and blasting, water jet and wedge methods. Limestones are often commercially and historically referred to as marble, which differs from the geological definition.

=== Locations ===
Marble production was dominated by 4 countries that accounted for almost half of world production of marble and decorative stone. China and Italy were the world leaders, each representing 34% and 19% of world production respectively, followed by India and Spain produced 16% and 13% respectively.

In 2018 Turkey was the world leader in marble export, with 42% share in global marble trade, followed by Italy with 18% and Greece with 10%. The largest importer of marble in 2018 was China with a 64% market share, followed by India with 11% and Italy with 5%.

==== Ancient times ====
White marbles throughout the Mediterranean basin were widely utilized during the Roman period. Extraction centers were unevenly distributed across the Italian Peninsula, mainland Greece, the Aegean Islands, Asia Minor, and smaller hubs like those in the Iberian Peninsula. The need for extensive trade arose due to this imbalance, leading to the widespread exchange of marble objects, including building elements, sculptures, and sarcophagi. There was a significant increase in the distribution of white marble from the late 1st century BC to the end of the 2nd century AD. A gradual decline in distribution started in the third century AD.

==== United States ====
According to the United States Geological Survey, U.S. domestic marble production in 2006 was 46,400 tons valued at about $18.1 million, compared to 72,300 tons valued at $18.9 million in 2005. Crushed marble production (for aggregate and industrial uses) in 2006 was 11.8 million tons valued at $116 million, of which 6.5 million tons was finely ground calcium carbonate and the rest was construction aggregate. For comparison, 2005 crushed marble production was 7.76 million tons valued at $58.7 million, of which 4.8 million tons was finely ground calcium carbonate and the rest was construction aggregate. U.S. dimension marble demand is about 1.3 million tons. The DSAN World Demand for (finished) Marble Index has shown a growth of 12% annually for the 2000–2006 period, compared to 10.5% annually for the 2000–2005 period. The largest dimension marble application is tile.

==== Palestine ====
The stone and marble industry is one of the largest industries in Palestine, contributing 20-25% of its total industrial revenues, generating USD $400–$450 million in revenue annually. The industry employs 15,000–20,000 workers across the West Bank across 1200–1700 facilities, and amounts to 4.5% of the nation&#x27;s GDP. The vast majority of the industry&#x27;s exports are to Israel.

Marble in the geologic sense does not naturally outcrop in Palestine, and the vast majority of commercially labeled marble produced in Palestine produced would be geologically considered limestone.

===Occupational safety===

Particulate air pollution exposure has been found to be elevated in the marble production industry. Exposure to the dust produced by cutting marble could impair lung function or cause lung disease in workers, such as silicosis. Skin and eye problems are also a potential hazard. Mitigations such as dust filters, or dust suppression are suggested, but more research needs to be carried out on the efficacy of safety measures.

In the United States, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for marble exposure in the workplace as 15 mg/m3 total exposure and 5 mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 10 mg/m3 total exposure and 5 mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.

Dust, debris and temperature fluctuations from working marble can endanger the eye health of employees. For the staff involved in marble processing, it is necessary to provide eye protection equipment, and it is recommended to improve the education of all workers on occupational health risks and strengthen preventive measures.

==Cultural associations==

As the favorite medium for Greek and Roman sculptors and architects (see classical sculpture), marble has become a cultural symbol of tradition and refined taste. Its extremely varied and colorful patterns make it a favorite decorative material.

Places named after the stone include Marblehead, Massachusetts; Marblehead, Ohio; Marble Arch, London; the Sea of Marmara; India&#x27;s Marble Rocks; and the towns of Marble, Minnesota; Marble, Colorado; Marble Falls, Texas, and Marble Hill, Manhattan, New York. The Elgin Marbles are marble sculptures from the Parthenon in Athens that are on display in the British Museum. 

== Impact on the environment ==

Total world quarrying production in 2019 was approximately 316 million tonnes; however, quarrying waste accounted for 53% of this total production. In the process of marble mining and processing, around half of the excavated material will be waste, this is often then used as chips for flooring or wall finish, and uses for which high-calcium limestone is suitable.

== Sustainability ==
Marble sludge waste can be used as a mineral filler in water-based paints. Using ground calcium carbonate as a filler in paint production can improve the brightness, hiding power and application performance of paint, and can also replace expensive pigments such as titanium dioxide. Recycling of marble waste leads to a large amount of waste not being land-filled, reducing environmental pollution, thereby realizing the sustainability of marble. Converting waste to generate economic income and restore degraded soil can improve the environment.

== Cleaning and preservation ==
The nature of marble is soft and porous, so it is easily stained by colored liquids and scratches easily. Maintenance and cleaning is particularly important.

=== Preservation ===

* Prevent sand and dust from contacting the marble surface.
* Avoid corroding marble surfaces with alcohol, color and acidic liquids.

=== Cleaning ===

* As a floor material, marble is easy to scratch. You can first use a vacuum cleaner to suck away the grit and dust on the marble floor, and then use a steam cleaner to remove other dirt.
* A mild, pH-neutral, non-abrasive soap should be used for cleaning marble surfaces. Wipe with a soft foam cotton or rag.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Grand Antique marble
* Marble sculpture
* Marmorino
* Naxian marble
* Carrara marble 
* Paper marbling
* Pietra dura, inlaying with marble and other stones
* Ruin marble, marble that contains light and dark patterns, giving the impression of a ruined cityscape
* Scagliola, imitating marble with plasterwork
* Verd antique, sometimes (erroneously) called &quot;serpentine marble&quot;, and often confused with Connemara marble

==References==
==External links==
* Dimension Stone Statistics and Information – United States Geological Survey minerals information for dimension stone
* USGS 2005 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Crushed 
* USGS 2005 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Dimension 
* USGS 2006 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Crushed 
* USGS 2006 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Dimension 
* Marble Institute of America </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="0" end="6" title="Marble" label="Marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="12" end="28" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="77" end="84" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="96" end="104" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="194" end="205" title="crystalline" label="crystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q525802" start="236" end="244" title="Foliation (geology)" label="foliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292632" start="246" end="253" title="Layered intrusion" label="layered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="292" end="299" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="353" end="362" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="379" end="391" title="stonemasonry" label="stonemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q837249" start="472" end="481" title="Marble sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="491" end="508" title="building material" label="building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="571" end="584" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508757" start="707" end="722" title="Robert S. P. Beekes" label="R. S. P. Beekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q965052" start="750" end="759" title="Pre-Greek" label="Pre-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="792" end="796" title="Stem (linguistics)" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="825" end="832" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="950" end="956" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="970" end="988" title="European languages" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="1125" end="1137" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="1141" end="1152" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="1153" end="1167" title="carbonate rock" label="carbonate rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1184" end="1193" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="1197" end="1205" title="dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="1384" end="1391" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977029" start="1470" end="1479" title="protolith" label="protolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="1589" end="1597" title="Silicate minerals" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q952465" start="1667" end="1671" title="Vein (geology)" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623560" start="1724" end="1734" title="Striation (geology)" label="striations"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="1790" end="1794" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="1796" end="1800" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1802" end="1806" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="1808" end="1818" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="1824" end="1829" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q335249" start="1931" end="1941" title="Serpentine group" label="serpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="2010" end="2016" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="2194" end="2198" title="Acid" label="Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104334" start="2254" end="2267" title="carbonic acid" label="carbonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q203443" start="2411" end="2422" title="headstone" label="gravestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="2466" end="2475" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="2487" end="2498" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q994559" start="2500" end="2509" title="sulfation" label="sulfation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="3041" end="3058" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302177" start="3761" end="3780" title="Methylophaga murata" label="Methylophaga murata"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="3833" end="3840" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="3919" end="3934" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q134055" start="3948" end="3960" title="Cladosporium" label="Cladosporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q342945" start="3982" end="3995" title="acrylic resin" label="acrylic resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="4141" end="4148" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q407931" start="4153" end="4172" title="magnesium carbonate" label="magnesium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="4247" end="4255" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="4261" end="4269" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="4392" end="4407" title="Stress (mechanics)" label="internal stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q837249" start="4675" end="4685" title="marble sculpture" label="sculptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="4692" end="4707" title="Classical antiquity" label="classical times"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="4794" end="4802" title="isotropy" label="isotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="4875" end="4894" title="Refractive index" label="index of refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="5278" end="5286" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="5355" end="5367" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q121649" start="5386" end="5401" title="dimension stone" label="dimension stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700258" start="5548" end="5564" title="Tennessee marble" label="Tennessee marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="5629" end="5639" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="5656" end="5665" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884464" start="5676" end="5693" title="Holston Formation" label="Holston Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="5696" end="5704" title="Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="5726" end="5738" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="5771" end="5795" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="5938" end="5944" title="quarry" label="quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6366" end="6371" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="6376" end="6381" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6482" end="6487" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6492" end="6497" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="6542" end="6548" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="6639" end="6644" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="6658" end="6664" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6718" end="6723" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6761" end="6766" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="6849" end="6868" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6901" end="6906" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="6971" end="6988" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q375433" start="6990" end="7005" title="mainland Greece" label="mainland Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="7011" end="7025" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7027" end="7037" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="7074" end="7091" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="7250" end="7260" title="Sarcophagus" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="7503" end="7534" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="7840" end="7857" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="7875" end="7897" title="construction aggregate" label="construction aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q653318" start="9219" end="9228" title="silicosis" label="silicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="9455" end="9500" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="9533" end="9559" title="permissible exposure limit" label="permissible exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="9686" end="9739" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="9758" end="9784" title="recommended exposure limit" label="recommended exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="9882" end="9888" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422725" start="10052" end="10066" title="eye protection" label="eye protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="10143" end="10162" title="Occupational safety and health" label="occupational health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476517" start="10306" end="10325" title="classical sculpture" label="classical sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27416" start="10517" end="10542" title="Marblehead, Massachusetts" label="Marblehead, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672436" start="10544" end="10560" title="Marblehead, Ohio" label="Marblehead, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q845529" start="10562" end="10573" title="Marble Arch" label="Marble Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="10587" end="10601" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722748" start="10616" end="10628" title="Marble Rocks" label="Marble Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177962" start="10647" end="10664" title="Marble, Minnesota" label="Marble, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q662804" start="10666" end="10682" title="Marble, Colorado" label="Marble, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q167183" start="10684" end="10703" title="Marble Falls, Texas" label="Marble Falls, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373472" start="10709" end="10741" title="Marble Hill, Manhattan, New York" label="Marble Hill, Manhattan, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q606662" start="10747" end="10760" title="Elgin Marbles" label="Elgin Marbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="10792" end="10801" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="10839" end="10853" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="10902" end="10908" title="quarry" label="quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="11366" end="11383" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182040" start="11444" end="11456" title="hiding power" label="hiding power"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="11526" end="11533" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="11543" end="11559" title="titanium dioxide" label="titanium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536632" start="12530" end="12550" title="Grand Antique marble" label="Grand Antique marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q837249" start="12553" end="12569" title="Marble sculpture" label="Marble sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772175" start="12572" end="12581" title="Marmorino" label="Marmorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972471" start="12584" end="12597" title="Naxian marble" label="Naxian marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q40088" start="12600" end="12614" title="Carrara marble" label="Carrara marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q614541" start="12618" end="12632" title="Paper marbling" label="Paper marbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044853" start="12635" end="12646" title="Pietra dura" label="Pietra dura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373742" start="12688" end="12699" title="Ruin marble" label="Ruin marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415022" start="12793" end="12802" title="Scagliola" label="Scagliola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223325" start="12840" end="12852" title="Verd antique" label="Verd antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375410" start="12940" end="12956" title="Connemara marble" label="Connemara marble"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19055" wikidata="Q1214005" url="?curid=19055" title="Manufacturing Consent (film)">
<text>Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media is a 1992 documentary film that explores the political life and ideas of linguist, intellectual, and political activist Noam Chomsky. Canadian filmmakers Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick expand the analysis of capitalism and mass media presented in &quot;Manufacturing Consent&quot;, a 1988 book Chomsky wrote with Edward S. Herman.

==Overview==
The film presents and illustrates Chomsky and Herman&#x27;s propaganda model thesis that corporate media, as profit-driven institutions, tend to serve and further the agendas and interests of dominant, elite groups in the society. A centerpiece of the film is a long examination of the history of &quot;The New York Times&quot;&#x27; coverage of the Indonesian occupation of East Timor, which Chomsky says exemplifies the media&#x27;s unwillingness to criticize an ally of the elite.

Until the release of &quot;The Corporation&quot; (2003), made by Mark Achbar, Jennifer Abbott and Joel Bakan, it was the most successful feature documentary in Canadian history playing theatrically in over 300 cities around the world. It appeared in more than 50 international film festivals where it received 22 awards. It was broadcast on television in over 30 markets and translated into a dozen languages.

Chomsky confessed in an on-stage interview at the 2013 New York City Documentary festival that he has never actually seen the documentary because &quot;I can&#x27;t stand watching myself...but I&#x27;m told it was a pretty impressive film.&quot; In a published conversation with Achbar and several activists, he stated that &quot;the positive impact of it has been astonishing to me&quot; but people mistakenly get the impression that he is the leader of a movement that they should join. He also criticizes &quot;The New York Times&quot; review of the film, which mistakes his message for being a call for voter organizing rather than for engaging in media critique and political action.

==Companion book==

Mark Achbar edited a companion book of the same name. It features a transcript of the film annotated with excerpts from referenced and relevant materials as well as several comments from Noam Chomsky interspersed throughout. Eighteen &quot;Philosopher All-Stars&quot; baseball cards (as seen in the film) are also included. On the back of each card is a short summary of the person, titles of their major works, and a series of quotations attributed to the individual. Chomsky is featured as a card in the set, as are René Descartes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Voltaire, Mary Wollstonecraft, Wilhelm von Humboldt, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Sojourner Truth, Karl Marx, Sitting Bull, Rosa Luxemburg, Peter Kropotkin, Emma Goldman, Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King Jr., Bertrand Russell, and Michel Foucault. The book made &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;″s national bestseller list in Canada.

The first half of the book, hyperlinked to the relevant portions of the film&#x27;s audio, is available online from &quot;Z Magazine&quot;. The entire book is available as a PDF document on the Region 2 DVD of the film.

==See also==

* Concentration of media ownership
* Propaganda model
* List of films dealing with anarchism

==References==
==External links==
* 
* NFB Web page
* The Herman-Chomsky Propaganda Model Twenty Years On &quot;Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture&quot; 6(2), 2009

===Multimedia===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="60" end="76" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="123" end="131" title="Linguistics" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="133" end="145" title="intellectual" label="intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="151" end="169" title="political activist" label="political activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="170" end="182" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="184" end="192" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397462" start="204" end="215" title="Mark Achbar" label="Mark Achbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177754" start="220" end="235" title="Peter Wintonick" label="Peter Wintonick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="259" end="269" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="274" end="284" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213103" start="304" end="325" title="Manufacturing Consent" label="Manufacturing Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q866780" start="364" end="380" title="Edward S. Herman" label="Edward S. Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482076" start="456" end="472" title="propaganda model" label="propaganda model"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="699" end="717" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665403" start="746" end="781" title="Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="Indonesian occupation of East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475460" start="908" end="923" title="The Corporation (2003 film)" label="The Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397462" start="946" end="957" title="Mark Achbar" label="Mark Achbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220867" start="959" end="974" title="Jennifer Abbott" label="Jennifer Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354264" start="979" end="989" title="Joel Bakan" label="Joel Bakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349859" start="1347" end="1381" title="Doc NYC" label="New York City Documentary festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397462" start="2002" end="2013" title="Mark Achbar" label="Mark Achbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="2189" end="2201" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190417" start="2270" end="2283" title="baseball card" label="baseball card"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2520" end="2534" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="2536" end="2557" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="2559" end="2567" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q101638" start="2569" end="2588" title="Mary Wollstonecraft" label="Mary Wollstonecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q77888" start="2590" end="2610" title="Wilhelm von Humboldt" label="Wilhelm von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="2612" end="2634" title="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="2636" end="2651" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="2653" end="2662" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="2664" end="2676" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="2678" end="2692" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752" start="2694" end="2709" title="Peter Kropotkin" label="Peter Kropotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="2711" end="2723" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="2725" end="2739" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="2741" end="2763" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="2765" end="2781" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="2787" end="2802" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="2824" end="2842" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q136638" start="3010" end="3020" title="Z Magazine" label="Z Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="3062" end="3065" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3082" end="3090" title="DVD region code#2" label="Region 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="3091" end="3094" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="3125" end="3157" title="Concentration of media ownership" label="Concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482076" start="3160" end="3176" title="Propaganda model" label="Propaganda model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058666" start="3179" end="3215" title="List of films dealing with anarchism" label="List of films dealing with anarchism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19058" wikidata="Q1726" url="?curid=19058" title="Munich">
<text>Munich ( ; ; ) is the capital and most populous city of Bavaria, Germany. With a population of 1,604,384 inhabitants as of 30 November 2024, it is the third-largest city by population in Germany, after Berlin and Hamburg, and thus the largest which does not constitute its own state, as well as the 11th-largest city in the European Union. The Munich metropolitan area – including suburbs and satellite towns – has 3 million inhabitants; and the city&#x27;s metropolitan region is home to about 6.2 million people and is the third largest metropolitan region by GDP in the European Union.

Straddling the banks of the river Isar north of the Alps, Munich is the seat of the Bavarian administrative region of Upper Bavaria, while being the most densely populated municipality in Germany with 4,500 people per km2. Munich is the second-largest city in the Bavarian dialect area, after the Austrian capital of Vienna.

The city was first mentioned in 1158. Catholic Munich strongly resisted the Reformation and was a political point of divergence during the resulting Thirty Years&#x27; War, but remained physically untouched despite an occupation by the Protestant Swedes. Once Bavaria was established as the Kingdom of Bavaria in 1806, Munich became a major European centre of arts, architecture, culture and science. In 1918, during the German revolution of 1918–1919, the ruling House of Wittelsbach, which had governed Bavaria since 1180, was forced to abdicate in Munich and a short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic was declared. In the 1920s, Munich became home to several political factions, among them the Nazi Party. After the Nazis&#x27; rise to power, Munich was declared their &quot;Capital of the Movement&quot;. The city was heavily bombed during World War II but has restored most of its old town and boasts nearly 30,000 buildings from before the war all over the city. Following the war, there was a great increase in population and economic power during the years of Wirtschaftswunder. The city hosted the 1972 Summer Olympics.

Today, Munich is a global centre of science, technology, finance, innovation, business, and tourism. Munich enjoys a very high standard and quality of living, reaching first in Germany and third worldwide according to the 2018 Mercer survey, and being rated the world&#x27;s most liveable city by the Monocle&#x27;s Quality of Life Survey 2018. Munich is consistently ranked as one of the most expensive cities in Germany in terms of real estate prices and rental costs. In 2023, 30.1 percent of Munich&#x27;s residents were foreigners, and another 19,4 percent were German citizens with a migration background from a foreign country.

Munich&#x27;s economy is based on high tech, automobiles, and the service sector, as well as Information technology, biotechnology, engineering, and electronics. It has one of the strongest economies of any German city and the lowest unemployment rate of all cities in Germany with more than one million inhabitants. The city houses many multinational companies, such as BMW, Siemens, Allianz SE and Munich Re. In addition, Munich is home to two research universities, and a multitude of scientific institutions. Munich&#x27;s numerous architectural and cultural attractions, sports events, exhibitions and its annual Oktoberfest, the world&#x27;s largest , attract considerable tourism.

==History==

===Etymology===
Munich was a tiny 8th-century friar settlement, which was named &quot;zu den Munichen&quot; (&quot;to the monks&quot;). The Old High German &quot;Muniche&quot; served as the basis for the modern German city name &quot;München&quot;.

===Prehistory===
The river Isar was a prehistoric trade route and in the Bronze Age Munich was among the largest raft ports in Europe. Bronze Age settlements up to four millennia old have been discovered. Evidence of Celtic settlements from the Iron Age have been discovered in areas around Ramersdorf-Perlach.

===Roman period===
The ancient Roman road Via Julia, which connected Augsburg and Salzburg, crossed over the Isar south of Munich, at the towns of Baierbrunn and Gauting. A Roman settlement north-east of Munich was excavated in the neighborhood of Denning.

===Post-Roman settlements===
Starting in the 6th century, the Baiuvarii populated the area around what is now modern Munich, such as in Johanneskirchen, Feldmoching, Bogenhausen and Pasing. The first known Christian church was built ca. 815 in Fröttmanning.

===Origin of medieval town===

The first medieval bridges across the river Isar were located in current city areas of Munich and Landshut. The Duke of Saxony and Bavaria Henry the Lion founded the town of Munich in his territory to control the salt trade, after having burned down the town of Föhring and its bridges over the Isar. Historians date this event at about 1158. The layout of Munich city, with five city gates and market place, resembled that of Höxter.

Henry built a new toll bridge, customs house and a coin market closer to his home somewhat upstream at a settlement around the area of modern old town Munich. This new toll bridge most likely crossed the Isar where the Museuminsel and the modern Ludwigsbrücke is now located.

Otto of Freising protested to his nephew, Emperor Frederick Barbarosa (d. 1190). However, on 14 June 1158, in Augsburg, the conflict was settled in favor of Duke Henry. The &quot;Augsburg Arbitration&quot; mentions the name of the location in dispute as &quot;forum apud Munichen&quot;. Although Bishop Otto had lost his bridge, the arbiters ordered Duke Henry to pay a third of his income to the Bishop in Freising as compensation.

The 14th June 1158 is considered the official founding day of the city of Munich. Archaeological excavations at Marienhof Square (near Marienplatz) in advance of the expansion of the S-Bahn (subway) in 2012 discovered shards of vessels from the 11th century, which prove again that the settlement of Munich must be older than the Augsburg Arbitration of 1158. The old St. Peter&#x27;s Church near Marienplatz is also believed to predate the founding date of the town.

In 1175, Munich received city status and fortification. In 1180, after Henry the Lion&#x27;s fall from grace with Emperor Frederick Barbarosa, including his trial and exile, Otto I Wittelsbach became Duke of Bavaria, and Munich was handed to the Bishop of Freising. In 1240, Munich was transferred to Otto II Wittelsbach and in 1255, when the Duchy of Bavaria was split in two, Munich became the ducal residence of Upper Bavaria.

Duke Louis IV, a native of Munich, was elected German king in 1314 and crowned as Holy Roman Emperor in 1328. He strengthened the city&#x27;s position by granting it the salt monopoly, thus assuring it of additional income.

On 13 February 1327, a large fire broke out in Munich that lasted two days and destroyed about a third of the town.

In 1349, the Black Death ravaged Munich and Bavaria.

The growth of Munich was supplemented by its location on top of a gravel bed, where the Isar branched into Munich City Streams, which in turn provided power for many mills and industries within Munich.

In the 15th century, Munich underwent a revival of Gothic arts: the Old Town Hall was enlarged, and Munich&#x27;s largest Gothic church – the Frauenkirche – now a cathedral, was constructed in only 20 years, starting in 1468.

===Capital of reunited Bavaria===

When Bavaria was reunited in 1506 after a brief war against the Duchy of Landshut, Munich became its capital. The arts and politics became increasingly influenced by the court. The Renaissance movement beset Munich and the Bavarian branch of the House of Wittelsbach under Duke Albrecht V who bolstered their prestige by conjuring up a lineage that reached back to classical antiquity. In 1568 Albrecht V built the Antiquarium to house the Wittelsbach collection of Greek and Roman antiquities in the Munich Residenz. Albrecht V appointed the composer Orlando di Lasso as director of the court orchestra and tempted numerous Italian musicians to work at the Munich court, establishing Munich as a hub for late Renaissance music. During the rule of Duke William V Munich began to be called the &quot;German Rome&quot; and William V began presenting Emperor Charlemagne as ancestor of the Wittelsbach dynasty.

Duke William V further cemented the Wittelsbach rule by commissioning the Jesuit Michaelskirche. He had the sermons of his Jesuit court preacher Jeremias Drexel translated from Latin into German and published them to a greater audience. William V was addressed with the epithet &quot;the Pious&quot; and like his contemporary Wittelsbach dukes promoted himself as &quot;father of the land&quot; (&quot;Landesvater&quot;), encouraged pilgrimages and Marian devotions. William V had the Hofbräuhaus built in 1589. It would become the prototype for beer halls across Munich. After World War II the Residenze, the Hofbräuhaus, the Frauenkirche, and the Peterskirche were reconstructed to look exactly as they did before the Nazi Party seized power in 1933.

The Catholic League was founded in Munich in 1609. In 1623, during the Thirty Years&#x27; War (1618–1648), Munich became an electoral residence when Duke Maximilian I was invested with the electoral dignity, but in 1632 the city was occupied by King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden.

In 1634 Swedish and Spanish troops advanced on Munich. Maximilian I published a plague ordinance to halt an epidemic escalation. The bubonic plague nevertheless ravaged Munich and the surrounding countryside in 1634 and 1635. During the Thirty Years&#x27; War (1618–1648) troops again converged on Munich in 1647 and precautions were taken, so as to avoid another epidemic.

Under the regency of the Bavarian electors, Munich was an important centre of Baroque life, but also had to suffer under Habsburg occupations in 1704 and 1742. When Elector Maximilian III Joseph died in 1745, the succession empowered the Palatinate branch within the House of Wittelsbach.

In 1777 Bavarian lands were inherited by Karl Theodor. The new duke was disliked by the citizens of Munich for his supposedly enlightened ideas. In 1785 Karl Theodor invited Count Rumford Benjamin Thompson to take up residency in Munich and implement stringent social reforms. The poor were forced to live in newly built workhouses. The Bavarian army was restructured, with common soldiers receiving better food and reassurances that they would be treated humanely by officers. Munich was the largest German city to lose fortification in the 1790s. In 1791 Karl Theodor and Count Rumford started to demolish Munich&#x27;s fortifications. After 1793 Munich&#x27;s citizens, including house servants, carpenters, butchers, merchants, and court officials, seized the opportunity, building new houses, stalls, and sheds outside the city walls.

After making an alliance with Napoleonic France, the city became the capital of the new Kingdom of Bavaria in 1806 with Elector Maximillian IV Joseph becoming its first king. The state parliament (the &quot;Landtag&quot;) and the new archdiocese of Munich and Freising were also located in the city.

The establishment of Bavarian state sovereignty profoundly affected Munich. Munich became the center of a modernizing kingdom, and one of the king&#x27;s first acts was the secularization of Bavaria. He had dissolved all monasteries in 1802 and once crowned, Maximilian Joseph generated state revenues by selling off church lands. While many monasteries were reestablished, Maximilian Joseph I succeeded in controlling the right to brew beer (&quot;Braurecht&quot;). The king handed the brewing monopoly to Munich&#x27;s wealthiest brewers, who in turn paid substantial taxes on their beer production. In 1807 the king abolished all ordinances that limited the number of apprentices and journeymen a brewery could employ. Munich&#x27;s population had swelled and Munich brewers were now free to employ as many workers as they needed to meet the demand. In October 1810 a beer festival was held on the meadows just outside Munich to commemorate the wedding of the crown prince and princess Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen. The parades in regional dress (&quot;Tracht&quot;) represented the diversity of the kingdom. The fields are now part of the Theresienwiese and the celebrations developed into Munich&#x27;s annual Oktoberfest.

The Bavarian state proceeded to take control over the beer market, by regulating all taxes on beer in 1806 and 1811. Brewers and the beer taverns (&quot;Wirtshäuser&quot;) were taxed, and the state also controlled the quality of beer while limiting the competition among breweries. In 1831 the king&#x27;s government introduced a cost-of-living allowance on beer for lower-ranking civil servants and soldiers. Soldiers stationed in Munich were granted a daily allowance for beer in the early 1840s. By the 1850s beer had become essential staple food for Munich&#x27;s working and lower classes. Since the Middle Ages beer had been regarded as nutritious &quot;liquid bread&quot; (&quot;fließendes Brot&quot;) in Bavaria. But Munich suffered from poor water sanitation and as early as the 1700s beer came to be regarded as the &quot;fifth element&quot;. Beer was essential in maintaining public health in Munich and in the mid-1840s Munich police estimated that at least 40,000 residents relied primarily on beer for their nutrition.
In 1832 Peter von Hess painted the Greek War of Independence at the order of King Ludwig I. Ludwig I had the Königsplatz built in neoclassicism as a matter of ideological choice. Leo von Klenze supervised the construction of a Propylaia between 1854 and 1862.

During the early to mid-19th century, the old fortified city walls of Munich were largely demolished due to population expansion. The first Munich railway station was built in 1839, with a line going to Augsburg in the west. By 1849 a newer Munich Central Train Station (München Hauptbahnhof) was completed, with a line going to Landshut and Regensburg in the north. In 1825 Ludwig I had ascended to the throne and commissioned leading architects such as Leo von Klenze to design a series of public museums in neoclassical style. The grand building projects of Ludwig I gave Munich the endearment &quot;Isar-Athen&quot; and &quot;Monaco di Bavaria&quot;. Between 1856 and 1861 the court gardener Carl von Effner landscaped the banks of the river Isar and established the &quot;Maximilian Gardens&quot;. From 1848 the &quot;Münchner Neueste Nachrichten&quot; was published as a regional newspaper in Munich. In 1857 the construction of the Maximilianeum was begun.

By the time Ludwig II became king in 1864, he remained mostly aloof from his capital and focused more on his fanciful castles in the Bavarian countryside, which is why he is known the world over as the &#x27;fairytale king&#x27;. Ludwig II tried to lure Richard Wagner to Munich, but his plans for an opera house were declined by the city council. Ludwig II nevertheless generated a windfall for Munich&#x27;s craft and construction industries. In 1876 Munich hosted the first German Art and Industry Exhibition, which showcased the northern Neo-Renaissance fashion that came to be the German Empire&#x27;s predominant style. Munich based artists put on the German National Applied Arts Exhibition in 1888, showcasing Baroque Revival architecture and Rococo Revival designs.
In 1900 Wilhelm Röntgen moved to Munich, he was appointed as professor of physics. In 1901 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics.

The Prince Regent Luitpold&#x27;s reign from 1886 to 1912 was marked by tremendous artistic and cultural activity in Munich. At the dawn of the 20th century Munich was an epicenter for the Jugendstil movement, combining a liberal magazine culture with progressive industrial design and architecture. The German art movement took its name from the Munich magazine &quot;Die Jugend&quot; (&quot;The Youth&quot;). Prominent Munich Jugendstil artists include Hans Eduard von Berlepsch-Valendas, Otto Eckmann, Margarethe von Brauchitsch, August Endell, Hermann Obrist, Wilhelm von Debschitz, and Richard Riemerschmid. In 1905 two large department stores opened in Munich, the Kaufhaus Oberpollinger and the Warenhaus Hermann Tietz, both had been designed by the architect Max Littmann. In 1911 the expressionist group Der Blaue Reiter was established in Munich. Its founding members include Gabriele Münter.

===World War I to World War II===
Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, life in Munich became very difficult, as the Allied blockade of Germany led to food and fuel shortages. During French air raids in 1916, three bombs fell on Munich.

In 1916, the &#x27;Bayerische Motoren Werke&#x27; (BMW) produced its first aircraft engine in Munich. The public limited company BMW AG was founded in 1918, with Camillo Castiglioni owning one third of the share capital. In 1922 BMW relocated its headquarters to a factory in Munich.

After World War I, the city was at the centre of substantial political unrest. In November 1918, on the eve of the German revolution, Ludwig III of Bavaria and his family fled the city. After the murder of the first republican premier of Bavaria Kurt Eisner in February 1919 by Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was proclaimed. The November 1918 revolution ended the reign of the Wittelsbach in Bavaria. In &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; Adolf Hitler described his political activism in Munich after November 1918 as the &quot;Beginning of My Political Activity&quot;. Hitler called the short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic &quot;the rule of the Jews&quot;. In 1919 Bavaria Film was founded and in the 1920s Munich offered film makers an alternative to Germany&#x27;s largest film studio, Babelsberg Studio.
In 1923 Gustav von Kahr was appointed Bavarian prime minister and immediately planned for the expulsion of all Jews who did not hold German citizenship. Chief of Police Ernst Pöhner and Wilhelm Frick openly indulged in antisemitism, while Bavarian judges praised people on the political right as patriotic for their crimes and handed down mild sentences. In 1923, Adolf Hitler and his supporters, who were concentrated in Munich, staged the Beer Hall Putsch, an attempt to overthrow the Weimar Republic and seize power. The revolt failed, resulting in Hitler&#x27;s arrest and the temporary crippling of the Nazi Party (NSDAP).

Munich was chosen as capital for the Free State of Bavaria and acquired increased responsibility for administering the city itself and the surrounding districts. Offices needed to be built for bureaucracy, so a 12-story office building was erected in the southern part of the historic city centre in the late 1920s.

Munich again became important to the Nazis when they took power in Germany in 1933. The party created its first concentration camp at Dachau, north-west of the city. Because of its importance to the rise of National Socialism, Munich was referred to as the &quot;Hauptstadt der Bewegung&quot; (&quot;Capital of the Movement&quot;).

The NSDAP headquarters and the documentation apparatus for controlling all aspects of life were located in Munich. Nazi organizations, such as the National Socialist Women&#x27;s League and the Gestapo, had their offices along Brienner Straße and around the Königsplatz. The party acquired 68 buildings in the area and many &quot;Führerbauten&quot; (&quot;&quot;Führer&quot; buildings&quot;) were built to reflect a new aesthetic of power. Construction work for the Führerbau and the party headquarters (known as the Brown House) started in September 1933. The &quot;Haus der Kunst&quot; (House of German Art) was the first building to be commissioned by Hitler. The architect Paul Troost was asked to start work shortly after the Nazis had seized power because &quot;the most German of all German cities&quot; was left with no exhibition building when in 1931 the Glass Palace was destroyed in an arson attack. The &quot;Red Terror&quot; that supposedly preceded Nazi control in Munich was detailed in Nazi publications; seminal accounts are that of Rudolf Schricker &quot;Rotmord über München&quot; published in 1934, and &quot;Die Blutchronik des Marxismus in Deutschland&quot; by Adolf Ehrt and Hans Roden.

In 1930 &quot;Feinkost Käfer&quot; was founded in Munich, the &quot;Käfer&quot; catering business is now a world leading party service.

The city was the site where the 1938 Munich Agreement signed between the United Kingdom and the Third French Republic with Nazi Germany as part of the Franco-British policy of appeasement. The British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain assented to the German annexation of Czechoslovakia&#x27;s Sudetenland in the hopes of satisfying Hitler&#x27;s territorial expansion.

The Munich-Riem Airport was completed in October 1939.

On 8 November 1939, shortly after the Second World War had begun, Georg Elser planted a bomb in the Bürgerbräukeller in Munich in an attempt to assassinate Adolf Hitler, who held a political party speech. Hitler, however, had left the building minutes before the bomb went off. By mid 1942 the majority of Jews living in Munich and the suburbs had been deported.
During the war, Munich was the location of multiple forced labour camps, including two &quot;Polenlager&quot; camps for Polish youth, and 40 subcamps of the Dachau concentration camp, in which men and women of various nationalities were held. With up to 17,000 prisoners in 1945, the largest subcamp of Dachau was the Munich-Allach concentration camp.

Munich was the base of the White Rose, a student resistance movement. The group had distributed leaflets in several cities and following the 1943 Battle of Stalingrad members of the group stenciled slogans such as &quot;Down with Hitler&quot; and &quot;Hitler the Mass Murderer&quot; on public buildings in Munich. The core members were arrested and executed after Sophie Scholl and her brother Hans Scholl were caught distributing leaflets on Munich University campus calling upon the youth to rise against Hitler.

The city was heavily damaged by the bombing of Munich in World War II, with 71 air raids over five years. US troops captured Munich on 30 April 1945.

===Postwar===
In the aftermath of World War II, Germany and Japan were subject to US Military occupation. Due to Polish annexation of the Former eastern territories of Germany and expulsion of Germans from all over Eastern Europe, Munich operated over a thousand refugee camps for 151,113 people in October 1946. After US occupation Munich was completely rebuilt following a meticulous plan, which preserved its pre-war street grid, bar a few exceptions owing to then-modern traffic concepts. In 1957, Munich&#x27;s population surpassed one million. The city continued to play a highly significant role in the German economy, politics and culture, giving rise to its nickname &quot;Heimliche Hauptstadt&quot; (&quot;secret capital&quot;) in the decades after World War II. In Munich, the Bayerischer Rundfunk began its first television broadcast in 1954.

The Free State of Bavaria used the arms industry as kernel for its high tech development policy. Since 1963, Munich has been hosting the Munich Security Conference, held annually in the Hotel Bayerischer Hof. Munich also became known on the political level due to the strong influence of Bavarian politician Franz Josef Strauss from the 1960s to the 1980s. The Munich Airport, which commenced operations in 1992, was named in his honor.

In the early 1960s Dieter Kunzelmann was expelled from the Situationist International and founded an influential group called &quot;Subversive Aktion&quot; in Munich. Kunzelmann was also active in West Berlin, and became known for using situationist avant-garde as a cover for political violence.
Munich hosted the 1972 Summer Olympics. After winning the bid in 1966 the Mayor of Munich Hans-Jochen Vogel accelerated the construction of the U-Bahn subway and the S-Bahn metropolitan commuter railway. In May 1967 the construction work began for a new U-Bahn line connecting the city with the Olympic Park. The Olympic Park subway station was built near the BMW Headquarters and the line was completed in May 1972, three months before the opening of the 1972 Summer Olympics. Shortly before the opening ceremony, Munich also inaugurated a sizable pedestrian priority zone between Karlsplatz and Marienplatz. In 1970 the Munich city council released funds so that the iconic gothic facade and Glockenspiel of the &quot;New City Hall&quot; (Neues Rathaus) could be restored.

During the 1972 Summer Olympics 11 Israeli athletes were murdered by Palestinian terrorists in the Munich massacre, when gunmen from the Palestinian &quot;Black September&quot; group took hostage members of the Israeli Olympic team.

The most deadly militant attack the Federal Republic of Germany has ever witnessed was the Oktoberfest bombing. The attack was eventually blamed on militant Neo-Nazism.
Munich and its urban sprawl emerged as the leading German high tech region during the 1980s and 1990s. The urban economy of Munich became characterized by a dynamic labour market, low unemployment, a growing service economy and high per capita income. Munich is home of the famous Nockherberg Strong Beer Festival during the Lenten fasting period (usually in March). Its origins go back to the 17th/18th century, but has become popular when the festivities were first televised in the 1980s. The fest includes comical speeches and a mini-musical in which numerous German politicians are parodied by look-alike actors.

In 2007 the ecological restoration of the river Isar in the urban area of Munich was awarded the Water Development Prize by the German Association for Water, Wastewater and Waste (known as DWA in German). The renaturation of the Isar allows for the near natural development of the river bed and is part of Munich&#x27;s flood protection. About 20 percent of buildings in Munich now have a green roof. Munich city council has been encouraging better stormwater management since the 1990s with regulations and subsidies.

On the fifth anniversary of the 2011 Norway attacks an active shooter perpetrated a hate crime. The 2016 Munich shooting targeted people of Turkish and Arab descent.

Munich was one of the host cities for UEFA Euro 2020, which was delayed for a year due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany, and was a host city for UEFA Euro 2024.

==Geography==
===Topography===
Munich lies on the elevated plains of Upper Bavaria, about north of the northern edge of the Alps, at an altitude of about ASL. The local rivers are the Isar and the Würm. Munich is situated in the Northern Alpine Foreland. The northern part of this sandy plateau includes a highly fertile flint area which is no longer affected by the folding processes found in the Alps, while the southern part is covered with morainic hills. Between these are fields of fluvio-glacial out-wash, such as around Munich. Wherever these deposits get thinner, the ground water can permeate the gravel surface and flood the area, leading to marshes as in the north of Munich.

===Climate===
According to the Köppen climate classification, the climate is oceanic (&quot;Cfb&quot;), independent of the isotherm but with some humid continental (&quot;Dfb&quot;) features like warm to hot summers and cold winters, but without permanent snow cover. The city centre lies between both climates, while the airport of Munich has a humid continental climate. The warmest month, on average, is July. The coolest is January.

The proximity to the Alps brings higher volumes of rainfall and consequently greater susceptibility to flood problems. Studies of adaptation to climate change and extreme events are carried out; one of them is the Isar Plan of the EU Adaptation Climate.

Showers and thunderstorms bring the highest average monthly precipitation in late spring and throughout the summer. The most precipitation occurs in July, on average. Winter tends to have less precipitation, the least in February.

The higher elevation and proximity to the Alps cause the city to have more rain and snow than many other parts of Germany. The Alps affect the city&#x27;s climate in other ways too; for example, the warm downhill wind from the Alps (föhn wind), which can raise temperatures sharply within a few hours even in the winter.

Being at the centre of Europe, Munich is subject to many climatic influences, so that weather conditions there are more variable than in other European cities, especially those further west and south of the Alps.

Munich is near the Alps. Annual variation in temperature can be significant, because there are no large bodies of water nearby. The winter in Munich is generally cold and overcast, and some Munich winters have significant snow. January is the coldest month. While winter averages remain only moderately cold, and relatively mild for an elevated inland location of Munich&#x27;s latitude, inversion from the nearby Alps causes cold air to sink and result in temperatures below . In Munich the summer is usually pleasantly warm, with daytime temperatures averaging .

Munich is subject to active convective seasons and sometimes damaging events. The Alpine thunderstorm system moves along the mountain range, or detaches, heading east-north-east over the foothills of the Alps.

At Munich&#x27;s official weather stations, the highest and lowest temperatures ever measured are , on 27 July 1983 in Trudering-Riem, and , on 12 February 1929 in the Botanic Garden of the city.
====Climate change====
In Munich, the general trend of global warming with a rise of medium yearly temperatures of about in Germany between 1900 and 2020 can be observed as well. In November 2016 the city council concluded officially that a further rise in medium temperature, a higher number of heat extremes, a rise in the number of hot days and nights with temperatures higher than 20 °C (tropical nights), a change in precipitation patterns, as well as a rise in the number of local instances of heavy rain, is to be expected as part of the ongoing climate change. The city administration decided to support a joint study from its own Referat für Gesundheit und Umwelt (department for health and environmental issues) and the German Meteorological Service that will gather data on local weather. The data is supposed to be used to create a plan for action for adapting the city to better deal with climate change as well as an integrated action program for climate protection in Munich. With the help of those programs issues regarding spatial planning and settlement density, the development of buildings and green spaces as well as plans for functioning ventilation in a cityscape can be monitored and managed.

==Demographics==


From only 24,000 inhabitants in 1700, the city population doubled about every 30 years. It was 100,000 in 1852, 250,000 in 1883 and 500,000 in 1901. Since then, Munich has become Germany&#x27;s third-largest city. In 1933, 840,901 inhabitants were counted, and in 1957 over 1 million. Munich has reached 1.5 million in 2022.

===Immigration===
In December 2023, Munich had 1.58 million inhabitants; 477,855 foreign nationals resided in the city as of 31 December 2023 with 42.88% of these residents being citizens of EU member states, and 29.66% citizens in European states not in the EU (including Kosovo and Turkey). Along with the Turks, the Croats are one of the two largest foreign minorities in the city, which is why some Croats refer to Munich as their &quot;second capital&quot;. The largest groups of foreign nationals were Turks (38,947), Croats (37,541), Italians (28,142), Greeks (24,843), Bosnians (24,161) Ukrainians (21,899), and Austrians (21,944).
===Religion===
About 45% of Munich&#x27;s residents are not affiliated with any religious group; this ratio represents the fastest growing segment of the population. As in the rest of Germany, the Catholic and Protestant churches have experienced a continuous decline in membership. As of 31 December 2017, 31.8% of the city&#x27;s inhabitants were Catholic, 11.4% Protestant, 0.3% Jewish (see: History of the Jews in Munich), and 3.6% were members of an Orthodox Church (Eastern Orthodox or Oriental Orthodox). About 1% adhere to other Christian denominations. There is also a small Old Catholic parish and an English-speaking parish of the Episcopal Church in the city. According to Munich Statistical Office, in 2013 about 6.9% of Munich&#x27;s population was Muslim.
Munich has the largest Uyghur population with about 800 (whole Germany about 1,600) people with Uyghur diaspora. Many of them fled to Munich due to the Chinese government and are exiled in Munich. Munich is also home to World Uyghur Congress, which is an international organisation of exiled Uyghurs.

==Government and politics ==

As the capital of Bavaria, Munich is an important political centre for both the state and country as a whole. It is the seat of the Landtag of Bavaria, the State Chancellery, and all state departments. Several national and international authorities are located in Munich, including the Federal Finance Court of Germany, the German Patent Office and the European Patent Office.

===Mayor===
The current mayor of Munich is Dieter Reiter, he is from the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). He was elected in 2014 and re-elected in 2020. Bavaria has been dominated by the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) on a federal, state, and local level since the establishment of the Federal Republic in 1949. The Munich city council is called the Stadtrat.

The most recent mayoral election was held on 15 March 2020, with a runoff held on 29 March, and the results were as follows:
! rowspan=2 colspan=2|Candidate
! rowspan=2|Party
! colspan=2|First round
! colspan=2|Second round
! Votes
! Votes
|-
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Dieter Reiter
|align=left|Social Democratic Party
|259,928
|47.9
|401,856
|71.7
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Kristina Frank
|align=left|Christian Social Union
|115,795
|21.3
|158,773
|28.3
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Katrin Habenschaden
|align=left|Alliance 90/The Greens
|112,121
|20.7
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Wolfgang Wiehle
|align=left|Alternative for Germany
|14,988
|2.8
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Tobias Ruff
|align=left|Ecological Democratic Party
|8,464
|1.6
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Jörg Hoffmann
|align=left|Free Democratic Party
|8,201
|1.5
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Thomas Lechner
|align=left|The Left
|7,232
|1.3
|bgcolor=#007E82|
|align=left|Hans-Peter Mehling
|align=left|Free Voters of Bavaria
|5,003
|0.9
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Moritz Weixler
|align=left|Die PARTEI
|3,508
|0.6
|
|align=left|Dirk Höpner
|align=left|Munich List
|1,966
|0.4
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Richard Progl
|align=left|Bavaria Party
|1,958
|0.4
|
|align=left|Ender Beyhan-Bilgin
|align=left|FAIR
|1,483
|0.3
|
|align=left|Stephanie Dilba
|align=left|mut
|1,267
|0.2
|
|align=left|Cetin Oraner
|align=left|Together Bavaria
|819
|0.2
! colspan=3|Valid votes
! 542,733
! 99.6
! 560,629
! 99.7
! colspan=3|Invalid votes
! 1,997
! 0.4
! 1,616
! 0.3
! colspan=3|Total
! 544,730
! 100.0
! 562,245
! 100.0
! colspan=3|Electorate/voter turnout
! 1,110,571
! 49.0
! 1,109,032
! 50.7
|colspan=7|Source: Wahlen München (1st round, 2nd round)

===City council===

The Munich city council (&quot;Stadtrat&quot;) governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 15 March 2020, and the results were as follows:
! colspan=2|Party
! Lead candidate
! Votes
! +/−
! Seats
|-
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Alliance 90/The Greens (Grüne)
|align=left|Katrin Habenschaden
|11,762,516
|29.1
| 12.5
|23
| 10
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Christian Social Union (CSU)
|align=left|Kristina Frank
|9,986,014
|24.7
| 7.8
|20
| 6
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Social Democratic Party (SPD)
|align=left|Dieter Reiter
|8,884,562
|22.0
| 8.8
|18
| 7
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP)
|align=left|Tobias Ruff
|1,598,539
|4.0
| 1.4
|3
| 1
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Alternative for Germany (AfD)
|align=left|Iris Wassill
|1,559,476
|3.9
| 1.4
|3
| 1
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Free Democratic Party (FDP)
|align=left|Jörg Hoffmann
|1,420,194
|3.5
| 0.1
|3
|±0
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|The Left (Die Linke)
|align=left|Stefan Jagel
|1,319,464
|3.3
| 0.8
|3
| 1
|bgcolor=#007E82|
|align=left|Free Voters of Bavaria (FW)
|align=left|Hans-Peter Mehling
|1,008,400
|2.5
| 0.2
|2
|±0
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Volt Germany (Volt)
|align=left|Felix Sproll
|732,853
|1.8
|New
|1
|New
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Die PARTEI (PARTEI)
|align=left|Marie Burneleit
|528,949
|1.3
|New
|1
|New
|bgcolor=deeppink|
|align=left|Pink List (Rosa Liste)
|align=left|Thomas Niederbühl
|396,324
|1.0
| 0.9
|1
|±0
|
|align=left|Munich List
|align=left|Dirk Höpner
|339,705
|0.8
|New
|1
|New
|bgcolor=|
|align=left|Bavaria Party (BP)
|align=left|Richard Progl
|273,737
|0.7
| 0.2
|1
|±0
|
|align=left|mut
|align=left|Stephanie Dilba
|247,679
|0.6
|New
|0
|New
|
|align=left|FAIR
|align=left|Kemal Orak
|142,455
|0.4
|New
|0
|New
|
|align=left|Together Bavaria (ZuBa)
|align=left|Cetin Oraner
|120,975
|0.3
|New
|0
|New
|
|align=left|BIA
|align=left|Karl Richter
|86,358
|0.2
| 0.5
|0
|±0
! colspan=3|Valid votes
! 531,527
! 97.6
! 
|-
! colspan=3|Invalid votes
! 12,937
! 2.4
! 
|-
! colspan=3|Total
! 544,464
! 100.0
! 80
! ±0
! colspan=3|Electorate/voter turnout
! 1,110,571
! 49.0
! 7.0
! 
|colspan=8|Source: Wahlen München
The governing coalition after the 2020 election consisted of the Greens and the SPD, as well as the allied Volt and Pink List, which had one seat each. While the Greens had gained the most seats in the city council, the mayor was from the SPD. The parties made an agreement including social and ecological goals and focusing on heightening stipulations for new development in the city. The Red-Green alliance is a reprise of the 1990-2014 coalition, which was interrupted by a six-year CSU-SPD majority from 2014 to 2020.

===State Landtag===

In the Landtag of Bavaria, Munich is divided between nine constituencies. After the 2018 Bavarian state election, the composition and representation of each was as follows:

=== Federal parliament ===
In the Bundestag, Munich is divided between four constituencies. In the 20th Bundestag, the composition and representation of each was as follows:

===Subdivisions===

Since the reform of 1992, Munich is divided into 25 administrative boroughs (&quot;Stadtbezirke&quot;). They are subdivided into 105 statistical areas.

Allach-Untermenzing (23), Altstadt-Lehel (1), Aubing-Lochhausen-Langwied (22), Au-Haidhausen (5), Berg am Laim (14), Bogenhausen (13), Feldmoching-Hasenbergl (24), Hadern (20), Laim (25), Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt (2), Maxvorstadt (3), Milbertshofen-Am Hart (11), Moosach (10), Neuhausen-Nymphenburg (9), Obergiesing (17), Pasing-Obermenzing (21), Ramersdorf-Perlach (16), Schwabing-Freimann (12), Schwabing-West (4), Schwanthalerhöhe (8), Sendling (6), Sendling-Westpark (7), Thalkirchen-Obersendling-Forstenried-Fürstenried-Solln (19), Trudering-Riem (15), and Untergiesing-Harlaching (18).

There is no official division into districts. The number of districts is about 50, and if smaller units are counted as well, there are about 90 to 100 (see map). The three largest districts are Schwabing in the north (about 110,000 inhabitants), Sendling in the southwest (about 100,000 inhabitants), and Giesing in the south (about 80,000 inhabitants).

==Architecture==

===Old Town===

At the centre of the old town is the Marienplatz with the Old Town Hall and the New Town Hall. Its tower contains the Rathaus-Glockenspiel. The Peterskirche is the oldest church of the inner city. Nearby St. Peter, the Gothic hall-church Heiliggeistkirche was converted to baroque style from 1724 onwards and looks down upon the Viktualienmarkt. Three gates of the demolished medieval fortification survive; these are the Isartor, the Sendlinger Tor, and the Karlstor. The Karlstor leads up to the Stachus, a square dominated by the Justizpalast (Palace of Justice).

The Frauenkirche serves as the cathedral for the Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising. The nearby Michaelskirche is the largest renaissance church north of the Alps, while the Theatinerkirche is a basilica in Italianate high baroque, which had a major influence on southern German baroque architecture. Its dome dominates the Odeonsplatz.

===Palaces and castles===
Schloss Nymphenburg (Nymphenburg Palace, construction started 1664) is a museum open to the public for tours.

The smaller Schloss Fürstenried (Fürstenried Palace, construction 1715–1717) is used by the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising as a conference location.

Schloss Blutenburg (Blutenburg Castle) opened as a children&#x27;s library in 2024, but visitors may tour the late-Gothic Blutenburg Castle Church built on the same grounds.

The large Munich Residenz complex on the edge of Munich&#x27;s Old Town now ranks among Europe&#x27;s most significant museums of interior decoration. Within the is the splendid Cuvilliés Theatre and next door is the National Theatre Munich. Among the mansions that still exist in Munich are the Palais Porcia, the Palais Preysing, the Palais Holnstein and the Prinz-Carl-Palais. All mansions are situated close to the , so is the Alter Hof, the first residence of the House of Wittelsbach.

===Modernist architecture===
Despite Munich being the breeding ground for German Jugendstil, starting with the architect Martin Dülfer, Munich Jugendstil style was quickly submerged as historic trash. While the modernist architect Theodor Fischer was based in Munich, his influence on Munich underwhelmed. Prior to 1914 the city of Munich was under-industrialized. During the Weimar Republic, the Munich establishment was hostile to modernism. The TUM professor German Bestelmeyer favored a conservative style, and Jacobus Oud was rejected for the post of city building chief. Modernist exceptions include a series of post offices by Robert Vorhoelzer built in the late 1920s and early 1930s. Examples of avant-garde temporary constructions include the &quot;Wohnmaschine&quot; (&quot;Housing Machine&quot;) by Robert Vorhoelzer, as well as the &quot;Flachdachhaus&quot; (&quot;Flat Roof House&quot;) by Fritz Norkauer. Paul Schultze-Naumburg, and the Kampfbund enjoyed particular popularity.

===High rise buildings===

Several high-rise buildings are clustered at the northern edge of Munich in the skyline, like the HVB Tower, the Arabella High-Rise Building, the Highlight Towers, Uptown Munich, Münchner Tor and the BMW Headquarters next to the Olympic Park. Further high-rise buildings are located in the in Berg am Laim.

===Long-term residential development ===
Munich is subject to a long-term residential development plan that is established by the city administration of Munich. The LaSie (&quot;Langfristige Siedlungsentwicklung&quot;) was passed in 2011 in response to the acute housing crisis. LaSie is aligned with the strategic development plan passed for Munich in 1998 (&quot;Perspektive München&quot;). LaSie defines three priorities for the construction of residential housing in Munich. Existing housing estates, post-war low-density developments, and the suburban area are subject to densification (&quot;Nachverdichtung&quot;). Non-residential industrial areas are subject to conservation and will be turned into residential and mixed-use areas. On greenfield sites in the Munich periphery medium and large-scale housing estates are to be built so as to extend Munich&#x27;s urban center.

==Parks==

Friedrich Ludwig von Sckell became famous for designing the Englischer Garten between 1789 and 1807. Besides planning the first public garden in Europe, Sckell also redesigned Baroque gardens as landscape gardens, including the parks of Nymphenburg Palace and the Botanischer Garten München-Nymphenburg.

Other large green spaces are the Olympiapark, the Westpark and the Ostpark. The city&#x27;s oldest park is the Hofgarten, near the Residenz, dating back to the 16th century. The site of the largest beer garden in town, the former royal Hirschgarten, was founded in 1780.

==Sports==
===Football===

Munich is home to several professional Association football teams including the FC Bayern Munich. Other notable clubs include 1860 Munich, who currently play in the 3. Liga. Noticeably, FC Bayern Munich is the most successful club in Germany and it is also very reputed across Europe and the world. Munich hosted matches in the 2006 FIFA World Cup.

===Basketball===
FC Bayern Munich Basketball is currently playing in the Beko Basket Bundesliga. The city hosted the final stages of the FIBA EuroBasket 1993, where the German national basketball team won the gold medal.

===Ice hockey===
The city&#x27;s ice hockey club is EHC Red Bull München who play in the Deutsche Eishockey Liga. The team has won four DEL Championships, in 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2023.

===Olympics===

Munich hosted the 1972 Summer Olympics; the Munich massacre took place in the Olympic village. It was one of the host cities for the 2006 Football World Cup, which was not held in Munich&#x27;s Olympic Stadium, but in a new football specific stadium, the Allianz Arena. Munich bid to host the 2018 Winter Olympic Games, but lost to Pyeongchang. In September 2011 the DOSB President Thomas Bach confirmed that Munich would bid again for the Winter Olympics in the future. These plans were abandoned some time later.

===Road running===
Regular annual road running events in Munich are the Munich Marathon in October, the Stadtlauf end of June, the company run B2Run in July, the New Year&#x27;s Run on 31 December, the Spartan Race Sprint, the Olympia Alm Crosslauf and the Bestzeitenmarathon.

===Swimming===

Public sporting facilities in Munich include ten indoor swimming pools and eight outdoor swimming pools, which are operated by the Munich City Utilities (SWM) communal company. Popular indoor swimming pools include the Olympia Schwimmhalle of the 1972 Summer Olympics, the wave pool Cosimawellenbad, as well as the Müllersches Volksbad which was built in 1901. Further, swimming within Munich&#x27;s city limits is also possible in several artificial lakes such as for example the Riemer See or the Langwieder lake district.

===River surfing===

River surfing is a popular sport in Munich. The Flosskanal wave in the south of Munich is less challenging. A well visited surfing spot for experienced surfers is the Eisbach standing wave, where the annual Munich Surf Open is celebrated on the last Saturday of July.

==Culture==

===Language===

German is spoken and understood in and around Munich. While the German language has many dialects, so-called &quot;Standard German&quot; or &quot;High German&quot; is learned in schools and spoken among Germans, Austrians and in some parts of Switzerland. A speaker of a Low German dialect in Hamburg may find it difficult to understand the dialect of a Bavarian mountaineer. The Bavarian dialects are recognized as regional language and continues to be spoken alongside Standard German.

===Museums===
The gothic Morris dancers of Erasmus Grasser are exhibited in the Munich City Museum in the old gothic arsenal building in the inner city.

In 1903 Oskar von Miller assembled a group of engineers and industrialists, who chartered the Deutsches Museum. The Museum was built with the financial support of the German business and imperial nobility community, as well as the blessing of Wilhelm II, German Emperor. The Deutsches Museum had its grand opening in 1925, but has undergone a reinvention recently. The Deutsches Museum now operates three locations. The original site in central Munich continues to expand its exhibits.
The city has several important art galleries, most of which can be found in the Kunstareal. The Lenbachhaus displays works of the movement Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider), a Munich-based modernist art. Starting in 1970s, German municipalities started to respond to cultural tourism and invested in public museums. The Neue Pinakothek, like other German museums, was wholly reconstructed from 1974 until 1981. The Pinakothek der Moderne lets the public see an eclectic mix of contemporary art and the principle attention of the permanent collection is Classical Moderns. But the displays are enhanced continuously with spectacular gifts from private collections.

City guides published in the early 1860s directed tourists to Munich&#x27;s architecture and art collections, which at the time were unique in Germany and are a legacy mainly of Ludwig I of Bavaria, with contributions from Maximilian II of Bavaria. The Alte Pinakothek contains works of European masters between the 14th and 18th centuries. Major displays include Albrecht Dürer&#x27;s &quot;Self-Portrait&quot; (1500), his &quot;Four Apostles&quot;, Raphael&#x27;s paintings &quot;The Canigiani Holy Family&quot; and &quot;Madonna Tempi&quot; as well as Peter Paul Rubens large &quot;Judgment Day&quot;. 

An extensive collection of Greek and Roman art is held in the Glyptothek and the Staatliche Antikensammlungen (the State Antiquities Collections). Works on display include the Medusa Rondanini, the Barberini Faun and figures from the Temple of Aphaea on Aegina for the Glyptothek. Another interesting museum is the Staatliche Sammlung für Ägyptische Kunst (the State Collection of Egyptian Art).

Several public collections of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich are still housed in the Kunstareal. The expanded state collections are housed in the Paläontologisches Museum München, and the Zoologische Staatssammlung München. After the first German art exhibition in the Glaspalast for an international audience in 1869, Munich emerged as a focal point for the arts. Men of distinction from around the world visited the Academy of Fine Arts under the directorship of Karl von Piloty and later Wilhelm von Kaulbach.

The Museum Five Continents is the second largest collection in Germany of artefacts and objects from outside Europe, while the Bavarian National Museum and the adjoining Bavarian State Archaeological Collection display regional art and cultural history. The Schackgalerie is an important gallery of German 19th-century paintings.

The memorial museum of the former Dachau concentration camp is just outside the city.

===Music===

Munich is a major international musical centre and has played host to many prominent composers including Orlande de Lassus, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Carl Maria von Weber, Richard Wagner, Gustav Mahler, Richard Strauss, Max Reger and Carl Orff. Some of classical music&#x27;s best-known compositions have been created in and around Munich by composers born in the area, for example, Richard Strauss&#x27;s tone poem &quot;Also sprach Zarathustra&quot; or Carl Orff&#x27;s &quot;Carmina Burana&quot;.
===Opera===

Richard Wagner was a supporter of William I, German Emperor, but Wagner only found a generous patron in Ludwig II of Bavaria. 1870 til 1871 Wagner premiered Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg (&quot;The Mastersingers of Nuremberg&quot;) in Munich, a popular success for Wagner and King Ludwig II. Wagner premiered at the Hoftheater, now the National Theatre Munich, with Angelo Quaglio the Younger designing the premiere production.

The National Theatre Munich is now the home of the Bavarian State Opera and the Bavarian State Orchestra. Next door, the modern Residenz Theatre was erected in the building that also houses the Cuvilliés Theatre. The Staatstheater am Gärtnerplatz is a state theater while another opera house, the Prinzregententheater, has become the home of the Bavarian Theater Academy and the Munich Chamber Orchestra.

===Orchestra===
The modern Gasteig centre houses the Munich Philharmonic Orchestra. The third orchestra in Munich with international importance is the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra. Its primary concert venue is the Herkulessaal in the former city royal residence, the Munich Residenz. Many important conductors have been attracted by the city&#x27;s orchestras, including Felix Weingartner, Hans Pfitzner, Hans Rosbaud, Hans Knappertsbusch, Sergiu Celibidache, James Levine, Christian Thielemann, Lorin Maazel, Rafael Kubelík, Eugen Jochum, Sir Colin Davis, Mariss Jansons, Bruno Walter, Georg Solti, Zubin Mehta and Kent Nagano. A stage for shows, big events and musicals is the Deutsche Theater. It is Germany&#x27;s largest theatre for guest performances.

===Pop and electronica===
Munich was the centre of Krautrock in southern Germany, with many important bands such as Amon Düül II, Embryo or Popol Vuh hailing from the city. In the 1970s, the Musicland Studios developed into one of the most prominent recording studios in the world, with bands such as the Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple and Queen recording albums there. Munich also played a significant role in the development of electronic music, with genre pioneer Giorgio Moroder, who invented synth disco and electronic dance music, and Donna Summer, one of disco music&#x27;s most important performers, both living and working in the city. In the late 1990s, Electroclash was substantially co-invented if not even invented in Munich, when DJ Hell introduced and assembled international pioneers of this musical genre through his International DeeJay Gigolo Records label here.

Other notable musicians and bands from Munich include Konstantin Wecker, Willy Astor, Spider Murphy Gang, Münchener Freiheit, Lou Bega, Megaherz, FSK, Colour Haze and Sportfreunde Stiller.

Munich hosted several &quot;Love Parades&quot; and &quot;Mayday Party&quot; rave events throughout the 1990s. Munich continues to rave, the local youth scenes are active.

===Theatre===
The Munich Kammerspiele is one of the most important German-language theaters. Since Gotthold Ephraim Lessing&#x27;s premieres in 1775 many important writers have staged their plays in Munich, they include Christian Friedrich Hebbel, Henrik Ibsen, and Hugo von Hofmannsthal.

===Schwabing===

At the turn of the 20th century Schwabing was a preeminent cultural metropolis. Schwabing was an epicenter for both literature and the fine arts, with numerous German and non-German artists living there.

Vladimir Lenin authored &quot;What Is to Be Done?&quot; while living in Schwabing. Central to Schwabing&#x27;s bohemian scene were &quot;Künstlerlokale&quot; (&quot;Artist&#x27;s Cafés&quot;) like Café Stefanie or Kabarett Simpl, whose liberal ways differed fundamentally from Munich&#x27;s more traditional localities. The Simpl, which survives to this day, was named after Munich&#x27;s anti-authoritarian satirical magazine &quot;Simplicissimus&quot;, founded in 1896 by Albert Langen and Thomas Theodor Heine, which quickly became an important organ of the &quot;Schwabinger Bohème&quot;. Its caricatures and biting satirical attacks on Wilhelmine German society were the result of countless of collaborative efforts by many of the best visual artists and writers from Munich and elsewhere.

In 1971 Eckart Witzigmann teamed up with a Munich building contractor to finance and open the &quot;Tantris&quot; restaurant in Schwabing. Witzigmann is credited for starting the German &quot;Küchenwunder&quot; (&quot;kitchen wonder&quot;).

===Biedermeier===
The Biedermeier era was named after a character that regularly appeared in the satire magazine &quot;Münchner Fliegende Blätter&quot; (&quot;Loose Munich Pages&quot;), which was published by Adolf Kussmaul and Ludwig Eichrodt in Munich between 1855 and 1857. Biedermeier was a synonym for arts, furniture, and the lifestyle of the nonheroic middle class. The Biedermeier era painters Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller, Moritz von Schwind, and Carl Spitzweg are shown in the Neue Pinakothek.

===Prinzregentenzeit===
Celebrity literary figures worked in Munich especially during the final decades of the Kingdom of Bavaria, the so-called &quot;Prinzregentenzeit&quot; (literally &quot;prince regent&#x27;s time&quot;) under the reign of Luitpold, Prince Regent of Bavaria. This includes Thomas Mann, Heinrich Mann, Paul Johann Ludwig von Heyse, Rainer Maria Rilke, Ludwig Thoma, Fanny zu Reventlow, Oskar Panizza, Gustav Meyrink, Max Halbe, Erich Mühsam and Frank Wedekind.

===Weimar Republic===

The period immediately before World War I saw continued economic and cultural prominence for the city. Thomas Mann wrote in his novella &quot;Gladius Dei&quot; about this period: &quot;München leuchtete&quot; (literally &quot;Munich shone&quot;). Munich remained a centre of cultural life during the Weimar Republic, with figures such as Lion Feuchtwanger, Bertolt Brecht, Peter Paul Althaus, Stefan George, Ricarda Huch, Joachim Ringelnatz, Oskar Maria Graf, Annette Kolb, Ernst Toller, Hugo Ball, and Klaus Mann adding to the already established big names.

Karl Valentin, the cabaret performer and comedian, is to this day remembered and beloved as a cultural icon of his hometown. Between 1910 and 1940, he wrote and performed in many absurdist sketches and short films that were highly influential, earning him the nickname of &quot;Charlie Chaplin of Germany&quot;.

Liesl Karlstadt, before working together with Valentin, cross-dressed and performed cabaret with yodeling on stage and in Munich&#x27;s Cafe-Theatres. The cabaret scene was crushed when the Nazis seized power in 1933 and Karlstadt was saved from Nazi sterilization by a doctor. Contemporary Munich cabaret still reverences 1920s cabaret, the Munich alternative rock band F.S.K. absorbs yodels.

===Post-war literature===
After World War II, Munich soon again became a focal point of the German literary scene and remains so to this day, with writers as diverse as Wolfgang Koeppen, Erich Kästner, Eugen Roth, Alfred Andersch, Elfriede Jelinek, Hans Magnus Enzensberger, Michael Ende, Franz Xaver Kroetz, Gerhard Polt and Patrick Süskind calling the city their home.

===Fine arts===
From the Gothic to the Baroque era, the fine arts were represented in Munich by artists like Erasmus Grasser, Jan Polack, Johann Baptist Straub, Ignaz Günther, Hans Krumpper, Ludwig von Schwanthaler, Cosmas Damian Asam, Egid Quirin Asam, Johann Baptist Zimmermann, Johann Michael Fischer and François de Cuvilliés. Munich had already become an important place for painters like Carl Rottmann, Lovis Corinth, Wilhelm von Kaulbach, Carl Spitzweg, Franz von Lenbach, Franz Stuck, Karl Piloty and Wilhelm Leibl.

===Cinema===
Munich was (and in some cases, still is) home to many of the most important authors of the New German Cinema movement, including Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Werner Herzog, Edgar Reitz and Herbert Achternbusch. In 1971, the Filmverlag der Autoren was founded, cementing the city&#x27;s role in the movement&#x27;s history. Munich served as the location for many of Fassbinder&#x27;s films, among them &quot;&quot;. The Hotel Deutsche Eiche near Gärtnerplatz was somewhat like a centre of operations for Fassbinder and his &quot;clan&quot; of actors. New German Cinema is considered by far the most important artistic movement in German cinema history since the era of German Expressionism in the 1920s.

In 1919, the Bavaria Film Studios were founded, which developed into one of Europe&#x27;s largest film studios. Directors like Alfred Hitchcock, Billy Wilder, Orson Welles, John Huston, Ingmar Bergman, Stanley Kubrick, Claude Chabrol, Fritz Umgelter, Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Wolfgang Petersen and Wim Wenders made films there. Among the internationally well-known films produced at the studios are &quot;The Pleasure Garden&quot; (1925) by Alfred Hitchcock, &quot;The Great Escape&quot; (1963) by John Sturges, &quot;Paths of Glory&quot; (1957) by Stanley Kubrick, &quot;Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory&quot; (1971) by Mel Stuart and both (1981) and &quot;The Neverending Story&quot; (1984) by Wolfgang Petersen. Munich remains one of the centres of the German film and entertainment industry.

===Festivals===
====Coopers&#x27; Dance====

The Coopers&#x27; Dance () is a guild dance of coopers originally started in Munich. Since early 1800s the custom spread via journeymen in it is now a common tradition over the Old Bavaria region. The dance was supposed to be held every seven years.

====Starkbierfest====
March and April, for three weeks during Lent, celebrating Munich&#x27;s &quot;strong beer&quot;. Starkbier was created in 1651 by the local Paulinerkirche, Leipzig monks who drank this &#x27;Flüssiges Brot&#x27;, or &#x27;liquid bread&#x27;. It became a public festival in 1751 and is now the second largest beer festival in Munich. A Starkbierfest may be celebrated in beer halls and pubs.

====Frühlingsfest====
Held for two weeks at the Theresienwiese from the end of April to the beginning of May, the new local spring beers are served.

====Auer Dult====

A regular event combining a market and a German style folk festival on the Mariahilfplatz. The Auer Dult can be up to 300 stalls, selling handmade crafts, household goods, and local foods.

====Kocherlball====
Munich&#x27;s Kocherlball (&quot;Cooks&#x27; Ball&quot;) is an annual event, to commemorate all servants, ranging from kitchenhands to cooks. The tradition started in the 19th century.

====Tollwood====

Usually held annually in July and December, Olympia Park. The Tollwood Festival showcases fine and performing arts with live music, and several lanes of booths selling handmade crafts, as well as Organic food, mostly Fusion cuisine.

====Oktoberfest====
At the Theresienwiese, the largest beer festival in the world, Munich&#x27;s Oktoberfest runs for 16–18 days from the end of September through early October. In the last 200 years the festival has grown to span 85 acres and now welcomes over six million visitors every year. Beer is served from the six major Munich breweries. These are Augustiner-Bräu, Hacker-Pschorr Brewery, Löwenbräu Brewery, Paulaner Brewery, Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu, and Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München. Food must be bought in each tent.

====Christkindlmarkt====
The Munich Christkindlmarkt started to evolve in the 14th century. The German Christkindlmarkt reached the desired accomplishment in the 17th century in Nuremberg.

===Cuisine and culinary specialities===

The Munich cuisine contributes to the Bavarian cuisine. Munich Weisswurst (&quot;white sausage&quot;, &quot;German: Münchner Weißwurst&quot;) was invented here in 1857. It is a Munich speciality. Traditionally Weisswurst is served in pubs before noon and is served with sweet mustard and freshly baked pretzels.

Munich has 11 restaurants that have been awarded one or more Michelin Guide stars in 2021.

===Beers and breweries===

Munich is known for its breweries and Weissbier (&quot;wheat beer&quot;). Helles, a pale lager with a translucent gold color, is the most popular contemporary Munich beer. Helles has largely replaced Munich&#x27;s dark beer, known as Dunkel, which gets its color from roasted malt. It was the typical beer in Munich in the 19th century. Starkbier is the strongest Munich beer, with a high alcohol content of 6%–9%. It is dark amber in color and has a heavy malty taste. The beer served at Oktoberfest is a special type of beer with a higher alcohol content.

Wirtshäuser are traditional Bavarian pubs, many of which also have small outside areas. Biergärten (&quot;beer gardens&quot;) are a popular fixture in Munich&#x27;s gastronomic landscape. They are central to the city&#x27;s culture, and are an overt melting pot for members of all walks of life, regardless of social class. There are many smaller beer gardens, but some beer gardens have thousands of seats. Large beer gardens can be found in the Englischer Garten, on the Nockherberg, and in the Hirschgarten.

There are six main breweries in Munich are Augustiner-Bräu, Hacker-Pschorr Brewery, Hofbräuhaus, Löwenbräu, Paulaner, and Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu. Smaller breweries are becoming more prevalent in Munich.

===Circus===
The Circus Krone based in Munich is one of the largest circuses in Europe. It was the first and still is one of only a few in Western Europe to also occupy a building of its own.

===Nightlife===

Nightlife in Munich is located mostly in the boroughs Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt, Maxvorstadt, Au-Haidhausen, Berg am Laim and Sendling. Between Sendlinger Tor and Maximiliansplatz, on the edge of the central Altstadt-Lehel district, there is also the so-called Feierbanane (party banana), a roughly banana-shaped unofficial party zone spanning along Sonnenstraße, characterized by a high concentration of clubs, bars and restaurants, which became the center of Munich&#x27;s nightlife in the mid-2000s.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Schwabing was considered a center of nightlife in Germany, with internationally known clubs such as Big Apple, &quot;PN hit-house&quot;, &quot;Domicile&quot;, &quot;Hot Club&quot;, &quot;Piper Club&quot;, &quot;Tiffany&quot;, Germany&#x27;s first large-scale discotheque Blow Up and the underwater nightclub Yellow Submarine, and Munich has been called &quot;New York&#x27;s big disco sister&quot; in this context. Bars in the Schwabing district of this era include, among many others, Schwabinger 7 and &quot;Schwabinger Podium&quot;. Since the 1980s, however, Schwabing has lost much of its nightlife activity due to gentrification and the resulting high rents, and the formerly wild artists&#x27; and students&#x27; quarter developed into one of the city&#x27;s most coveted and expensive residential districts, attracting affluent citizens with little interest in partying.

Since the 1960s, the &quot;Rosa Viertel&quot; (pink quarter) developed in the Glockenbachviertel and around &quot;Gärtnerplatz&quot;, which in the 1980s made Munich &quot;one of the four gayest metropolises in the world&quot; along with San Francisco, New York City and Amsterdam. In particular, the area around Müllerstraße and &quot;Hans-Sachs-Straße&quot; was characterized by numerous gay bars and nightclubs. One of them was the travesty nightclub &quot;Old Mrs. Henderson&quot;, where Freddie Mercury, who lived in Munich from 1979 to 1985, filmed the music video for the song &quot;Living on My Own&quot; at his 39th birthday party.

Since the mid-1990s, the &quot;Kunstpark Ost&quot; and its successor &quot;Kultfabrik&quot;, a former industrial complex that was converted to a large party area near München Ostbahnhof in Berg am Laim, hosted more than 30 clubs and was especially popular among younger people from the metropolitan area surrounding Munich and tourists. The Kultfabrik was closed at the end of the year 2015 to convert the area into a residential and office area. Apart from the Kultfarbik and the smaller &quot;Optimolwerke&quot;, there is a wide variety of establishments in the urban parts of nearby Haidhausen. Before the Kunstpark Ost, there had already been an accumulation of internationally known nightclubs in the remains of the abandoned former Munich-Riem Airport.
Munich nightlife tends to change dramatically and quickly. Establishments open and close every year, and due to gentrification and the overheated housing market many survive only a few years, while others last longer. Beyond the already mentioned venues of the 1960s and 1970s, nightclubs with international recognition in recent history included &quot;Tanzlokal Größenwahn&quot;, The Atomic Café and the techno clubs Babalu Club, Ultraschall, , , , &quot;Die Registratur&quot; and &quot;Bob Beaman&quot;. From 1995 to 2001, Munich was also home to the Union Move, one of the largest technoparades in Germany.

Munich has the highest density of music venues of any German city, followed by Hamburg, Cologne and Berlin. Within the city&#x27;s limits are more than 100 nightclubs and thousands of bars and restaurants.

Some notable nightclubs are: popular techno clubs are Blitz Club, &quot;Harry Klein&quot;, &quot;Rote Sonne&quot;, Bahnwärter Thiel, &quot;Pimpernel&quot;, &quot;Charlie&quot;, &quot;Palais&quot; and &quot;Pathos&quot;. Popular mixed music clubs are &quot;Call me Drella&quot;, &quot;Wannda Circus&quot;, &quot;Tonhalle&quot;, &quot;Backstage&quot;, &quot;Muffathalle&quot;, &quot;Ampere&quot;, &quot;Pacha&quot;, &quot;P1&quot;, Zenith, &quot;Minna Thiel&quot; and the party ship Alte Utting.

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===


Munich is a leading location for science and research with a long list of Nobel Prize laureates from Wilhelm Röntgen in 1901 to Theodor W. Hänsch in 2005.

The Ludwig Maximilian University (LMU) and the Technische Universität München (TUM), were two of the first three German universities to be awarded the title &quot;elite university&quot; by a selection committee composed of academics and members of the Ministries of Education and Research of the Federation and the German states (Länder).

*Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich (LMU), founded in 1472 in Ingolstadt, moved to Munich in 1826
*Technical University of Munich (TUM), founded in 1868
*Akademie der Bildenden Künste München, founded in 1808
*Bundeswehr University Munich, founded in 1973 (located in Neubiberg)
*Deutsche Journalistenschule, founded in 1959
*Bayerische Akademie für Außenwirtschaft, founded in 1989
*Hochschule für Musik und Theater München, founded in 1830
*International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Life Sciences, founded in 2005
*International School of Management, Germany, founded in 1990
*Katholische Stiftungsfachhochschule München, founded in 1971
*Munich Business School (MBS), founded in 1991
*Munich Intellectual Property Law Center (MIPLC), founded in 2003
*Munich School of Philosophy, founded in 1925 in Pullach, moved to Munich in 1971
*Munich School of Political Science, founded in 1950
*Munich University of Applied Sciences (HM), founded in 1971
*New European College, founded in 2014
*Ukrainian Free University, founded in 1921 (from 1945 – in Munich)
*University of Television and Film Munich (&quot;Hochschule für Fernsehen und Film&quot;), founded in 1966

===Primary and secondary schools===
Notable Gymnasien in Munich include the Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium, the Luitpold Gymnasium, the Wilhelmsgymnasium, as well as the Wittelsbacher Gymnasium. Munich has several notable international schools, including Lycée Jean Renoir, the Japanische Internationale Schule München, the Bavarian International School, the Munich International School, and the European School, Munich.

===Scientific research institutions===
===Max Planck Society===
The Max Planck Society, a government funded non-profit research organization, has its administrative headquarters in Munich.

===Fraunhofer Society===
The Fraunhofer Society, the German government funded research organization for applied research, has its headquarters in Munich.

===Other research institutes===

*Botanische Staatssammlung München, a notable herbarium
*Ifo Institute for Economic Research, theoretical and applied research in economics and finance
*Doerner Institute
*European Southern Observatory
*Helmholtz Zentrum München
*Zoologische Staatssammlung München
*German Aerospace Center (GSOC), Oberpfaffenhofen bei München

==International relations==
===Twin towns and sister cities===
Munich is twinned with:

*Edinburgh, Scotland, UK (1954)
*Verona, Italy (1960)
*Bordeaux, France (1964)
*Sapporo, Japan (1972)
*Cincinnati, United States (1989)
*Kyiv, Ukraine (1989)
*Harare, Zimbabwe (1996)
*Beersheba, Israel (2021)
==Economy==

Munich has the strongest economy of any German city according to a study and the lowest unemployment rate (5.4% in July 2020) of any German city of more than a million people (the others being Berlin, Hamburg and Cologne). Munich ranks third on the list of German cities by gross domestic product (GDP). In addition, it is one of the most attractive business locations in Germany. The city is also the economic centre of southern Germany. Munich topped the ranking of the magazine &quot;Capital&quot; in February 2005 for the economic prospects between 2002 and 2011 in 60 German cities.

Munich is a financial center and global city that holds the headquarters of many companies. This includes more companies listed by the DAX than any other German city, as well as the German or European headquarters of many foreign companies such as McDonald&#x27;s and Microsoft. One of the best-known newly established Munich companies is Flixbus.

===Manufacturing===
Munich holds the headquarters of Siemens AG (electronics), BMW (car), Traton (truck manufacturer, engineering), MTU Aero Engines (aircraft engine manufacturer), Linde (gases) and Rohde &amp; Schwarz (electronics). Among German cities with more than 500,000 inhabitants, purchasing power is highest in Munich (€26,648 per inhabitant) . In 2006, Munich blue-collar workers enjoyed an average hourly wage of €18.62 (ca. $20).

The breakdown by cities proper (not metropolitan areas) of Global 500 cities listed Munich in 8th position in 2009. Munich is also a centre for biotechnology, software and other service industries. Furthermore, Munich is the home of the headquarters of many other large companies such as the injection moulding machine manufacturer Krauss-Maffei, and its arms manufacturing branch Krauss-Maffei &amp; Wegmann, the camera and lighting manufacturer Arri, the semiconductor firm Infineon Technologies (headquartered in the suburban town of Neubiberg), lighting giant Osram, as well as the German or European headquarters of many foreign companies such as Microsoft.

===Finance===
Munich has significance as a financial centre (second only to Frankfurt), being home of HypoVereinsbank and the Bayerische Landesbank. It outranks Frankfurt though as home of insurance companies such as Allianz (insurance) and Munich Re (re-insurance).

===Media===
Munich is the largest publishing city in Europe and home to the &quot;Süddeutsche Zeitung&quot;, one of Germany&#x27;s biggest daily newspapers. The city is also the location of the programming headquarters of Germany&#x27;s largest public broadcasting network, ARD, while the largest commercial network, Pro7-Sat1 Media AG, is headquartered in the suburb of Unterföhring. The headquarters of the German branch of Random House, the world&#x27;s largest publishing house, and of Burda publishing group are also in Munich.

The Bavaria Film Studios are located in the suburb of Grünwald. They are one of Europe&#x27;s biggest film production studios.

===Technology===

*Teamwire, 2010 technology startup company

==Quality of life==
Most Munich residents enjoy a high quality of life. Mercer HR Consulting consistently rates the city among the top 10 cities with the highest quality of life worldwide – a 2011 survey ranked Munich as 4th. In 2007 the same company also ranked Munich as the 39th most expensive in the world and most expensive major city in Germany. Munich enjoys a thriving economy, driven by the information technology, biotechnology, and publishing sectors. Environmental pollution is low, although the city council is concerned about levels of particulate matter (PM), especially along the city&#x27;s major thoroughfares. Since the enactment of EU legislation concerning the concentration of particulate in the air, environmental groups such as Greenpeace have staged large protest rallies to urge the city council and the state government to take a harder stance on pollution. Due to the high standard of living in and the thriving economy of the city and the region, there was an influx of people and Munich&#x27;s population surpassed 1.5 million by June 2015, an increase of more than 20% in 10 years.

==Transport==
Munich has an extensive public transport system consisting of an underground metro, trams, buses and high-speed rail. In 2015, the transport modal share in Munich was 38 percent public transport, 25 percent car, 23 percent walking, and 15 percent bicycle. Its public transport system delivered 566 million passenger trips that year.

Munich is the hub of a developed regional transportation system, including the second-largest airport in Germany and the Berlin–Munich high-speed railway, which connects Munich to the German capital city with a journey time of about 4 hours. Flixmobility which offers intercity coach service is headquartered in Munich.

The trade fair Transport Logistic is held every two years at the &quot;Neue Messe München&quot; (Messe München International).

===Public transport===

For its urban population of 2.6 million people, Munich and its closest suburbs have a comprehensive network of public transport incorporating the Munich U-Bahn, the Munich S-Bahn, trams and buses. The system is supervised by the Munich Transport and Tariff Association (&quot;Münchner Verkehrs- und Tarifverbund&quot;). The Munich tramway is the oldest existing public transportation system in the city, which has been in operation since 1876. Munich also has an extensive network of bus lines. The average amount of time people spend commuting to and from work with public transit in Munich on a weekday is 56 min.

The extensive network of subway and tram lines assists and complement pedestrian movement in the city centre. The 700m-long Kaufinger Straße, which starts near the Main train station, forms a pedestrian east–west spine that traverses almost the entire centre. Major spines and many smaller streets cover an extensive area of the centre that can be enjoyed on foot and bike. These attributes result from applying the principle of filtered permeability. Pedestrian and bike paths, which permeate the entire Munich city centre, go through public squares and open spaces for enjoyment. Munich city centre was subject to urban planning and has a comprehensive model for laying out neighborhoods and districts according to grid plan.

===Cycling===
Cycling has a strong presence in the city and is recognized as a good alternative. The growing number of bicycle lanes are widely used throughout the year. Cycle paths can be found alongside the majority of sidewalks and streets, although the newer or renovated ones are much easier to tell apart from pavements than older ones. A modern bike hire system is available within the area bounded by the &quot;Mittlerer Ring&quot;.

===Cultural history trails and bicycle routes===
Since 2001, historically interesting places in Munich can be explored via the List of cultural history trails in Munich (&quot;KulturGeschichtsPfade&quot;). Sign-posted cycle routes are the Outer &quot;Äußere Radlring&quot; (outer cycle route) and the &quot;RadlRing München&quot;.

===Munich Central Train Station===

München Hauptbahnhof is the central railway station located in the city centre and is the long-distance station in Munich.

Munich Central Train Station serves about 450,000 passengers a day, which puts it on par with other large stations in Germany. Munich Central Train Station alongside München Ost railway station are two of the 21 stations in Germany classified by Deutsche Bahn as a category 1 station.

The central mainline station is a terminal station with 32 platforms. The subterranean S-Bahn with 2 platforms and U-Bahn stations with 6 platforms are through stations.

The Intercity-Express (ICE) stop at Munich Central Train Station. InterCity and EuroCity trains to destinations east of Munich also stop at the München Ost railway station. Munich is connected to Nuremberg via Ingolstadt by the Nuremberg–Munich high-speed railway and Berlin–Munich high-speed railway.

The old air raid shelter next to platform 11 of Munich Central Train Station was an important distribution point for guest workers (&quot;Gastarbeiter&quot;) between 1960 and 1973. At peak more than 1,000 guest workers arrived per day, in total 1.8 million guest workers passed through Munich Central Train Station.

===Autobahns===
Munich is an integral part of the Autobahn network of southern Germany. Motorways from Stuttgart (W), Nuremberg, Frankfurt and Berlin (N), Deggendorf and Passau (E), Salzburg and Innsbruck (SE), Garmisch Partenkirchen (S) and Lindau (SW) terminate at Munich, allowing direct access to the different parts of Germany, Austria and Italy.

Traffic is often very heavy in and around Munich. Traffic congestion are commonplace at the beginning and end of major Bavarian holidays. There are few &quot;green waves&quot; or roundabouts, and an abundance of construction sites.

Munich has introduced an environmental zone and was among the first German cities to require a green sticker for vehicles, these are an requirement when entering the city or driving in the wider surrounding area.

=== Air ===
====Munich International Airport====

Franz Josef Strauss International Airport (IATA: MUC, ICAO: EDDM) is the second-largest airport in Germany and seventh-largest in Europe after London Heathrow, Paris Charles de Gaulle, Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Madrid and Istanbul Atatürk. It is used by about 46 million passengers a year, and lies some north east of the city centre. It replaced the smaller Munich-Riem Airport in 1992. The airport can be reached by suburban train lines from the city. From the main railway station the journey takes 40–45 minutes. A magnetic levitation train (called Transrapid), which was to have run at speeds of up to from the central station to the airport in a travel time of 10 minutes, had been approved, but was cancelled in March 2008 because of cost escalation and after heavy protests. Lufthansa opened its second hub at the airport when Terminal 2 was opened in 2003.

====Other airports====
In 2008, the Bavarian state government granted a licence to expand Oberpfaffenhofen Air Station located west of Munich, for commercial use. These plans were opposed by many residents in the Oberpfaffenhofen area as well as other branches of local government, including the city of Munich, which took the case to court. However, in October 2009, the permit allowing up to 9725 business flights per year to depart from or land at Oberpfaffenhofen was confirmed by a regional judge.

Despite being from Munich, Memmingen Airport has been advertised as Airport Munich West. After 2005, passenger traffic of nearby Augsburg Airport was relocated to Munich Airport, leaving the Augsburg region of Bavaria without an air passenger airport within close reach.

==Around Munich==

===Nearby towns===
The Munich agglomeration sprawls across the plain of the Alpine foothills comprising about 2.6 million inhabitants. Several smaller traditional Bavarian towns and cities like Dachau, Freising, Erding, Starnberg, Landshut and Moosburg are today part of the Greater Munich Region, formed by Munich and the surrounding districts, making up the Munich Metropolitan Region, which has a population of about 6 million people.

===Recreation===

South of Munich, there are numerous nearby freshwater lakes such as Lake Starnberg, Ammersee, Chiemsee, Walchensee, Kochelsee, Tegernsee, Schliersee, Simssee, Staffelsee, Wörthsee, Kirchsee and the Osterseen (Easter Lakes), which are popular among Munich residents for recreation, swimming and watersports and can be quickly reached by car and a few also by Munich&#x27;s S-Bahn.
==Notable people==

===Born in Munich===

===Notable residents===
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="0" end="6" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q27763944" start="34" end="52" title="List of cities in Bavaria by population" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="56" end="63" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="65" end="72" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242225" start="151" end="194" title="List of cities in Germany by population" label="third-largest city by population in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="202" end="208" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="213" end="220" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q727640" start="299" end="316" title="List of cities in the European Union by population within city limits" label="11th-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="324" end="338" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q880769" start="446" end="477" title="Munich Metropolitan Region" label="city&amp;#x27;s metropolitan region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="525" end="565" title="List of EU metropolitan regions by GDP#2021 ranking of top 4 German metropolitan regions" label="third largest metropolitan region by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q106588" start="624" end="628" title="Isar" label="Isar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="642" end="646" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q22721" start="683" end="704" title="Regierungsbezirk" label="administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10562" start="708" end="721" title="Upper Bavaria" label="Upper Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="854" end="875" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian dialect area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="907" end="913" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="992" end="1003" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1065" end="1087" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="1163" end="1169" title="Swedes" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="1207" end="1225" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="1282" end="1294" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="1337" end="1367" title="German revolution of 1918–1919" label="German revolution of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="1380" end="1400" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q58738" start="1492" end="1516" title="Bavarian Soviet Republic" label="Bavarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="1610" end="1620" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1757" end="1769" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="1981" end="1998" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="2020" end="2040" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="2109" end="2119" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391599" start="2270" end="2276" title="Mercer (consulting firm)" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2344" end="2386" title="Most livable cities in the world#Monocle&amp;#x27;s Quality of Life Survey" label="Monocle&amp;#x27;s Quality of Life Survey 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2679" end="2700" title="Munich&amp;#x27;s economy" label="Munich&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="2713" end="2722" title="high tech" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="2724" end="2735" title="Automotive industry" label="automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="2745" end="2759" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="2772" end="2794" title="Information technology" label="Information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="2796" end="2809" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="2828" end="2839" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="3050" end="3053" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="3055" end="3062" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q487292" start="3064" end="3074" title="Allianz SE" label="Allianz SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q166637" start="3079" end="3088" title="Munich Re" label="Munich Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="3297" end="3308" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="3427" end="3432" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106588" start="3658" end="3662" title="Isar" label="Isar"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="3681" end="3692" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3704" end="3714" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q200433" start="3744" end="3753" title="raft" label="raft port"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3848" end="3852" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3876" end="3884" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q255291" start="3922" end="3940" title="Ramersdorf-Perlach" label="Ramersdorf-Perlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="4012" end="4020" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="4025" end="4033" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q503705" start="4090" end="4100" title="Baierbrunn" label="Baierbrunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q74057" start="4105" end="4112" title="Gauting" label="Gauting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188920" start="4191" end="4198" title="Denning (Munich)" label="Denning"/>
<link wikidata="Q156740" start="4263" end="4272" title="Baiuvarii" label="Baiuvarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974" start="4589" end="4597" title="Landshut" label="Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="4630" end="4644" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754087" start="4704" end="4714" title="salt trade" label="salt trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107" start="4918" end="4924" title="Höxter" label="Höxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q435942" start="5204" end="5220" title="Otto of Freising" label="Otto of Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="5246" end="5273" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Frederick Barbarosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="5314" end="5322" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q760561" start="5383" end="5403" title="Augsburg Arbitration" label="Augsburg Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q252648" start="5773" end="5784" title="Marienplatz" label="Marienplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q707645" start="6006" end="6029" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Munich" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60563" start="6281" end="6299" title="Otto I of Wittelsbach, Duke of Bavaria" label="Otto I Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q219133" start="6353" end="6371" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising" label="Bishop of Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q697412" start="6408" end="6427" title="Otto II Wittelsbach, Duke of Bavaria" label="Otto II Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="6450" end="6466" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Duchy of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10562" start="6522" end="6535" title="Upper Bavaria" label="Upper Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="6543" end="6551" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="6620" end="6638" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="6893" end="6904" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q127691207" start="7041" end="7060" title="Munich City Streams" label="Munich City Streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="7188" end="7198" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="7259" end="7265" title="gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167193" start="7279" end="7291" title="Munich Frauenkirche" label="Frauenkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q677693" start="7447" end="7450" title="War of the Succession of Landshut" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q677490" start="7472" end="7480" title="Bavaria-Landshut" label="Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7580" end="7591" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="7645" end="7665" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q60907" start="7677" end="7687" title="Albert V, Duke of Bavaria" label="Albrecht V"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="7764" end="7783" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q707981" start="7839" end="7892" title="Staatliche Antikensammlungen" label="Wittelsbach collection of Greek and Roman antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q686548" start="7900" end="7915" title="Residenz, Munich" label="Munich Residenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="7951" end="7967" title="Orlando di Lasso" label="Orlando di Lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="8109" end="8126" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q60568" start="8147" end="8161" title="William V, Duke of Bavaria" label="Duke William V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="8255" end="8266" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="8382" end="8388" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q265745" start="8389" end="8403" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Munich" label="Michaelskirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q67095" start="8453" end="8468" title="Jeremias Drexel" label="Jeremias Drexel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938795" start="8757" end="8773" title="Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church" label="Marian devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q697534" start="8793" end="8804" title="Hofbräuhaus" label="Hofbräuhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q858012" start="8854" end="8863" title="beer hall" label="beer hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8886" end="8898" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q167193" start="8935" end="8947" title="Munich Frauenkirche" label="Frauenkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q707645" start="8957" end="8969" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Munich" label="Peterskirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="9028" end="9038" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q731814" start="9066" end="9081" title="Catholic League (German)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="9133" end="9155" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57206" start="9216" end="9228" title="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria" label="Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="9251" end="9268" title="prince-elector" label="electoral dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="9312" end="9339" title="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden" label="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="9475" end="9489" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="9795" end="9802" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="9838" end="9846" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57841" start="9890" end="9911" title="Maximilian III Joseph" label="Maximilian III Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q22932" start="9955" end="9965" title="Count palatine" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="9984" end="10004" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44961" start="10048" end="10060" title="Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria" label="Karl Theodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44645" start="10195" end="10212" title="Benjamin Thompson" label="Benjamin Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="10328" end="10338" title="workhouses" label="workhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="10528" end="10541" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="10936" end="10954" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10976" end="10997" title="Maximillian IV Joseph" label="Maximillian IV Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="11055" end="11062" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q219133" start="11082" end="11116" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising" label="archdiocese of Munich and Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="11322" end="11336" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="11370" end="11381" title="monasteries" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q582096" start="11836" end="11846" title="journeymen" label="journeymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q233198" start="12138" end="12168" title="Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen" label="Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q700887" start="12294" end="12308" title="Theresienwiese" label="Theresienwiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="12366" end="12377" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q319676" start="12633" end="12644" title="Competition (economics)" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="12918" end="12929" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="13131" end="13147" title="Sanitation" label="water sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="13267" end="13280" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q388523" start="13421" end="13435" title="Peter von Hess" label="Peter von Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="13448" end="13473" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="13495" end="13503" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I"/>
<link wikidata="Q561084" start="13522" end="13533" title="Königsplatz, Munich" label="Königsplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60163" start="13592" end="13606" title="Leo von Klenze" label="Leo von Klenze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="13877" end="13885" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q254647" start="13945" end="13965" title="München Hauptbahnhof" label="München Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974" start="14003" end="14011" title="Landshut" label="Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="14016" end="14026" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="14049" end="14057" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60163" start="14129" end="14143" title="Leo von Klenze" label="Leo von Klenze"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="14184" end="14196" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041323" start="14370" end="14385" title="Carl von Effner" label="Carl von Effner"/>
<link wikidata="Q106588" start="14420" end="14424" title="Isar" label="Isar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958977" start="14497" end="14525" title="Münchner Neueste Nachrichten" label="Münchner Neueste Nachrichten"/>
<link wikidata="Q266759" start="14613" end="14626" title="Maximilianeum" label="Maximilianeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44039" start="14651" end="14660" title="Ludwig II of Bavaria" label="Ludwig II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="14893" end="14907" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="15181" end="15196" title="Neo-Renaissance" label="Neo-Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="15225" end="15238" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q911397" start="15357" end="15385" title="Baroque Revival architecture" label="Baroque Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356060" start="15390" end="15404" title="Rococo Revival" label="Rococo Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q35149" start="15422" end="15437" title="Wilhelm Röntgen" label="Wilhelm Röntgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44785" start="15567" end="15575" title="Luitpold, Prince Regent of Bavaria" label="Luitpold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294605" start="15738" end="15748" title="Jugendstil" label="Jugendstil"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="15813" end="15830" title="industrial design" label="industrial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q118833" start="16004" end="16038" title="Hans Eduard von Berlepsch-Valendas" label="Hans Eduard von Berlepsch-Valendas"/>
<link wikidata="Q456371" start="16040" end="16052" title="Otto Eckmann" label="Otto Eckmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16054" end="16080" title="Margarethe von Brauchitsch" label="Margarethe von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62351" start="16082" end="16095" title="August Endell" label="August Endell"/>
<link wikidata="Q332579" start="16097" end="16111" title="Hermann Obrist" label="Hermann Obrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371430" start="16113" end="16134" title="Wilhelm von Debschitz" label="Wilhelm von Debschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q64104" start="16140" end="16160" title="Richard Riemerschmid" label="Richard Riemerschmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q78111" start="16251" end="16274" title="Hermann Tietz" label="Warenhaus Hermann Tietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q67407" start="16316" end="16328" title="Max Littmann" label="Max Littmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="16342" end="16355" title="expressionist" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="16362" end="16378" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q463978" start="16435" end="16450" title="Gabriele Münter" label="Gabriele Münter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="16579" end="16605" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="Allied blockade of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="16751" end="16754" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="16775" end="16790" title="aircraft engine" label="aircraft engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79091" start="16862" end="16881" title="Camillo Castiglioni" label="Camillo Castiglioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q44393" start="17119" end="17140" title="Ludwig III of Bavaria" label="Ludwig III of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q684380" start="17212" end="17230" title="List of Ministers-President of Bavaria" label="premier of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76440" start="17231" end="17242" title="Kurt Eisner" label="Kurt Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q63060" start="17263" end="17293" title="Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley" label="Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q58738" start="17299" end="17323" title="Bavarian Soviet Republic" label="Bavarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="17425" end="17435" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="17442" end="17454" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q648034" start="17670" end="17682" title="Bavaria Film" label="Bavaria Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q705676" start="17793" end="17810" title="Babelsberg Studio" label="Babelsberg Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q58860" start="17820" end="17835" title="Gustav von Kahr" label="Gustav von Kahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q90644" start="17981" end="17993" title="Ernst Pöhner" label="Ernst Pöhner"/>
<link wikidata="Q76887" start="17998" end="18011" title="Wilhelm Frick" label="Wilhelm Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="18253" end="18269" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="18299" end="18314" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="18420" end="18430" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="18478" end="18499" title="Free State of Bavaria" label="Free State of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="18870" end="18888" title="Nazi concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="18892" end="18898" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q119239" start="19238" end="19276" title="National Socialist Women&amp;#x27;s League" label="National Socialist Women&amp;#x27;s League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="19285" end="19292" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q880404" start="19318" end="19333" title="Brienner Straße (Munich)" label="Brienner Straße"/>
<link wikidata="Q561084" start="19349" end="19360" title="Königsplatz, Munich" label="Königsplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q571767" start="19557" end="19566" title="Führerbau" label="Führerbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q819575" start="19608" end="19619" title="Brown House, Munich" label="Brown House"/>
<link wikidata="Q697782" start="19658" end="19672" title="Haus der Kunst" label="Haus der Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q63199" start="19768" end="19779" title="Paul Troost" label="Paul Troost"/>
<link wikidata="Q319069" start="19956" end="19968" title="Glaspalast (Munich)" label="Glass Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="20477" end="20493" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="20536" end="20557" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="20563" end="20575" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="20616" end="20627" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="20656" end="20675" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="20713" end="20727" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="20735" end="20746" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q372317" start="20816" end="20835" title="Munich-Riem Airport" label="Munich-Riem Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q77269" start="20934" end="20945" title="Georg Elser" label="Georg Elser"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="21283" end="21296" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="21351" end="21357" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="21388" end="21413" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719246" start="21549" end="21581" title="Munich-Allach concentration camp" label="Munich-Allach concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153364" start="21611" end="21621" title="White Rose" label="White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="21633" end="21652" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="21730" end="21750" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q504073" start="21772" end="21779" title="stencil" label="stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76972" start="21949" end="21962" title="Sophie Scholl" label="Sophie Scholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q57820" start="21979" end="21990" title="Hans Scholl" label="Hans Scholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="22028" end="22045" title="Munich University" label="Munich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875563" start="22137" end="22170" title="bombing of Munich in World War II" label="bombing of Munich in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="22334" end="22345" title="US Military" label="US Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q700842" start="22390" end="22427" title="Former eastern territories of Germany" label="Former eastern territories of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="22432" end="22481" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="expulsion of Germans from all over Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="22862" end="22868" title="West Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q278637" start="23040" end="23060" title="Bayerischer Rundfunk" label="Bayerischer Rundfunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="23112" end="23133" title="Free State of Bavaria" label="Free State of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="23143" end="23156" title="arms industry" label="arms industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="23175" end="23184" title="high tech" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q565507" start="23245" end="23271" title="Munich Security Conference" label="Munich Security Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q728213" start="23294" end="23315" title="Hotel Bayerischer Hof, Munich" label="Hotel Bayerischer Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q44620" start="23416" end="23435" title="Franz Josef Strauss" label="Franz Josef Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q131402" start="23469" end="23483" title="Munich Airport" label="Munich Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q108481" start="23565" end="23582" title="Dieter Kunzelmann" label="Dieter Kunzelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="23605" end="23631" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="23861" end="23881" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q99736389" start="23917" end="23932" title="Mayor of Munich" label="Mayor of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q552483" start="23933" end="23950" title="Hans-Jochen Vogel" label="Hans-Jochen Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q164054" start="23987" end="23993" title="Munich U-Bahn" label="U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q256524" start="24009" end="24015" title="Munich S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q383296" start="24138" end="24150" title="Olympiapark (Munich)" label="Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q526963" start="24203" end="24219" title="BMW Headquarters" label="BMW Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q152974" start="24425" end="24435" title="Karlsplatz (Stachus)" label="Karlsplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q252648" start="24440" end="24451" title="Marienplatz" label="Marienplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="24519" end="24525" title="Gothic architecture" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295591" start="24537" end="24549" title="Rathaus-Glockenspiel" label="Glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152979" start="24557" end="24582" title="Neues Rathaus (Munich)" label="&amp;quot;New City Hall&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="24688" end="24699" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="24718" end="24733" title="Munich massacre" label="Munich massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q152211" start="24774" end="24789" title="Black September (group)" label="Black September"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="24889" end="24916" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q464048" start="24944" end="24963" title="Oktoberfest bombing" label="Oktoberfest bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="25010" end="25020" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="25037" end="25049" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="25187" end="25200" title="labour market" label="labour market"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="25230" end="25245" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q256487" start="25303" end="25314" title="Nockherberg" label="Nockherberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428433" start="25653" end="25675" title="ecological restoration" label="ecological restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429491" start="25922" end="25931" title="river bed" label="river bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="25961" end="25977" title="flood protection" label="flood protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741" start="26030" end="26040" title="green roof" label="green roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="26090" end="26100" title="stormwater" label="stormwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q79967" start="26193" end="26212" title="2011 Norway attacks" label="2011 Norway attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029371" start="26216" end="26230" title="active shooter" label="active shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="26245" end="26255" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q25980145" start="26261" end="26281" title="2016 Munich shooting" label="2016 Munich shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="26366" end="26380" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="UEFA Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q83889294" start="26422" end="26450" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Germany" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098367" start="26476" end="26490" title="UEFA Euro 2024" label="UEFA Euro 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q10562" start="26562" end="26575" title="Upper Bavaria" label="Upper Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="26617" end="26621" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="26647" end="26650" title="Above mean sea level" label="ASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q106588" start="26677" end="26681" title="Isar" label="Isar"/>
<link wikidata="Q258243" start="26690" end="26694" title="Würm" label="Würm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="26731" end="26746" title="Foothills" label="Alpine Foreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="26814" end="26819" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q81659" start="26860" end="26867" title="fold (geology)" label="folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="26937" end="26945" title="moraine" label="morainic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667598" start="26981" end="26995" title="fluvio-glacial" label="fluvio-glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="27070" end="27082" title="Groundwater" label="ground water"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="27146" end="27151" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="27213" end="27242" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="27259" end="27266" title="Oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="27328" end="27345" title="Humid continental climate" label="humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q131402" start="27504" end="27521" title="Munich Airport" label="airport of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="27528" end="27553" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="27641" end="27645" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909735" start="27723" end="27737" title="Urban flooding" label="flood problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="27750" end="27778" title="climate change adaptation" label="adaptation to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="27851" end="27853" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="28340" end="28349" title="föhn wind" label="föhn wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="28662" end="28666" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="29031" end="29040" title="inversion (meteorology)" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="29237" end="29247" title="convective" label="convective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="29298" end="29317" title="Thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="29446" end="29461" title="weather station" label="weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="29671" end="29685" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q842740" start="30008" end="30022" title="tropical night" label="tropical night"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="30038" end="30060" title="Precipitation" label="precipitation patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q325859" start="30346" end="30375" title="Deutscher Wetterdienst" label="German Meteorological Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q149013" start="30656" end="30672" title="spatial planning" label="spatial planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="30776" end="30787" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="31687" end="31692" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="31703" end="31709" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="31720" end="31728" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="31739" end="31745" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165235" start="31756" end="31764" title="Bosnians" label="Bosnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="31774" end="31784" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="31799" end="31808" title="Austrians" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="32168" end="32176" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="32184" end="32194" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516808" start="32214" end="32243" title="History of the Jews in Munich" label="History of the Jews in Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="32291" end="32307" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="32311" end="32328" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="32403" end="32415" title="Old Catholic" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="32461" end="32477" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="32582" end="32588" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="32613" end="32619" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q701642" start="32810" end="32831" title="World Uyghur Congress" label="World Uyghur Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="32845" end="32871" title="international organisation" label="international organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q641439" start="33054" end="33072" title="Landtag of Bavaria" label="Landtag of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q812286" start="33078" end="33095" title="Bayerische Staatskanzlei" label="State Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q702415" start="33208" end="33240" title="Federal Finance Court of Germany" label="Federal Finance Court of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q314296" start="33246" end="33266" title="German Patent Office" label="German Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132151" start="33275" end="33297" title="European Patent Office" label="European Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222671" start="33343" end="33356" title="Dieter Reiter" label="Dieter Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="33373" end="33407" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="33496" end="33529" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="Christian Social Union in Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222671" start="33945" end="33958" title="Dieter Reiter" label="Dieter Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="33971" end="33994" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="34075" end="34097" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="Christian Social Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="34183" end="34205" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="34272" end="34295" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q294989" start="34356" end="34383" title="Ecological Democratic Party" label="Ecological Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="34445" end="34466" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="34529" end="34537" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231839" start="34611" end="34633" title="Free Voters of Bavaria" label="Free Voters of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="34696" end="34706" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q255857" start="34830" end="34843" title="Bavaria Party" label="Bavaria Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="35628" end="35650" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="35748" end="35770" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="Christian Social Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="35858" end="35881" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222671" start="35900" end="35913" title="Dieter Reiter" label="Dieter Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q294989" start="35968" end="35995" title="Ecological Democratic Party" label="Ecological Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="36078" end="36101" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="36185" end="36206" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="36291" end="36299" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231839" start="36396" end="36418" title="Free Voters of Bavaria" label="Free Voters of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36507" end="36519" title="Volt Europa#Germany" label="Volt Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="36602" end="36612" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q255857" start="36888" end="36901" title="Bavaria Party" label="Bavaria Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q641439" start="38051" end="38069" title="Landtag of Bavaria" label="Landtag of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19833920" start="38128" end="38156" title="2018 Bavarian state election" label="2018 Bavarian state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="38252" end="38261" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q108701512" start="38317" end="38331" title="List of members of the 20th Bundestag" label="20th Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="38480" end="38487" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q252295" start="38566" end="38585" title="Allach-Untermenzing" label="Allach-Untermenzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q971198" start="38592" end="38606" title="Altstadt-Lehel" label="Altstadt-Lehel"/>
<link wikidata="Q533095" start="38612" end="38638" title="Aubing-Lochhausen-Langwied" label="Aubing-Lochhausen-Langwied"/>
<link wikidata="Q252058" start="38645" end="38658" title="Au-Haidhausen" label="Au-Haidhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q533054" start="38664" end="38676" title="Berg am Laim" label="Berg am Laim"/>
<link wikidata="Q329707" start="38683" end="38694" title="Bogenhausen" label="Bogenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q252173" start="38701" end="38723" title="Feldmoching-Hasenbergl" label="Feldmoching-Hasenbergl"/>
<link wikidata="Q267364" start="38730" end="38736" title="Hadern" label="Hadern"/>
<link wikidata="Q259879" start="38743" end="38747" title="Laim" label="Laim"/>
<link wikidata="Q537044" start="38754" end="38782" title="Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt" label="Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q256012" start="38788" end="38799" title="Maxvorstadt" label="Maxvorstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q251311" start="38805" end="38826" title="Milbertshofen-Am Hart" label="Milbertshofen-Am Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q263163" start="38833" end="38840" title="Moosach (District of Munich)" label="Moosach"/>
<link wikidata="Q266932" start="38847" end="38868" title="Neuhausen-Nymphenburg" label="Neuhausen-Nymphenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q254178" start="38874" end="38885" title="Obergiesing" label="Obergiesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q255702" start="38892" end="38910" title="Pasing-Obermenzing" label="Pasing-Obermenzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q255291" start="38917" end="38935" title="Ramersdorf-Perlach" label="Ramersdorf-Perlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q252119" start="38942" end="38960" title="Schwabing-Freimann" label="Schwabing-Freimann"/>
<link wikidata="Q252119" start="38967" end="38981" title="Schwabing-West" label="Schwabing-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q166011" start="38987" end="39003" title="Schwanthalerhöhe" label="Schwanthalerhöhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q262879" start="39009" end="39017" title="Sendling" label="Sendling"/>
<link wikidata="Q224635" start="39023" end="39040" title="Sendling-Westpark" label="Sendling-Westpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q458136" start="39046" end="39100" title="Thalkirchen-Obersendling-Forstenried-Fürstenried-Solln" label="Thalkirchen-Obersendling-Forstenried-Fürstenried-Solln"/>
<link wikidata="Q538037" start="39107" end="39121" title="Trudering-Riem" label="Trudering-Riem"/>
<link wikidata="Q265068" start="39132" end="39155" title="Untergiesing-Harlaching" label="Untergiesing-Harlaching"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39319" end="39322" title=":de:Liste der Stadtteile Münchens#/media/Datei:Karte der Ortsbezeichnungen in München.png" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q252119" start="39357" end="39366" title="Schwabing" label="Schwabing"/>
<link wikidata="Q262879" start="39409" end="39417" title="Sendling" label="Sendling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523383" start="39468" end="39475" title="Giesing" label="Giesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q252648" start="39589" end="39600" title="Marienplatz" label="Marienplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q439458" start="39610" end="39623" title="Old Town Hall, Munich" label="Old Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152979" start="39632" end="39645" title="New Town Hall, Munich" label="New Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295591" start="39670" end="39690" title="Rathaus-Glockenspiel" label="Rathaus-Glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q707645" start="39696" end="39708" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Munich" label="Peterskirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q251087" start="39790" end="39807" title="Heiliggeistkirche (Munich)" label="Heiliggeistkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q686629" start="39881" end="39896" title="Viktualienmarkt" label="Viktualienmarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q260660" start="39974" end="39981" title="Isartor" label="Isartor"/>
<link wikidata="Q254394" start="39987" end="40001" title="Sendlinger Tor" label="Sendlinger Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q567400" start="40011" end="40019" title="Karlstor" label="Karlstor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152974" start="40050" end="40057" title="Karlsplatz (Stachus)" label="Stachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130609" start="40085" end="40097" title="Justizpalast (Munich)" label="Justizpalast"/>
<link wikidata="Q167193" start="40124" end="40136" title="Munich Frauenkirche" label="Frauenkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q219133" start="40169" end="40212" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising" label="Catholic Archdiocese of Munich and Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q265745" start="40225" end="40239" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Munich" label="Michaelskirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="40255" end="40266" title="renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q259799" start="40303" end="40318" title="Theatine Church, Munich" label="Theatinerkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="40324" end="40332" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="40408" end="40415" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q259839" start="40453" end="40464" title="Odeonsplatz" label="Odeonsplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131631" start="40514" end="40532" title="Nymphenburg Palace" label="Nymphenburg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q567568" start="40637" end="40655" title="Fürstenried Palace" label="Fürstenried Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q219133" start="40696" end="40730" title="Archdiocese of Munich and Freising" label="Archdiocese of Munich and Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q702533" start="40778" end="40795" title="Blutenburg Castle" label="Blutenburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q686548" start="40943" end="40958" title="Munich Residenz" label="Munich Residenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q532191" start="41111" end="41128" title="Cuvilliés Theatre" label="Cuvilliés Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q707679" start="41150" end="41173" title="National Theatre Munich" label="National Theatre Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q321041" start="41229" end="41242" title="Palais Porcia" label="Palais Porcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q872048" start="41248" end="41263" title="Palais Preysing" label="Palais Preysing"/>
<link wikidata="Q686997" start="41269" end="41285" title="Palais Holnstein" label="Palais Holnstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q880394" start="41294" end="41311" title="Prinz-Carl-Palais" label="Prinz-Carl-Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q315084" start="41364" end="41373" title="Alter Hof" label="Alter Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="41402" end="41422" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294605" start="41506" end="41516" title="Jugendstil" label="Jugendstil"/>
<link wikidata="Q96787" start="41546" end="41559" title="Martin Dülfer" label="Martin Dülfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61259" start="41656" end="41671" title="Theodor Fischer" label="Theodor Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="41801" end="41816" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="41858" end="41867" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q91823" start="41887" end="41905" title="German Bestelmeyer" label="German Bestelmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q470588" start="41940" end="41951" title="Jacobus Oud" label="Jacobus Oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q104993" start="42059" end="42076" title="Robert Vorhoelzer" label="Robert Vorhoelzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="42130" end="42141" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q104993" start="42236" end="42253" title="Robert Vorhoelzer" label="Robert Vorhoelzer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42329" end="42343" title="Fritz Norkauer" label="Fritz Norkauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q69257" start="42345" end="42367" title="Paul Schultze-Naumburg" label="Paul Schultze-Naumburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643648" start="42377" end="42386" title="Kampfbund" label="Kampfbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q896364" start="42544" end="42553" title="Hypo-Haus" label="HVB Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q623693" start="42559" end="42586" title="Arabella High-Rise Building" label="Arabella High-Rise Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q882583" start="42592" end="42608" title="Highlight Towers" label="Highlight Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q328507" start="42610" end="42623" title="Uptown Munich" label="Uptown Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q526963" start="42646" end="42662" title="BMW Headquarters" label="BMW Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q383296" start="42675" end="42687" title="Olympiapark (Munich)" label="Olympic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q533054" start="42739" end="42751" title="Berg am Laim" label="Berg am Laim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104567" start="43242" end="43256" title="housing estate" label="housing estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="43331" end="43344" title="densification" label="densification"/>
<link wikidata="Q68169" start="43649" end="43676" title="Friedrich Ludwig von Sckell" label="Friedrich Ludwig von Sckell"/>
<link wikidata="Q260223" start="43709" end="43726" title="Englischer Garten" label="Englischer Garten"/>
<link wikidata="Q131631" start="43886" end="43904" title="Nymphenburg Palace" label="Nymphenburg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q707660" start="43913" end="43951" title="Botanischer Garten München-Nymphenburg" label="Botanischer Garten München-Nymphenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q383296" start="43987" end="43998" title="Olympiapark, Munich" label="Olympiapark"/>
<link wikidata="Q994667" start="44004" end="44012" title="Westpark (Munich)" label="Westpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455683" start="44021" end="44028" title="Ostpark (Munich)" label="Ostpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q707673" start="44065" end="44074" title="Hofgarten (Munich)" label="Hofgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="44333" end="44349" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="FC Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131603" start="44379" end="44390" title="TSV 1860 Munich" label="1860 Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154069" start="44418" end="44425" title="3. Liga" label="3. Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="44439" end="44455" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="FC Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="44581" end="44600" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q600149" start="44620" end="44647" title="FC Bayern Munich (basketball)" label="FC Bayern Munich Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q36984" start="44745" end="44760" title="EuroBasket 1993" label="EuroBasket 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q164592" start="44772" end="44803" title="German national basketball team" label="German national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q658379" start="44877" end="44897" title="EHC Red Bull München" label="EHC Red Bull München"/>
<link wikidata="Q169519" start="44914" end="44937" title="Deutsche Eishockey Liga" label="Deutsche Eishockey Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="45045" end="45065" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="45071" end="45086" title="Munich massacre" label="Munich massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012854" start="45105" end="45120" title="Olympic Village, Munich" label="Olympic village"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="45160" end="45183" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 Football World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131610" start="45221" end="45236" title="Olympic Stadium (Munich)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154710" start="45251" end="45276" title="Soccer-specific stadium" label="football specific stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127429" start="45282" end="45295" title="Allianz Arena" label="Allianz Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="45320" end="45345" title="2018 Winter Olympic Games" label="2018 Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q188624" start="45359" end="45370" title="Pyeongchang County" label="Pyeongchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q323728" start="45394" end="45398" title="DOSB" label="DOSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q72245" start="45409" end="45420" title="Thomas Bach" label="Thomas Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q880008" start="45615" end="45630" title="Munich Marathon" label="Munich Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084891" start="45745" end="45757" title="Spartan Race" label="Spartan Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q882871" start="45968" end="45995" title="Stadtwerke München" label="Munich City Utilities (SWM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882013" start="46056" end="46076" title="Olympia Schwimmhalle" label="Olympia Schwimmhalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="46084" end="46104" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461922" start="46318" end="46328" title="Riemer See" label="Riemer See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805467" start="46336" end="46360" title="Langwieder lake district" label="Langwieder lake district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434370" start="46384" end="46397" title="River surfing" label="River surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q527132" start="46551" end="46558" title="Eisbach (Isar)" label="Eisbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="46797" end="46812" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="46885" end="46892" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="46894" end="46903" title="Austrians" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="46953" end="46963" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="47062" end="47079" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="47196" end="47208" title="Morris dance" label="Morris dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q896013" start="47214" end="47229" title="Erasmus Grasser" label="Erasmus Grasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q452685" start="47251" end="47269" title="Munich Stadtmuseum" label="Munich City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76456" start="47333" end="47349" title="Oskar von Miller" label="Oskar von Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q131617" start="47419" end="47435" title="Deutsches Museum" label="Deutsches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="47568" end="47594" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II, German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q259225" start="47891" end="47901" title="Kunstareal" label="Kunstareal"/>
<link wikidata="Q262234" start="47907" end="47918" title="Lenbachhaus" label="Lenbachhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="47950" end="47966" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170152" start="48131" end="48146" title="Neue Pinakothek" label="Neue Pinakothek"/>
<link wikidata="Q250195" start="48226" end="48248" title="Pinakothek der Moderne" label="Pinakothek der Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="48288" end="48304" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="48654" end="48673" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44530" start="48699" end="48723" title="Maximilian II of Bavaria" label="Maximilian II of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="48840" end="48854" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546309" start="48862" end="48894" title="Self-Portrait (Dürer, Munich)" label="&amp;quot;Self-Portrait&amp;quot; (1500)"/>
<link wikidata="Q829270" start="48906" end="48919" title="The Four Apostles" label="Four Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="48927" end="48934" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713671" start="48958" end="48983" title="Canigiani Holy Family (Raphael)" label="The Canigiani Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535486" start="49000" end="49013" title="Tempi Madonna (Raphael)" label="Madonna Tempi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="49031" end="49048" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q162077" start="49145" end="49155" title="Glyptothek" label="Glyptothek"/>
<link wikidata="Q707981" start="49164" end="49192" title="Staatliche Antikensammlungen" label="Staatliche Antikensammlungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626932" start="49259" end="49275" title="Medusa Rondanini" label="Medusa Rondanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q681431" start="49281" end="49295" title="Barberini Faun" label="Barberini Faun"/>
<link wikidata="Q596988" start="49317" end="49333" title="Temple of Aphaea" label="Temple of Aphaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="49337" end="49343" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q464872" start="49398" end="49438" title="Staatliche Sammlung für Ägyptische Kunst" label="Staatliche Sammlung für Ägyptische Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="49514" end="49552" title="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich" label="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q259225" start="49577" end="49587" title="Kunstareal" label="Kunstareal"/>
<link wikidata="Q473832" start="49638" end="49670" title="Paläontologisches Museum München" label="Paläontologisches Museum München"/>
<link wikidata="Q220219" start="49680" end="49714" title="Zoologische Staatssammlung München" label="Zoologische Staatssammlung München"/>
<link wikidata="Q319069" start="49761" end="49771" title="Glaspalast (Munich)" label="Glaspalast"/>
<link wikidata="Q414052" start="49910" end="49930" title="Academy of Fine Arts, Munich" label="Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q505758" start="49957" end="49972" title="Karl von Piloty" label="Karl von Piloty"/>
<link wikidata="Q604107" start="49983" end="50003" title="Wilhelm von Kaulbach" label="Wilhelm von Kaulbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q454217" start="50010" end="50032" title="Museum Five Continents" label="Museum Five Continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q631056" start="50133" end="50157" title="Bavarian National Museum" label="Bavarian National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q636743" start="50176" end="50216" title="Bavarian State Archaeological Collection" label="Bavarian State Archaeological Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q523652" start="50264" end="50277" title="Schackgalerie" label="Schackgalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="50371" end="50396" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="50542" end="50559" title="Orlande de Lassus" label="Orlande de Lassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="50561" end="50584" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q154812" start="50586" end="50606" title="Carl Maria von Weber" label="Carl Maria von Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="50608" end="50622" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="50624" end="50637" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="50639" end="50654" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q57139" start="50656" end="50665" title="Max Reger" label="Max Reger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44086" start="50670" end="50679" title="Carl Orff" label="Carl Orff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35720" start="50858" end="50881" title="Also sprach Zarathustra (Strauss)" label="Also sprach Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q157150" start="50914" end="50928" title="Carmina Burana" label="Carmina Burana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="50949" end="50963" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="50983" end="51008" title="William I, German Emperor" label="William I, German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44039" start="51053" end="51073" title="Ludwig II of Bavaria" label="Ludwig II of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q465540" start="51106" end="51136" title="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg" label="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707679" start="51286" end="51309" title="National Theatre Munich" label="National Theatre Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q536430" start="51316" end="51342" title="Angelo Quaglio the Younger" label="Angelo Quaglio the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q681931" start="51430" end="51450" title="Bavarian State Opera" label="Bavarian State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q683117" start="51459" end="51483" title="Bavarian State Orchestra" label="Bavarian State Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q883454" start="51507" end="51523" title="Residenz Theatre" label="Residenz Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q532191" start="51573" end="51590" title="Cuvilliés Theatre" label="Cuvilliés Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q318058" start="51596" end="51625" title="Staatstheater am Gärtnerplatz" label="Staatstheater am Gärtnerplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q456586" start="51676" end="51696" title="Prinzregententheater" label="Prinzregententheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q315242" start="51758" end="51782" title="Munich Chamber Orchestra" label="Munich Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q529345" start="51812" end="51819" title="Gasteig" label="Gasteig"/>
<link wikidata="Q693453" start="51838" end="51867" title="Munich Philharmonic" label="Munich Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q636159" start="51936" end="51969" title="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q686548" start="52057" end="52072" title="Munich Residenz" label="Munich Residenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q316920" start="52161" end="52178" title="Felix Weingartner" label="Felix Weingartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q57358" start="52180" end="52193" title="Hans Pfitzner" label="Hans Pfitzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q89527" start="52195" end="52207" title="Hans Rosbaud" label="Hans Rosbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q57425" start="52209" end="52228" title="Hans Knappertsbusch" label="Hans Knappertsbusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q165671" start="52230" end="52248" title="Sergiu Celibidache" label="Sergiu Celibidache"/>
<link wikidata="Q336388" start="52250" end="52262" title="James Levine" label="James Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60813" start="52264" end="52284" title="Christian Thielemann" label="Christian Thielemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q117710" start="52286" end="52298" title="Lorin Maazel" label="Lorin Maazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158017" start="52300" end="52314" title="Rafael Kubelík" label="Rafael Kubelík"/>
<link wikidata="Q57419" start="52316" end="52328" title="Eugen Jochum" label="Eugen Jochum"/>
<link wikidata="Q366624" start="52334" end="52345" title="Colin Davis" label="Colin Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158340" start="52347" end="52361" title="Mariss Jansons" label="Mariss Jansons"/>
<link wikidata="Q156910" start="52363" end="52375" title="Bruno Walter" label="Bruno Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="52377" end="52388" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q157635" start="52390" end="52401" title="Zubin Mehta" label="Zubin Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q819447" start="52406" end="52417" title="Kent Nagano" label="Kent Nagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q984018" start="52469" end="52485" title="Deutsches Theater München" label="Deutsche Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q320592" start="52600" end="52609" title="Krautrock" label="Krautrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319707" start="52665" end="52677" title="Amon Düül II" label="Amon Düül II"/>
<link wikidata="Q547788" start="52679" end="52685" title="Embryo (band)" label="Embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q706764" start="52689" end="52698" title="Popol Vuh (band)" label="Popol Vuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q551323" start="52740" end="52757" title="Musicland Studios" label="Musicland Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="52854" end="52868" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="52870" end="52882" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="52884" end="52895" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="52900" end="52905" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312674" start="53027" end="53042" title="Giorgio Moroder" label="Giorgio Moroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="53057" end="53062" title="synth" label="synth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="53063" end="53068" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="53073" end="53095" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q908933" start="53101" end="53113" title="Donna Summer" label="Donna Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q861823" start="53224" end="53236" title="Electroclash" label="Electroclash"/>
<link wikidata="Q62061" start="53304" end="53311" title="DJ Hell" label="DJ Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q569337" start="53394" end="53429" title="International DeeJay Gigolo Records" label="International DeeJay Gigolo Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q45373" start="53497" end="53514" title="Konstantin Wecker" label="Konstantin Wecker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53516" end="53527" title=":de:Willy Astor" label="Willy Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q260919" start="53529" end="53547" title="Spider Murphy Gang" label="Spider Murphy Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q302119" start="53549" end="53567" title="Münchener Freiheit (band)" label="Münchener Freiheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60268" start="53569" end="53577" title="Lou Bega" label="Lou Bega"/>
<link wikidata="Q619332" start="53579" end="53587" title="Megaherz" label="Megaherz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337257" start="53589" end="53592" title="FSK (band)" label="FSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q883407" start="53594" end="53605" title="Colour Haze" label="Colour Haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q263183" start="53610" end="53630" title="Sportfreunde Stiller" label="Sportfreunde Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="53709" end="53713" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q520185" start="53823" end="53842" title="Munich Kammerspiele" label="Munich Kammerspiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="53904" end="53928" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q57182" start="54025" end="54051" title="Christian Friedrich Hebbel" label="Christian Friedrich Hebbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="54053" end="54065" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513" start="54071" end="54092" title="Hugo von Hofmannsthal" label="Hugo von Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q252119" start="54144" end="54153" title="Schwabing" label="Schwabing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="54317" end="54331" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q946877" start="54347" end="54366" title="What Is to Be Done?" label="What Is to Be Done?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025667" start="54514" end="54527" title="Café Stefanie" label="Café Stefanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602508" start="54540" end="54545" title="Simpl (Munich)" label="Simpl"/>
<link wikidata="Q697730" start="54750" end="54764" title="Simplicissimus" label="Simplicissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q70927" start="54791" end="54804" title="Albert Langen" label="Albert Langen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216004" start="54809" end="54829" title="Thomas Theodor Heine" label="Thomas Theodor Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q537340" start="54958" end="54968" title="Wilhelminism" label="Wilhelmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44608" start="55121" end="55138" title="Eckart Witzigmann" label="Eckart Witzigmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q154432" start="55377" end="55388" title="Biedermeier" label="Biedermeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q63005" start="55564" end="55578" title="Adolf Kussmaul" label="Adolf Kussmaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q96692" start="55583" end="55598" title="Ludwig Eichrodt" label="Ludwig Eichrodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186816" start="55757" end="55783" title="Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller" label="Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q551901" start="55785" end="55803" title="Moritz von Schwind" label="Moritz von Schwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q164979" start="55809" end="55822" title="Carl Spitzweg" label="Carl Spitzweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170152" start="55840" end="55855" title="Neue Pinakothek" label="Neue Pinakothek"/>
<link wikidata="Q44785" start="56102" end="56136" title="Luitpold, Prince Regent of Bavaria" label="Luitpold, Prince Regent of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="56152" end="56163" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76480" start="56165" end="56178" title="Heinrich Mann" label="Heinrich Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76487" start="56180" end="56208" title="Paul Johann Ludwig von Heyse" label="Paul Johann Ludwig von Heyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="56210" end="56228" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q45309" start="56230" end="56242" title="Ludwig Thoma" label="Ludwig Thoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q71429" start="56244" end="56262" title="Fanny zu Reventlow" label="Fanny zu Reventlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q62871" start="56264" end="56277" title="Oskar Panizza" label="Oskar Panizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q78511" start="56279" end="56293" title="Gustav Meyrink" label="Gustav Meyrink"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042" start="56295" end="56304" title="Max Halbe" label="Max Halbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q61722" start="56306" end="56318" title="Erich Mühsam" label="Erich Mühsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q57619" start="56323" end="56337" title="Frank Wedekind" label="Frank Wedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="56466" end="56477" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="56663" end="56678" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q77024" start="56701" end="56718" title="Lion Feuchtwanger" label="Lion Feuchtwanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="56720" end="56734" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q102362" start="56736" end="56754" title="Peter Paul Althaus" label="Peter Paul Althaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57187" start="56756" end="56769" title="Stefan George" label="Stefan George"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785" start="56771" end="56783" title="Ricarda Huch" label="Ricarda Huch"/>
<link wikidata="Q552038" start="56785" end="56803" title="Joachim Ringelnatz" label="Joachim Ringelnatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44540" start="56805" end="56821" title="Oskar Maria Graf" label="Oskar Maria Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q71112" start="56823" end="56835" title="Annette Kolb" label="Annette Kolb"/>
<link wikidata="Q57266" start="56837" end="56849" title="Ernst Toller" label="Ernst Toller"/>
<link wikidata="Q70989" start="56851" end="56860" title="Hugo Ball" label="Hugo Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q77087" start="56866" end="56876" title="Klaus Mann" label="Klaus Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q45255" start="56923" end="56936" title="Karl Valentin" label="Karl Valentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="57201" end="57216" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106393" start="57236" end="57251" title="Liesl Karlstadt" label="Liesl Karlstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="57333" end="57341" title="yodeling" label="yodeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337257" start="57607" end="57613" title="F.S.K. (band)" label="F.S.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q64248" start="57800" end="57816" title="Wolfgang Koeppen" label="Wolfgang Koeppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76546" start="57818" end="57831" title="Erich Kästner" label="Erich Kästner"/>
<link wikidata="Q45294" start="57833" end="57843" title="Eugen Roth" label="Eugen Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60851" start="57845" end="57860" title="Alfred Andersch" label="Alfred Andersch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47243" start="57862" end="57878" title="Elfriede Jelinek" label="Elfriede Jelinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q44584" start="57880" end="57904" title="Hans Magnus Enzensberger" label="Hans Magnus Enzensberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q76498" start="57906" end="57918" title="Michael Ende" label="Michael Ende"/>
<link wikidata="Q45239" start="57920" end="57938" title="Franz Xaver Kroetz" label="Franz Xaver Kroetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q106412" start="57940" end="57952" title="Gerhard Polt" label="Gerhard Polt"/>
<link wikidata="Q105994" start="57957" end="57972" title="Patrick Süskind" label="Patrick Süskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q896013" start="58112" end="58127" title="Erasmus Grasser" label="Erasmus Grasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q73889" start="58129" end="58139" title="Jan Polack" label="Jan Polack"/>
<link wikidata="Q261984" start="58141" end="58162" title="Johann Baptist Straub" label="Johann Baptist Straub"/>
<link wikidata="Q525374" start="58164" end="58177" title="Ignaz Günther" label="Ignaz Günther"/>
<link wikidata="Q91771" start="58179" end="58192" title="Hans Krumpper" label="Hans Krumpper"/>
<link wikidata="Q448426" start="58194" end="58217" title="Ludwig Michael Schwanthaler" label="Ludwig von Schwanthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q715693" start="58219" end="58237" title="Cosmas Damian Asam" label="Cosmas Damian Asam"/>
<link wikidata="Q639579" start="58239" end="58255" title="Egid Quirin Asam" label="Egid Quirin Asam"/>
<link wikidata="Q536529" start="58257" end="58282" title="Johann Baptist Zimmermann" label="Johann Baptist Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q72959" start="58284" end="58306" title="Johann Michael Fischer" label="Johann Michael Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739" start="58311" end="58332" title="François de Cuvilliés" label="François de Cuvilliés"/>
<link wikidata="Q647805" start="58397" end="58410" title="Carl Rottmann" label="Carl Rottmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q157610" start="58412" end="58425" title="Lovis Corinth" label="Lovis Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q604107" start="58427" end="58447" title="Wilhelm von Kaulbach" label="Wilhelm von Kaulbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q164979" start="58449" end="58462" title="Carl Spitzweg" label="Carl Spitzweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q585323" start="58464" end="58481" title="Franz von Lenbach" label="Franz von Lenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q45006" start="58483" end="58494" title="Franz Stuck" label="Franz Stuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q505758" start="58496" end="58507" title="Karl Piloty" label="Karl Piloty"/>
<link wikidata="Q704661" start="58512" end="58525" title="Wilhelm Leibl" label="Wilhelm Leibl"/>
<link wikidata="Q643782" start="58632" end="58649" title="New German Cinema" label="New German Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q44426" start="58670" end="58694" title="Rainer Werner Fassbinder" label="Rainer Werner Fassbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="58696" end="58709" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q64392" start="58711" end="58722" title="Edgar Reitz" label="Edgar Reitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45221" start="58727" end="58747" title="Herbert Achternbusch" label="Herbert Achternbusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415344" start="58762" end="58784" title="Filmverlag der Autoren" label="Filmverlag der Autoren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58963" end="58977" title="Deutsche Eiche" label="Deutsche Eiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="59206" end="59226" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984939" start="59255" end="59275" title="Bavaria Studios" label="Bavaria Film Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="59369" end="59385" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="59387" end="59399" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="59401" end="59413" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="59415" end="59426" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="59428" end="59442" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="59444" end="59459" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q55375" start="59461" end="59475" title="Claude Chabrol" label="Claude Chabrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q103000" start="59477" end="59491" title="Fritz Umgelter" label="Fritz Umgelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44426" start="59493" end="59517" title="Rainer Werner Fassbinder" label="Rainer Werner Fassbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q65321" start="59519" end="59536" title="Wolfgang Petersen" label="Wolfgang Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55411" start="59541" end="59552" title="Wim Wenders" label="Wim Wenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q39005" start="59648" end="59667" title="The Pleasure Garden (1925 film)" label="The Pleasure Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q110354" start="59708" end="59724" title="The Great Escape (film)" label="The Great Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q361670" start="59741" end="59753" title="John Sturges" label="John Sturges"/>
<link wikidata="Q747936" start="59761" end="59775" title="Paths of Glory" label="Paths of Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q936327" start="59815" end="59854" title="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory" label="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380505" start="59871" end="59881" title="Mel Stuart" label="Mel Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q316555" start="59908" end="59929" title="The Neverending Story (film)" label="The Neverending Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q65321" start="59946" end="59963" title="Wolfgang Petersen" label="Wolfgang Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28649" start="60096" end="60115" title="Coopers&amp;#x27; Dance" label="Coopers&amp;#x27; Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="60124" end="60129" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q38883" start="60139" end="60145" title="cooper (profession)" label="cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q582096" start="60217" end="60227" title="journeyman" label="journeymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q837017" start="60269" end="60280" title="Old Bavaria" label="Old Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="60405" end="60409" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q318798" start="60505" end="60528" title="Paulinerkirche, Leipzig" label="Paulinerkirche, Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="60529" end="60533" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q858012" start="60735" end="60744" title="beer hall" label="beer hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q700887" start="60805" end="60819" title="Theresienwiese" label="Theresienwiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="60954" end="60960" title="marketplace" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q13930359" start="60980" end="60993" title="Volksfest" label="folk festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q875597" start="61001" end="61015" title="Mariahilfplatz" label="Mariahilfplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q369594" start="61081" end="61096" title="household goods" label="household goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674120" start="61102" end="61112" title="local food" label="local food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439377" start="61402" end="61419" title="Tollwood Festival" label="Tollwood Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="61536" end="61548" title="Organic food" label="Organic food"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="61557" end="61571" title="Fusion cuisine" label="Fusion cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700887" start="61601" end="61615" title="Theresienwiese" label="Theresienwiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919327" start="61629" end="61642" title="beer festival" label="beer festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="61671" end="61682" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="61910" end="61919" title="Brewery" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q153546" start="61931" end="61946" title="Augustiner-Bräu" label="Augustiner-Bräu"/>
<link wikidata="Q568684" start="61948" end="61970" title="Hacker-Pschorr Brewery" label="Hacker-Pschorr Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q256392" start="61972" end="61989" title="Löwenbräu Brewery" label="Löwenbräu Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q127305" start="61991" end="62007" title="Paulaner Brewery" label="Paulaner Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q787066" start="62009" end="62033" title="Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu" label="Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu"/>
<link wikidata="Q697534" start="62039" end="62073" title="Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München" label="Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München"/>
<link wikidata="Q57607" start="62146" end="62162" title="Christkindlmarkt" label="Christkindlmarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="62288" end="62297" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q458851" start="62379" end="62395" title="Bavarian cuisine" label="Bavarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q707636" start="62404" end="62414" title="Weisswurst" label="Weisswurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="62611" end="62624" title="sweet mustard" label="sweet mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160525" start="62643" end="62650" title="pretzel" label="pretzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="62715" end="62729" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131413" start="62811" end="62820" title="Weissbier" label="Weissbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q261105" start="62847" end="62853" title="Helles" label="Helles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709638" start="62857" end="62867" title="pale lager" label="pale lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265882" start="63007" end="63013" title="Dunkel" label="Dunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="63262" end="63273" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q857909" start="63438" end="63449" title="beer garden" label="beer garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q260223" start="63779" end="63796" title="Englischer Garten" label="Englischer Garten"/>
<link wikidata="Q153546" start="63887" end="63902" title="Augustiner-Bräu" label="Augustiner-Bräu"/>
<link wikidata="Q568684" start="63904" end="63926" title="Hacker-Pschorr Brewery" label="Hacker-Pschorr Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q697534" start="63928" end="63939" title="Hofbräuhaus" label="Hofbräuhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256392" start="63941" end="63950" title="Löwenbräu" label="Löwenbräu"/>
<link wikidata="Q127305" start="63952" end="63960" title="Paulaner" label="Paulaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q787066" start="63966" end="63990" title="Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu" label="Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu"/>
<link wikidata="Q562223" start="64067" end="64079" title="Circus Krone" label="Circus Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789836" start="64221" end="64229" title="Circus Krone Building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594437" start="64260" end="64269" title="Nightlife" label="Nightlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q537044" start="64314" end="64342" title="Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt" label="Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q256012" start="64344" end="64355" title="Maxvorstadt" label="Maxvorstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q252058" start="64357" end="64370" title="Au-Haidhausen" label="Au-Haidhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q533054" start="64372" end="64384" title="Berg am Laim" label="Berg am Laim"/>
<link wikidata="Q262879" start="64389" end="64397" title="Sendling" label="Sendling"/>
<link wikidata="Q254394" start="64407" end="64421" title="Sendlinger Tor" label="Sendlinger Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q971198" start="64471" end="64485" title="Altstadt-Lehel" label="Altstadt-Lehel"/>
<link wikidata="Q252119" start="64790" end="64799" title="Schwabing" label="Schwabing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123169089" start="64890" end="64899" title="Big Apple (club)" label="Big Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q73361720" start="65061" end="65068" title="Blow Up (club)" label="Blow Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q91095399" start="65098" end="65114" title="Yellow Submarine (club)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384868" start="65276" end="65289" title="Schwabinger 7" label="Schwabinger 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="65409" end="65423" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65747" end="65765" title="Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt#Glockenbachviertel" label="Glockenbachviertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54966608" start="65981" end="65993" title="Müllerstraße" label="Müllerstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q16764901" start="66103" end="66111" title="Travesti (theatre)" label="travesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="66160" end="66175" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089220" start="66258" end="66274" title="Living on My Own" label="Living on My Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q801228" start="66477" end="66495" title="Munich East station" label="München Ostbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q533054" start="66499" end="66511" title="Berg am Laim" label="Berg am Laim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569131" start="66896" end="66906" title="Haidhausen (Munich)" label="Haidhausen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67048" end="67067" title="Munich-Riem Airport#Reuse" label="Munich-Riem Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691205" start="67450" end="67465" title="The Atomic Café (club)" label="The Atomic Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884056" start="67487" end="67498" title="Babalu Club" label="Babalu Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417720" start="67500" end="67511" title="Ultraschall" label="Ultraschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494617" start="67622" end="67632" title="Union Move" label="Union Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q358576" start="67653" end="67665" title="technoparade" label="technoparade"/>
<link wikidata="Q69908442" start="67941" end="67951" title="Blitz Club" label="Blitz Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q57838809" start="68002" end="68018" title="Bahnwärter Thiel (club)" label="Bahnwärter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189593" start="68317" end="68323" title="Zenith (building)" label="Zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q30133833" start="68368" end="68379" title="Alte Utting" label="Alte Utting"/>
<link wikidata="Q35149" start="68532" end="68547" title="Wilhelm Röntgen" label="Wilhelm Röntgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q71013" start="68559" end="68576" title="Theodor W. Hänsch" label="Theodor W. Hänsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="68928" end="68966" title="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich" label="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004" start="68993" end="69003" title="Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="69030" end="69060" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q414052" start="69085" end="69122" title="Academy of Fine Arts, Munich" label="Akademie der Bildenden Künste München"/>
<link wikidata="Q283099" start="69141" end="69169" title="Bundeswehr University Munich" label="Bundeswehr University Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q258208" start="69199" end="69208" title="Neubiberg" label="Neubiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q321714" start="69211" end="69238" title="Deutsche Journalistenschule" label="Deutsche Journalistenschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q812154" start="69257" end="69296" title="Bayerische Akademie für Außenwirtschaft" label="Bayerische Akademie für Außenwirtschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q657167" start="69315" end="69355" title="Hochschule für Musik und Theater München" label="Hochschule für Musik und Theater München"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051922" start="69374" end="69455" title="International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Life Sciences" label="International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665159" start="69474" end="69517" title="International School of Management, Germany" label="International School of Management, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69536" end="69579" title="Katholische Stiftungsfachhochschule München" label="Katholische Stiftungsfachhochschule München"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311824" start="69598" end="69620" title="Munich Business School" label="Munich Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936096" start="69645" end="69684" title="Munich Intellectual Property Law Center" label="Munich Intellectual Property Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q881849" start="69711" end="69738" title="Munich School of Philosophy" label="Munich School of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202116" start="69759" end="69766" title="Pullach" label="Pullach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622215" start="69793" end="69827" title="Munich School of Political Science" label="Munich School of Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q314089" start="69846" end="69883" title="Munich University of Applied Sciences" label="Munich University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110057" start="69907" end="69927" title="New European College" label="New European College"/>
<link wikidata="Q646136" start="69946" end="69971" title="Ukrainian Free University" label="Ukrainian Free University"/>
<link wikidata="Q569350" start="70014" end="70054" title="University of Television and Film Munich" label="University of Television and Film Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895591" start="70197" end="70221" title="Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium" label="Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324614" start="70227" end="70245" title="Luitpold Gymnasium" label="Luitpold Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576235" start="70251" end="70268" title="Wilhelmsgymnasium (Munich)" label="Wilhelmsgymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586679" start="70285" end="70308" title="Wittelsbacher-Gymnasium München" label="Wittelsbacher Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844772" start="70370" end="70387" title="Lycée Jean Renoir (Munich)" label="Lycée Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16929953" start="70393" end="70433" title="Japanische Internationale Schule München" label="Japanische Internationale Schule München"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873666" start="70439" end="70468" title="Bavarian International School" label="Bavarian International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090997" start="70474" end="70501" title="Munich International School" label="Munich International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259830" start="70511" end="70534" title="European School, Munich" label="European School, Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="70605" end="70623" title="Max Planck Society" label="Max Planck Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="70756" end="70774" title="Fraunhofer Society" label="Fraunhofer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q875673" start="70916" end="70949" title="Botanische Staatssammlung München" label="Botanische Staatssammlung München"/>
<link wikidata="Q181916" start="70961" end="70970" title="herbarium" label="herbarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q314073" start="70972" end="71007" title="Ifo Institute for Economic Research" label="Ifo Institute for Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234560" start="71068" end="71085" title="Doerner Institute" label="Doerner Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="71087" end="71116" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q878592" start="71118" end="71143" title="Helmholtz Zentrum München" label="Helmholtz Zentrum München"/>
<link wikidata="Q220219" start="71145" end="71179" title="Zoologische Staatssammlung München" label="Zoologische Staatssammlung München"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="71181" end="71204" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q566671" start="71213" end="71241" title="Oberpfaffenhofen" label="Oberpfaffenhofen bei München"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="71316" end="71323" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="71332" end="71341" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="71364" end="71370" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="71386" end="71394" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="71411" end="71418" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="71434" end="71444" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="71468" end="71472" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="71490" end="71496" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="71515" end="71524" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="71746" end="71752" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="71766" end="71773" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q51135696" start="71783" end="71794" title="List of German cities by GDP" label="ranks third"/>
<link wikidata="Q46519" start="71974" end="71990" title="southern Germany" label="southern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="72154" end="72170" title="financial center" label="financial center"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="72175" end="72186" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q155718" start="72277" end="72280" title="DAX" label="DAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="72390" end="72405" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="72410" end="72419" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="72481" end="72488" title="Flixbus" label="Flixbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="72544" end="72554" title="Siemens" label="Siemens AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="72570" end="72573" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228137" start="72581" end="72587" title="Traton" label="Traton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128929" start="72623" end="72639" title="MTU Aero Engines" label="MTU Aero Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q682759" start="72672" end="72677" title="The Linde Group" label="Linde"/>
<link wikidata="Q571907" start="72690" end="72709" title="Rohde &amp;amp; Schwarz" label="Rohde &amp;amp; Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="72711" end="72722" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="73079" end="73092" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="73113" end="73131" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756282" start="73227" end="73253" title="injection moulding machine" label="injection moulding machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q819150" start="73267" end="73280" title="Krauss-Maffei" label="Krauss-Maffei"/>
<link wikidata="Q646220" start="73316" end="73343" title="Krauss-Maffei Wegmann" label="Krauss-Maffei &amp;amp; Wegmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11207" start="73382" end="73386" title="Arri" label="Arri"/>
<link wikidata="Q311394" start="73411" end="73432" title="Infineon Technologies" label="Infineon Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q258208" start="73472" end="73481" title="Neubiberg" label="Neubiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q310481" start="73499" end="73504" title="Osram" label="Osram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="73587" end="73596" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936084" start="73642" end="73658" title="Munich&amp;#x27;s financial community" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="73675" end="73684" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q220189" start="73701" end="73716" title="HypoVereinsbank" label="HypoVereinsbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q152106" start="73725" end="73746" title="Bayerische Landesbank" label="Bayerische Landesbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="73760" end="73769" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q487292" start="73816" end="73823" title="Allianz" label="Allianz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166637" start="73840" end="73849" title="Munich Re" label="Munich Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="73851" end="73863" title="Reinsurance" label="re-insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q158870" start="73949" end="73968" title="Süddeutsche Zeitung" label="Süddeutsche Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q49653" start="74141" end="74144" title="ARD (broadcaster)" label="ARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q168717" start="74184" end="74202" title="ProSieben" label="Pro7-Sat1 Media AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q267408" start="74238" end="74250" title="Unterföhring" label="Unterföhring"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="74293" end="74305" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q459029" start="74357" end="74379" title="Hubert Burda Media" label="Burda publishing group"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984939" start="74405" end="74425" title="Bavaria Film Studios" label="Bavaria Film Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q220090" start="74455" end="74463" title="Grünwald, Bavaria" label="Grünwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611321" start="74548" end="74556" title="Teamwire" label="Teamwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391599" start="74663" end="74683" title="Mercer (consulting firm)" label="Mercer HR Consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="75141" end="75159" title="particulate matter" label="particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75243" end="75301" title="particulate#EU legislation" label="EU legislation concerning the concentration of particulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="75343" end="75353" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413618" start="75860" end="75871" title="modal share" label="modal share"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741704" start="76174" end="76206" title="Berlin–Munich high-speed railway" label="Berlin–Munich high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="76295" end="76307" title="Flixmobility" label="Flixmobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449638" start="76389" end="76407" title="Transport Logistic" label="Transport Logistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164054" start="76672" end="76685" title="Munich U-Bahn" label="Munich U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q256524" start="76691" end="76704" title="Munich S-Bahn" label="Munich S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q259000" start="76755" end="76794" title="Munich Transport and Tariff Association" label="Munich Transport and Tariff Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q526596" start="76850" end="76864" title="Munich tramway" label="Munich tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169313" start="77572" end="77593" title="Permeability (spatial and transport planning)" label="filtered permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="77759" end="77773" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="77860" end="77869" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198662" start="77991" end="78004" title="Segregated cycle facilities" label="bicycle lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060525" start="78224" end="78240" title="Call a Bike" label="bike hire system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520382" start="78441" end="78482" title="List of cultural history trails in Munich" label="List of cultural history trails in Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q801228" start="78972" end="78999" title="München Ost railway station" label="München Ost railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9322" start="79052" end="79065" title="Deutsche Bahn" label="Deutsche Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q550637" start="79071" end="79089" title="German railway station categories" label="category 1 station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="79126" end="79142" title="terminal station" label="terminal station"/>
<link wikidata="Q256524" start="79179" end="79185" title="Munich S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q164054" start="79207" end="79213" title="Munich U-Bahn" label="U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="79267" end="79284" title="Intercity-Express" label="Intercity-Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q529938" start="79329" end="79338" title="InterCity" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q753050" start="79343" end="79351" title="EuroCity" label="EuroCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="79459" end="79468" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004" start="79473" end="79483" title="Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107031102" start="79491" end="79526" title="Nuremberg–Munich high-speed railway" label="Nuremberg–Munich high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741704" start="79531" end="79563" title="Berlin–Munich high-speed railway" label="Berlin–Munich high-speed railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512400" start="79683" end="79695" title="guest worker" label="guest worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="79933" end="79941" title="Autobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="79986" end="79995" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="80001" end="80010" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="80012" end="80021" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16083" start="80038" end="80048" title="Deggendorf" label="Deggendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190" start="80053" end="80059" title="Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="80065" end="80073" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="80078" end="80087" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q127043" start="80094" end="80116" title="Garmisch-Partenkirchen" label="Garmisch Partenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153969" start="80125" end="80131" title="Lindau" label="Lindau"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="80286" end="80304" title="Traffic congestion" label="Traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="80415" end="80425" title="roundabout" label="roundabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334812" start="80494" end="80512" title="Traffic and Environmental Zone" label="environmental zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053399" start="80564" end="80577" title="green sticker" label="green sticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131402" start="80733" end="80774" title="Munich Airport" label="Franz Josef Strauss International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19755" start="80776" end="80780" title="International Air Transport Association" label="IATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="80787" end="80791" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="80876" end="80891" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="80893" end="80916" title="Charles de Gaulle Airport" label="Paris Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46033" start="80918" end="80927" title="Frankfurt International Airport" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="80929" end="80938" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="80940" end="80946" title="Barajas Airport" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q86473" start="80951" end="80967" title="Atatürk International Airport" label="Istanbul Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q372317" start="81088" end="81107" title="Munich-Riem Airport" label="Munich-Riem Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q254647" start="81192" end="81212" title="München Hauptbahnhof" label="main railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="81248" end="81273" title="maglev (transport)" label="magnetic levitation train"/>
<link wikidata="Q157018" start="81282" end="81292" title="Transrapid" label="Transrapid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="81512" end="81521" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q651281" start="82127" end="82144" title="Memmingen Airport" label="Memmingen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q328183" start="82229" end="82245" title="Augsburg Airport" label="Augsburg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="82467" end="82483" title="Foothills" label="Alpine foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077" start="82585" end="82591" title="Dachau, Bavaria" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998" start="82593" end="82601" title="Freising" label="Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980" start="82603" end="82609" title="Erding" label="Erding"/>
<link wikidata="Q61936" start="82611" end="82620" title="Starnberg" label="Starnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974" start="82622" end="82630" title="Landshut" label="Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q31872" start="82635" end="82643" title="Moosburg" label="Moosburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q880769" start="82751" end="82777" title="Munich Metropolitan Region" label="Munich Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q131615" start="82916" end="82930" title="Lake Starnberg" label="Lake Starnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q265336" start="82932" end="82940" title="Ammersee" label="Ammersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138" start="82942" end="82950" title="Chiemsee" label="Chiemsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q174645" start="82952" end="82962" title="Walchensee" label="Walchensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q257264" start="82964" end="82973" title="Kochelsee" label="Kochelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q253971" start="82975" end="82984" title="Tegernsee (lake)" label="Tegernsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q834157" start="82986" end="82996" title="Schliersee (lake)" label="Schliersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q315443" start="82998" end="83005" title="Simssee" label="Simssee"/>
<link wikidata="Q278982" start="83007" end="83017" title="Staffelsee" label="Staffelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596558" start="83019" end="83027" title="Wörthsee" label="Wörthsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743379" start="83029" end="83037" title="Kirchsee (Bavaria)" label="Kirchsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q895525" start="83046" end="83055" title="Osterseen" label="Osterseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q256524" start="83220" end="83226" title="Munich S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19064" wikidata="Q6860022" url="?curid=19064" title="Millsaps College">
<text>Millsaps College is a private liberal arts college in Jackson, Mississippi. It was founded in 1890 and is affiliated with the United Methodist Church.

==History==
The college was founded in 1889–90 by a Confederate veteran, Major Reuben Webster Millsaps, who donated the land for the college and $50,000. William Belton Murrah was the college&#x27;s first president, and Bishop Charles Betts Galloway of the Methodist Episcopal Church South organized the college&#x27;s early fund-raising efforts. Both men were honored with halls named in their honor. Major Millsaps and his wife are interred in a tomb near the center of campus. The current United Methodist Church continues to affiliate with the college.

===Navy V-12 program===
Millsaps was chosen as one of 131 sites for the training of Navy and Marine officers in the V-12 Navy College Training Program. In April 1943, 380 students arrived for the Navy V-12 program offering engineering, pre-medical and pre-dental training. Thereafter Millsaps began accepting students year-round for the program. A total of 873 officer candidates went through Millsaps between 1943 and 1945.

===Civil rights era===

Millsaps College students protested the shooting of Jackson State University student and civil rights worker Benjamin Brown, who was killed by police at a protest. The Mississippi Sovereignty Commission photographed the Millsaps protesters and identified them. The Sovereignty Commission spied on and conspired against civil rights activists and organized pressure and economic oppression of those who supported the civil rights movement in Mississippi.

=== Dismissal of James Bowley ===
Millsaps College suspended and later dismissed James Bowley, a tenured professor of politics and religion, after he emailed three students that class was cancelled to &quot;mourn and process this racist fascist country&quot; after Donald Trump was elected in the 2024 United States elections. Millsaps interim provost Stephanie Rolph placed him on administrative leave, saying that it was because he &quot;[shared] personal opinions with [his] students&quot; using his official email. The Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression said that the college &quot;fabricated a policy violation&quot; as to fire Bowley in an article demanding his reinstatement that the college called &quot;riddled with inaccuracies&quot;. The college&#x27;s faculty council president, David Wood, told &quot;Inside Higher Ed&quot; that the suspension was &quot;unfair and unsubstantiated&quot; and the decision to ban Bowley without a hearing was done on &quot;very poor judgment&quot;. However, he also described Bowley&#x27;s past actions as &quot;a bit reckless&quot; and said that Bowley would &quot;push the envelope&quot; of the administration with controversial issues. One of these past issues involving Bowley was the defacement of the Christian Center, an academic building on campus that was set for renovation in 2017. Bowley and several students applied graffiti to the walls, and the graffiti included many politically charged comments about state and federal leaders. This was seen as an act of vandalism by the administration, and &quot;disciplinary processes were initiated against the students and faculty [Bowley] involved.&quot;

A grievance panel of three faculty members called for a formal apology by Rolph, Bowley&#x27;s reinstatement, and compensation to be given to Bowley. The panel writes that Rolph was unable provide a specific policy that Bowley violated and that no policy exists to regulate the use of campus emails to share personal opinions. Bowley said that he appealed his dismissal to the board of trustees.

===Important dates in Millsaps history===

* 1890: Major Reuben Webster Millsaps founds the college with a personal gift of $50,000.
* 1901: Millsaps builds the first golf course in Mississippi.
* 1902: Mary Letitia Holloman becomes the first female graduate of Millsaps.
* 1908: Sing-Ung Zung of Suzhou, China, becomes the first international student to graduate from Millsaps.
* 1914: Old Main, one of the first buildings on campus, burns and is replaced by Murrah Hall.
* 1916: Major Millsaps dies and is interred on campus.
* 1931: The first night football game in Mississippi is played on the Millsaps campus between the Majors and Mississippi A&amp;M (now Mississippi State University).
* 1936: Millsaps College absorbs bankrupt Grenada College during the Great Depression.
* 1943: Johnny Carson attends Millsaps for V-12 naval officer training, entertaining his comrades with a magic and humor act.
* 1944: Louis H. Wilson, who graduated from the college in 1941, received the Medal of Honor for his actions at the Battle of Guam during World War II. Wilson became a General and the 26th Commandant of the Marine Corps in 1975. He was the first Marine Corps Commandant to serve full-time on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
* 1947-48: Ruth Chang of Shanghai, China becomes one of the first non-white students to attend Millsaps.
* 1953: Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis judge a Millsaps beauty contest.
* 1965: Millsaps becomes the first all-white college in Mississippi to voluntarily desegregate.
* 1967: Robert F. Kennedy during his presidential campaign speaks at the college about the obligations of young Americans to give back to their country.
* 1975: Presidential candidate Jimmy Carter speaks to Millsaps students about the crisis in the Middle East.
* 1988: Millsaps initiates the first campus chapter of Habitat for Humanity in Mississippi.
* 1989: Millsaps becomes the first school in Mississippi to have a chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society.
* 2025: Millsaps fires tenured professor James E. Bowley for expressing his political opinions in an e-mail.

===Presidents===
* William Belton Murrah, 1890–1910
* David Carlisle Hull, 1910–1912
* Alexander Farrar Watkins, 1912–1923
* David Martin Key, 1923–1938
* Marion Lofton Smith, 1938–1952
* Homer Ellis Finger, Jr., 1952–1964
* Benjamin Barnes Graves, 1965–1970
* Edward McDaniel Collins, Jr., 1970–1978
* George Marion Harmon (1978–2000) – After 22 years of leading Millsaps College, Harmon announced his resignation in the spring of 1999. His last day as president of Millsaps College was June 30, 2000.
* Frances Lucas (2000–2010) – Lucas was the first woman to hold the post at Millsaps. Lucas resigned on April 23, 2009. Lucas cited disagreements with faculty as the reason for her resignation.
* Howard McMillan, Dean of Millsaps&#x27; Else School of Management took over as Interim President in August 2009.
* Robert Pearigen, Vice President of University Relations at The University of the South, was selected to serve as the eleventh president of the college. He began his term in office on July 1, 2010.
* Frank Neville, Senior Vice President of Strategic Initiatives and Chief of Staff at Georgia Institute of Technology, was selected to serve as the twelfth president of the college. He began his term in office on June 17, 2024.

==Rankings and distinctions==
Millsaps is one of 40 schools in Loren Pope&#x27;s &quot;Colleges That Change Lives&quot;.

==Athletics==
The school&#x27;s sports teams are known as the Majors and their colors are purple and white. They participate in the NCAA Division III and the Southern Athletic Association. Women&#x27;s sports include Basketball, Cross-country, Golf, Soccer, Softball, Swimming, Tennis, Track &amp; Field, and Volleyball, while Men&#x27;s sports include Baseball, Basketball, Cross-country, Football, Golf, Soccer, Swimming, Tennis, and Track &amp; Field.

==Notable faculty and alumni==
* Rodney J. Bartlett, quantum chemist
* Michael Beck, actor
* Jim C. Barnett, surgeon and politician
* James E. Bowley, Hebrew scholar (fired)
* Gary Burghoff, actor
* Johnny Carson, longtime host of &quot;The Tonight Show&quot;
* Turner Cassity, poet
* Roy Clyde Clark, Bishop of the United Methodist Church
* Lisa D&#x27;Amour, playwright
* David Herbert Donald, historian
* Nancy Plummer Faxon, organist and composer
* Ellen Gilchrist, author
* James E. Graves Jr., judge, Supreme Court of Mississippi
* Winifred Green, activist from Mississippi during the civil rights movement
* Scott Tracy Griffin, author
*Ben M. Hall, author
* William Hester (1933), president of the United States Tennis Association from 1977 to 1978
* Alan Hunter, MTV VJ
* James Kimbrell, poet
* Clay Foster Lee Jr., Bishop of the United Methodist Church
* Robert William Lowry (pastor), LGBTQIA+ activist
* Ray Marshall, Secretary of Labor during the Carter administration
* Robert S. McElvaine, history professor
*Myron S. McNeil, Mississippi state legislator
* Greg Miller, poet
* Lewis Nordan, author
* Kiese Laymon, professor
* Christopher Lee Nutter, author
* Claude Passeau, baseball player
* Rubel Phillips, Republican gubernatorial nominee in 1963 and 1967
* Paul Ramsey, ethicist
* Tate Reeves, Governor of Mississippi 
* Robert Robbins, MD, cardiothoracic surgeon, former President/CEO of Texas Medical Center, former President of The University of Arizona 
* Stokes Robertson Jr., Justice of the Supreme Court of Mississippi from 1966 to 1982
* Vic Roby, former NBC staff announcer
* Julian Rush, clergyman, playwright, non-profit administrator
* Kevin Sessums, author
* Otis Singletary, historian and 8th President of the University of Kentucky
* Donald Triplett, first person to be diagnosed with autism
* Eudora Welty, author
* Cassandra Wilson, jazz musician
* Louis H. Wilson Jr., Medal of Honor recipient

==See also==
==References==
==External links==
*Millsaps Athletics website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6860022" start="0" end="16" title="Millsaps College" label="Millsaps College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="22" end="29" title="Private college" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="30" end="50" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="54" end="74" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="126" end="149" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="204" end="215" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059201" start="231" end="254" title="Reuben Webster Millsaps" label="Reuben Webster Millsaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005370" start="306" end="327" title="William Belton Murrah" label="William Belton Murrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075591" start="379" end="401" title="Charles Betts Galloway" label="Charles Betts Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q839112" start="409" end="441" title="Methodist Episcopal Church South" label="Methodist Episcopal Church South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="794" end="798" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="803" end="809" title="U.S. Marines" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="826" end="860" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 Navy College Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="966" end="972" title="Dentistry" label="dental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747601" start="1212" end="1236" title="Jackson State University" label="Jackson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845498" start="1269" end="1283" title="Benjamin Brown (activist)" label="Benjamin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316923" start="1328" end="1362" title="Mississippi Sovereignty Commission" label="Mississippi Sovereignty Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133036" start="1696" end="1708" title="James E. Bowley" label="James Bowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1880" end="1892" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q110252005" start="1912" end="1940" title="2024 United States elections" label="2024 United States elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006246" start="2138" end="2185" title="Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression" label="Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848719" start="2442" end="2458" title="Inside Higher Ed" label="Inside Higher Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="3848" end="3852" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="3978" end="3984" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="4233" end="4241" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="4343" end="4371" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607363" start="4416" end="4431" title="Grenada College" label="Grenada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4443" end="4459" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="4469" end="4482" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="4504" end="4508" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827238" start="4595" end="4610" title="Louis H. Wilson" label="Louis H. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="4665" end="4679" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q696900" start="4703" end="4717" title="Battle of Guam (1944)" label="Battle of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4725" end="4737" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115074" start="4776" end="4806" title="Commandant of the United States Marine Corps" label="Commandant of the Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="4883" end="4904" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="4931" end="4946" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai, China"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="5019" end="5030" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="5035" end="5046" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="5163" end="5174" title="school integration in the United States" label="desegregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="5184" end="5201" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="5360" end="5372" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192147" start="5493" end="5513" title="Habitat for Humanity" label="Habitat for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="5612" end="5626" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133036" start="5683" end="5698" title="James E. Bowley" label="James E. Bowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005370" start="5771" end="5792" title="William Belton Murrah" label="William Belton Murrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890024" start="5940" end="5963" title="Homer Ellis Finger, Jr." label="Homer Ellis Finger, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16189374" start="6257" end="6270" title="Frances Lucas" label="Frances Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458159" start="6625" end="6652" title="The University of the South" label="The University of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680414" start="7055" end="7065" title="Loren Pope" label="Loren Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146923" start="7079" end="7105" title="Colleges That Change Lives" label="Colleges That Change Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610564" start="7159" end="7171" title="List of U.S. college team nicknames" label="are known as"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="7246" end="7263" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569650" start="7272" end="7301" title="Southern Athletic Association" label="Southern Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11203177" start="7603" end="7621" title="Rodney J. Bartlett" label="Rodney J. Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="7631" end="7638" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q724812" start="7641" end="7653" title="Michael Beck" label="Michael Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q14587587" start="7663" end="7677" title="Jim Barnett (Mississippi politician)" label="Jim C. Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133036" start="7704" end="7719" title="James E. Bowley" label="James E. Bowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q593735" start="7746" end="7759" title="Gary Burghoff" label="Gary Burghoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="7769" end="7782" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="7807" end="7823" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855909" start="7832" end="7846" title="Turner Cassity" label="Turner Cassity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372683" start="7855" end="7870" title="Roy Clyde Clark" label="Roy Clyde Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="7886" end="7909" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557907" start="7912" end="7929" title="Lisa D&amp;#x27;Amour" label="Lisa D&amp;#x27;Amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234936" start="7944" end="7964" title="David Herbert Donald" label="David Herbert Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q42837605" start="7978" end="7997" title="Nancy Plummer Faxon" label="Nancy Plummer Faxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q546275" start="8023" end="8038" title="Ellen Gilchrist" label="Ellen Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133102" start="8049" end="8068" title="James E. Graves Jr." label="James E. Graves Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7644945" start="8077" end="8105" title="Supreme Court of Mississippi" label="Supreme Court of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22914762" start="8108" end="8122" title="Winifred Green" label="Winifred Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="8138" end="8149" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="8161" end="8182" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663753" start="8185" end="8204" title="Scott Tracy Griffin" label="Scott Tracy Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886095" start="8214" end="8225" title="Ben M. Hall" label="Ben M. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578694" start="8236" end="8250" title="William Hester" label="William Hester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156323" start="8276" end="8308" title="United States Tennis Association" label="United States Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706916" start="8329" end="8340" title="Alan Hunter (VJ)" label="Alan Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="8342" end="8345" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137327" start="8351" end="8365" title="James Kimbrell" label="James Kimbrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129900" start="8374" end="8393" title="Clay Foster Lee Jr." label="Clay Foster Lee Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="8409" end="8432" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q113458480" start="8435" end="8464" title="Robert William Lowry (pastor)" label="Robert William Lowry (pastor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q475289" start="8486" end="8498" title="Ray Marshall" label="Ray Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="8500" end="8518" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349489" start="8554" end="8573" title="Robert S. McElvaine" label="Robert S. McElvaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106485951" start="8594" end="8609" title="Myron S. McNeil" label="Myron S. McNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606023" start="8642" end="8653" title="Greg Miller (poet)" label="Greg Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822136" start="8662" end="8674" title="Lewis Nordan" label="Lewis Nordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214941" start="8685" end="8697" title="Kiese Laymon" label="Kiese Laymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112722" start="8711" end="8733" title="Christopher Lee Nutter" label="Christopher Lee Nutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128985" start="8744" end="8758" title="Claude Passeau" label="Claude Passeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375921" start="8778" end="8792" title="Rubel Phillips" label="Rubel Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8794" end="8804" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061782" start="8846" end="8857" title="Paul Ramsey (ethicist)" label="Paul Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687964" start="8870" end="8881" title="Tate Reeves" label="Tate Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q878632" start="8883" end="8906" title="Governor of Mississippi" label="Governor of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55263576" start="8910" end="8928" title="Robert C. Robbins" label="Robert Robbins, MD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="8978" end="8998" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="9020" end="9045" title="University of Arizona" label="The University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q111394443" start="9049" end="9069" title="Stokes Robertson Jr." label="Stokes Robertson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7644945" start="9086" end="9114" title="Supreme Court of Mississippi" label="Supreme Court of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924895" start="9135" end="9143" title="Vic Roby" label="Vic Roby"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9152" end="9155" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q106665800" start="9174" end="9185" title="Julian Rush" label="Julian Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397469" start="9237" end="9250" title="Kevin Sessums" label="Kevin Sessums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108755" start="9261" end="9276" title="Otis Singletary" label="Otis Singletary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="9313" end="9335" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951318" start="9338" end="9353" title="Donald Triplett" label="Donald Triplett"/>
<link wikidata="Q259364" start="9398" end="9410" title="Eudora Welty" label="Eudora Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q239860" start="9421" end="9437" title="Cassandra Wilson" label="Cassandra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827238" start="9455" end="9474" title="Louis H. Wilson Jr." label="Louis H. Wilson Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19066" wikidata="Q184492" url="?curid=19066" title="Mälaren">
<text>Mälaren ( , , ), historically referred to as Lake Malar in English, is the third-largest freshwater lake in Sweden (after Vänern and Vättern). Its area is and its greatest depth is 64 m (210 ft). Mälaren spans from east to west. The lake drains, from south-west to north-east, into the Baltic Sea through its natural outlets Norrström and Söderström (as it flows around Stadsholmen island) and through the artificial Södertälje Canal and Hammarbyleden waterway. The easternmost bay of Mälaren, in central Stockholm, is called Riddarfjärden. The lake is located in Svealand and bounded by the provinces of Uppland, Södermanland and Västmanland. The two largest islands in Mälaren are Selaön () and Svartsjölandet (). Mälaren is low-lying and mostly relatively shallow.

Being a quite narrow and shallow lake, Mälaren has bridge crossings between Eskilstuna and Västerås with two crossings on the western end at Kvicksund and three separate bridges between Strängnäs and Enköping in the central part of the lake. On the eastern end, the entirety of Ekerö Municipality is set on islands within Mälaren. That urban area also has a bridge connection to the mainland in Stockholm along with bridges between various islands in the municipality.

The Viking Age settlements Birka on the island of Björkö and Hovgården on the neighbouring island Adelsö have been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1993, as has Drottningholm Palace on the island of Lovön.
The barrow of Björn Ironside is on the island of Munsö, within the lake.
==Etymology==
The etymological origin of the name stems from the Old Norse word appearing in historical records in the 1320s and meaning gravel. The lake was previously known as , which is Old Norse for &#x27;The Lake&#x27;.

==Geology==
By the end of the last ice age about 11,000 years ago, much of northern Europe and North America was covered by ice sheets up to thick. At the end of the ice age when the glaciers retreated, the removal of the weight from the depressed land led to a post-glacial rebound. Initially the rebound was rapid, proceeding at about per year. This phase lasted for about 2,000 years, and took place as the ice was being unloaded. Once deglaciation was complete, uplift slowed to about per year, and decreased exponentially after that. Today, typical uplift rates are of the order of per year or less, and studies suggest that rebound will continue for about another 10,000 years. The total uplift from the end of deglaciation can be up to .

In the Viking Age, Mälaren was still a bay of the Baltic Sea, and seagoing vessels could sail up it far into the interior of Sweden. Birka was conveniently near the trade routes through the Södertälje Canal. Due to the post-glacial rebound, Södertälje canal and the mouth of Riddarfjärden bay had become so shallow by about the year 1200 that ships had to unload their cargoes near the entrances, and progressively the bay became a lake. The decline of Birka and the subsequent foundation of Stockholm at the choke point of Riddarfjärden were in part due to the post-glacial rebound changing the topography of the Mälaren basin. The lake&#x27;s surface currently averages above sea level.

==Mythology==
According to Norse mythology as contained in the thirteenth-century Icelandic work &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, the lake was created by the goddess Gefjon when she tricked Gylfi, the Swedish king of Gylfaginning. Gylfi promised Gefjon as much land as four oxen could plough in a day and a night, but she used oxen from the land of the giants, and moreover uprooted the land and dragged it into the sea, where it became the island of Zealand. &quot;Snorra Edda&quot; says that &quot;the inlets in the lake correspond to the headlands in Zealand&quot;; since modern maps show this to be more true of Lake Vänern, the myth has been suggested to have been originally about Vänern, not Mälaren.

==Geography==
A selection, in alphabetical order:
==Ecology==
The most common nesting birds on the skerries of Mälaren are also the most common in the Baltic Sea. After a survey in 2005, the ten most common species were found to be common tern, herring gull, black-headed gull, common gull, mallard, tufted duck, Canada goose, common goldeneye, lesser black-backed gull and common sandpiper. White-tailed eagle, greylag goose, barnacle goose, black-throated diver, red-breasted merganser and gadwall are less common, and some of these latter are endangered in the Mälaren area. Since 1994 a subspecies of great cormorant &quot;Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis&quot;, has nested there as well. A 2005 survey tallied 23 breeding colonies with 2178 nests, of which the largest colony had 235 nests. Most experts believe the great cormorant population has peaked and will stabilize at around 2000 nests.

One of the characteristic species is the osprey which has one of its strongest presences in Lake Mälaren. The osprey nests in almost all bays of the lake.

The Zebra mussel is considered an invasive species and is causing some problems in Lake Mälaren.

Lake Mälaren has 33 species of naturally occurring fish species, which makes it Sweden’s most diverse lake in regard to fish. Other species have been introduced to the environment, including the common carp and the rainbow trout. The rainbow trout in particular is known to compete with indigenous fish for habitat and food, as they have a faster growth rate and predate on local species. However, they are not considered to have made a significant impact.

=== Crayfish ===
Crayfish are of large cultural and economic importance in Sweden, with crayfish parties being a longtime annual tradition for many Swedes.

Lake Mälaren was the first lake in Sweden to be affected by the crayfish plague (&quot;A. astaci&quot; Schicora&quot;)&quot; when infected crayfish imported from Finland were introduced to the lake with the intention of human consumption. The plague spread quickly through the lake, exacerbated by boat traffic, which decimated the indigenous noble crayfish (&quot;A. astacus&quot;) population and caused severe economic losses to the local fishing industry. From Mälaren, the plague spread rapidly to all freshwater bodies in Sweden.

After multiple recurrent outbreaks and failed attempts to restore populations of the noble crayfish, Swedish authorities introduced the North American signal crayfish (&quot;P. leniusculus)&quot; to L. Mälaren, a species that is resistant to the plague. Since 1969, Mälaren has been continuously stocked with signal crayfish. However, it was later discovered that signal crayfish were often carriers of crayfish plague. In addition, while populations of noble crayfish and signal crayfish have been known coexist, their larger size, faster growth rate, and aggressiveness often allows them to dominate populations of noble crayfish. This, in addition to habitat degradation, has led to a significant decrease in noble crayfish populations in L. Mälaren.

Signal crayfish have been largely successful in Sweden and rapidly expanded as a replacement population to noble crayfish. Stocking this species is now prohibited within multiple lakes in Sweden in order to protect noble crayfish population. In the Stockholm municipality, which includes L. Mälaren, signal crayfish are now illegal to import, move, or farm. There have been efforts to encourage farming of noble crayfish populations instead. However, illegal farming of signal crayfish continues to be a problem due to greater public demand for the larger signal crayfish.

== Mapping ==
From the mid 17th century onwards, multiple expeditions to measure and map L. Mälaren were undertaken. The lake was strategically and economically important, and there was a lack of a reliable map to navigate it. However, L. Mälaren’s many islands and bays made it an extensive and laborious task to measure.

In 1687, King Charles XI of Sweden commissioned cartographer Carl Gripenhielm to map Lake Mälaren and its surrounding provinces. From 2 August 1688 to 17 September 1688 Gripenhielm conducted the bulk of his expedition, and he would complete the map in 1689, known in Swedish as Gripenhielm&#x27;s &quot;Mälarkarta&quot;. The Mälarkarta is unique in that it is surrounded by a frame of 96 small, realistic gouache paintings of cities, castles, mansions, and fairways around Lake Mälaren. The map is hand drawn on regal paper, and measures . It has been kept in the National Library of Sweden since 1884. Due to its larger size, it was initially hung in the large viewing room, however in 1931 it was moved to a more secluded wall in a corridor to the map department. Heavy handed preservation techniques have led to some degradation on the illustrations. Since 1961, the map hangs in an area that the public does not have access to.

Gripenheim’s Mälarkarta was valid until 1739 when a new, more accurate map of L. Mälaren was completed by the then surveyor and cartographer Jacob Nordencreutz.

==Trivia==
* &quot;Mälardrottningen&quot; (Lake Mälar Queen) is a poetic name for Stockholm well known in Swedish literature.
* Utter Inn, an underwater hotel designed by the artist Mikael Genberg, is in the lake.
* The area around the lake hosted the cycling events at the 1912 Summer Olympics.

==See also==
* Mälaren Valley &quot;(Mälardalen)&quot;
* List of lakes of Sweden
* Geography of Stockholm
* Almarestäket
* Kanaanbadet

==References==
==External links==
*Mälarguiden - Guide to Mälaren (mostly in Swedish but a lot of maps and some English text)
*Castles around Mälaren </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="0" end="7" title="Mälaren" label="Mälaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="45" end="55" title="Mälaren" label="Lake Malar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="108" end="114" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q173596" start="122" end="128" title="Vänern" label="Vänern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188195" start="133" end="140" title="Vättern" label="Vättern"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="286" end="296" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479784" start="325" end="334" title="Norrström" label="Norrström"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737285" start="339" end="349" title="Söderström (Stockholm)" label="Söderström"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284547" start="370" end="381" title="Stadsholmen" label="Stadsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q950985" start="417" end="433" title="Södertälje Canal" label="Södertälje Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517451" start="438" end="451" title="Hammarbyleden" label="Hammarbyleden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="505" end="514" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q965439" start="526" end="539" title="Riddarfjärden" label="Riddarfjärden"/>
<link wikidata="Q203835" start="564" end="572" title="Svealand" label="Svealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q203509" start="605" end="612" title="Uppland" label="Uppland"/>
<link wikidata="Q626062" start="614" end="626" title="Södermanland" label="Södermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q321430" start="631" end="642" title="Västmanland" label="Västmanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242134" start="683" end="689" title="Selaön" label="Selaön"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706209" start="697" end="711" title="Svartsjölandet" label="Svartsjölandet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26498" start="845" end="855" title="Eskilstuna" label="Eskilstuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q25412" start="860" end="868" title="Västerås" label="Västerås"/>
<link wikidata="Q33799" start="910" end="919" title="Kvicksund" label="Kvicksund"/>
<link wikidata="Q106909" start="955" end="964" title="Strängnäs" label="Strängnäs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21167" start="969" end="977" title="Enköping" label="Enköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q492614" start="1047" end="1065" title="Ekerö Municipality" label="Ekerö Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="1243" end="1253" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="1266" end="1271" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q56768094" start="1289" end="1295" title="Björkö, Ekerö" label="Björkö"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916655" start="1300" end="1309" title="Hovgården" label="Hovgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q355577" start="1337" end="1343" title="Adelsö" label="Adelsö"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1356" end="1382" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q208559" start="1402" end="1422" title="Drottningholm Palace" label="Drottningholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q56772345" start="1440" end="1445" title="Lovön" label="Lovön"/>
<link wikidata="Q879668" start="1461" end="1475" title="Björn Ironside" label="Björn Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="1538" end="1550" title="etymology" label="etymological"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1585" end="1594" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1657" end="1663" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1709" end="1718" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="1870" end="1879" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="2008" end="2028" title="post-glacial rebound" label="post-glacial rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="2499" end="2509" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="2542" end="2552" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="2625" end="2630" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q950985" start="2682" end="2698" title="Södertälje Canal" label="Södertälje Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q965439" start="2767" end="2780" title="Riddarfjärden" label="Riddarfjärden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="2984" end="2993" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="3170" end="3179" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3209" end="3224" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="3285" end="3295" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q746235" start="3339" end="3345" title="Gefjon" label="Gefjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296321" start="3363" end="3368" title="Gylfi" label="Gylfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="3390" end="3402" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="3624" end="3631" title="Zealand" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q173596" start="3794" end="3800" title="Vänern" label="Vänern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785" start="3960" end="3964" title="nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18875" start="4114" end="4125" title="common tern" label="common tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q28236" start="4127" end="4139" title="European herring gull" label="herring gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="4141" end="4158" title="black-headed gull" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q26427" start="4160" end="4171" title="common gull" label="common gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="4173" end="4180" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26444" start="4182" end="4193" title="tufted duck" label="tufted duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="4195" end="4207" title="Canada goose" label="Canada goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q29865" start="4209" end="4225" title="common goldeneye" label="common goldeneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q27160" start="4227" end="4251" title="lesser black-backed gull" label="lesser black-backed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q18850" start="4256" end="4272" title="common sandpiper" label="common sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="4274" end="4292" title="White-tailed eagle" label="White-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25882" start="4294" end="4307" title="greylag goose" label="greylag goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q26680" start="4309" end="4323" title="barnacle goose" label="barnacle goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q184432" start="4325" end="4345" title="black-throated diver" label="black-throated diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q189609" start="4347" end="4369" title="red-breasted merganser" label="red-breasted merganser"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106966" start="4374" end="4381" title="gadwall" label="gadwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440" start="4487" end="4502" title="great cormorant" label="great cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="4820" end="4826" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q752130" start="4939" end="4951" title="Zebra mussel" label="Zebra mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="4969" end="4985" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q255208" start="5579" end="5595" title="Crayfish party" label="crayfish parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q602370" start="5712" end="5727" title="crayfish plague" label="crayfish plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q210959" start="5991" end="6005" title="Astacus astacus" label="noble crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q693000" start="6335" end="6350" title="signal crayfish" label="signal crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q52935" start="7846" end="7871" title="Charles XI of Sweden" label="King Charles XI of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7898" end="7914" title="Carl Gripenhielm" label="Carl Gripenhielm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8115" end="8156" title="Gripenhielm&amp;#x27;s Mälarkarta" label="Gripenhielm&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Mälarkarta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q953058" start="8401" end="8427" title="National Library of Sweden" label="National Library of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8911" end="8929" title="Jacob Nordencreutz" label="Jacob Nordencreutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="9014" end="9023" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903424" start="9060" end="9069" title="Utter Inn" label="Utter Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="9085" end="9090" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9114" end="9128" title="Mikael Genberg" label="Mikael Genberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q783367" start="9184" end="9191" title="Cycling at the 1912 Summer Olympics" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="9206" end="9226" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093686" start="9244" end="9258" title="Mälaren Valley" label="Mälaren Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q393373" start="9286" end="9309" title="List of lakes of Sweden" label="List of lakes of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q278367" start="9312" end="9334" title="Geography of Stockholm" label="Geography of Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733698" start="9337" end="9349" title="Almarestäket" label="Almarestäket"/>
<link wikidata="Q10543247" start="9352" end="9363" title="Kanaanbadet" label="Kanaanbadet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19068" wikidata="Q14773" url="?curid=19068" title="Macau">
<text>Macau or Macao is a special administrative region of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC). With a population of about people and a land area of , it is the most densely populated region in the world.

Formerly a Portuguese colony, the territory of Portuguese Macau was first leased to Portugal by the Ming dynasty as a trading post in 1557. Portugal paid an annual rent and administered the territory under Chinese sovereignty until 1887, when Portugal gained perpetual colonial rights with the signing of the Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking. The colony remained under Portuguese rule until the 1999 handover to China. Macau is a special administrative region of China, which maintains separate governing and economic systems from those of mainland China under the principle of &quot;one country, two systems&quot;. The unique blend of Portuguese and Chinese architecture in the city&#x27;s historic centre has resulted in its designation as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2005.

The gambling industry of Macau is seven times larger than that of Las Vegas. The city has one of the highest GDPs per capita and GDPs per capita by purchasing power parity in the world.

It has a very high Human Development Index of 0.925, as calculated by the Government of Macau, and the fourth-highest life expectancy in the world. The territory is highly urbanised, holding the status of the most densely populated territory on Earth; two-thirds of the total land area is built on land reclaimed from the sea.

== Etymology ==

The first known written record of the name &quot;Macau&quot;, rendered as &quot;A Ma Gang&quot; (), is found in a letter dated 20 November 1555. The local inhabitants believed that the sea goddess Matsu (alternatively called A-Ma) had blessed and protected the harbour and referred to the waters around A-Ma Temple by her name. When Portuguese explorers first arrived in the area and asked for the place name, the locals thought they were asking about the temple and told them it was &quot;Ma Kok&quot; (). The earliest Portuguese spelling for this was &quot;Amaquão&quot;. Multiple variations were used until &quot;Amacão / Amacao&quot; and &quot;Macão / Macao&quot; became common during the 17th century. 

The 1911 reform of Portuguese orthography standardised the spelling as &quot;Macau&quot;; however, the use of &quot;Macao&quot; persisted in English and other European languages.

The Macau Peninsula had many names in Chinese, including &quot;Jing&#x27;ao&quot; (), &quot;Haojing&quot; (), and &quot;Haojing&#x27;ao&quot; (). The islands Taipa, Coloane, and Hengqin were collectively called &quot;Shizimen&quot; (). These names would later become &quot;Ou mún&quot; (), &quot;Aomen&quot; in Mandarin and translating as &quot;bay gate&quot; or &quot;port gate&quot;, to refer to the whole territory.

== History ==
During the Qin dynasty (221–206 BC), the region was under the jurisdiction of Panyu County, Nanhai Prefecture of the province of Guangdong. The region is first known to have been settled during the Han dynasty. It was administratively part of Dongguan Prefecture in the Jin dynasty (266–420 AD), and alternated under the control of Nanhai and Dongguan in later dynasties. In 1152, during the Song dynasty (960–1279 AD), it was under the jurisdiction of the new Xiangshan County. In 1277, approximately 50,000 refugees fleeing the Mongol conquest of China settled in the coastal area.

The first European visitor to reach China by sea was the explorer Jorge Álvares, who arrived in 1513. Merchants first established a trading post in Hong Kong waters at Tamão, present-day Tuen Mun, beginning regular trade with nearby settlements in southern China. Military clashes between the Ming and Portuguese navies followed the expulsion of the Tamão traders in 1521. Despite the trade ban, Portuguese merchants continued to attempt to settle on other parts of the Pearl River estuary, finally settling on Macau. 

In their first attempts at obtaining trading posts by force, the Portuguese were defeated by the Ming Chinese at the Battle of Tunmen in Tamão (or Tuen Mun) in 1521, where the Portuguese lost two ships. They were also defeated at the Battle of Sincouwaan around Lantau Island, where the Portuguese lost two more ships. Other defeats include Shuangyu in 1548, where several Portuguese were captured, and near Dongshan County in 1549, where two Portuguese junks and Galeote Pereira were captured. During these battles the Ming Chinese captured weapons from the defeated Portuguese which they reverse engineered and mass-produced in China. These included the matchlock musket arquebuses, which they named bird guns, and breech-loading swivel guns, which they named as Folangji (Frankish) cannon because the Portuguese were known to the Chinese under the name of Franks at this time. 

The Portuguese later returned to China peacefully and presented themselves under the name Portuguese instead of Franks in the Luso-Chinese agreement (1554). They rented Macau as a trading post from China by paying annual lease of hundreds of silver taels to Ming China. Luso-Canton trade relations were formally reestablished in 1554, and Portugal soon after acquired a permanent lease for Macau in 1557, agreeing to pay 500 taels of silver as annual land rent.

Macau became a stopover on the sea lane that connected Japan with the wider world. The Portuguese could avoid the Pearl River and inched towards Quanzhou and Ningbo. But as they failed to establish trading relationships with the Chinese, the Portuguese focused on trade with Japan. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau was created in 1576, and by 1583 the Municipal Council of Macau had been established to handle municipal affairs for the growing settlement. Macau was at the peak of its prosperity as a major warehouse during the late 16th century, providing a crucial connection in exporting Chinese silk to Japan during the Nanban trade period.
Although the Portuguese were initially prohibited from fortifying Macau or stockpiling weapons, the Fortaleza do Monte was constructed in response to frequent Dutch naval incursions. The Dutch attempted to take the city in the 1622 Battle of Macau, but were repelled successfully by the Portuguese. Macau entered a period of decline in the 1640s following a series of catastrophic events for the burgeoning colony: Portuguese access to trade routes was irreparably severed when Japan halted trade in 1639, and after the Portuguese Restoration War of 1640, Portuguese Malacca fell to the Dutch in 1641.

Maritime trade with China was banned in 1644 following the Qing conquest under the &quot;Haijin&quot; policies. It was limited only to Macau on a lesser scale while the new dynasty focused on eliminating surviving Ming loyalists. While the Kangxi Emperor lifted the prohibition in 1684, China again restricted trade decades later under the Canton System in 1757. Foreign ships were required to stop first at Macau before further proceeding to Canton. Qing authorities exercised a much greater role in governing the territory during this period; Chinese residents were subject to Qing courts and new construction had to be approved by the resident mandarin beginning in the 1740s. As the opium trade became more lucrative during the 18th century, Macau again became an important stopping point en route to China.
Following the First Opium War and the establishment of Hong Kong by the British, Macau lost its role as a major port. Firecracker and incense production, as well as tea and tobacco processing, were vital industries in the colony during this time. Portugal was able to capitalise on China&#x27;s postwar weakness and assert its sovereignty; the Governor of Macau began refusing to pay China annual land rent for the colony in the 1840s, and annexed Taipa and Coloane, in 1851 and 1864, respectively. Portugal also occupied nearby Lapa and Montanha. But these were returned to China by 1887, when perpetual occupation rights over Macau were formalised in the Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking. This agreement also prohibited Portugal from ceding Macau without Chinese approval. Despite occasional conflict between Cantonese authorities and the colonial government, Macau&#x27;s status remained unchanged through the republican revolutions of both Portugal in 1910 and China in 1911. The Kuomintang further affirmed Portuguese jurisdiction in Macau when the Treaty of Peking was renegotiated in 1928.

During the Second World War, the Empire of Japan did not occupy the colony and generally respected Portuguese neutrality in Macau. However, after Japanese troops captured a British cargo ship in Macau waters in 1943, Japan installed a group of government &quot;advisors&quot; as an alternative to military occupation. The territory largely avoided military action during the war except in 1945, when the United States ordered air raids on Macau after learning that the colonial government was preparing to sell aviation fuel to Japan. In 1950 the US paid Portugal more than US$20 million in compensation for the damage during the war.

Refugees from mainland China swelled the population as they fled from the Chinese Civil War. Access to a large workforce enabled Macau&#x27;s economy to grow as the colony expanded its clothing and textiles manufacturing industry, developed its tourism industry, and legalised casino gaming. However, at the height of the Cultural Revolution, residents dissatisfied with the colonial administration rioted in the 1966 12-3 incident, in which 8 people were killed and more than 200 were injured. Portugal lost full control over the colony afterwards, and agreed to cooperate with the Chinese Communist Party in exchange for continued administration of Macau.

Following the 1974 Carnation Revolution, Portugal formally relinquished Macau as an overseas province and acknowledged it as a &quot;Chinese territory under Portuguese administration&quot;. After China first concluded arrangements on Hong Kong&#x27;s future with the United Kingdom, it entered negotiations with Portugal over Macau in 1986. 

These concluded with the signing of the 1987 Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau, in which Portugal agreed the handover of the colony in 1999 and China guaranteed Macau&#x27;s political and economic systems for 50 years after the handover. In the waning years of colonial rule, Macau rapidly urbanised and constructed large-scale infrastructure projects, including the Macau International Airport and a new container port. The handover of Macau was at midnight on 20 December 1999, after 442 years of Portuguese rule.

Following the handover, Macau liberalised its casino industry (which previously operated under a government-licensed monopoly) to allow foreign investors, starting a new period of economic development. The regional economy grew by a double-digit annual growth rate from 2002 to 2014, making Macau one of the richest economies in the world on a per capita basis. Political debates have centred on the region&#x27;s jurisdictional independence and the central government&#x27;s adherence of &quot;one country, two systems&quot;. While issues such as national security legislation have been controversial, Macanese residents generally have high levels of trust in the government. Kwong and Wong explain this by comparing Macau to Hong Kong: &quot;The case of Macau shows that the very small size of a &#x27;microstate&#x27; helps central authorities to exercise political control, stifle political pluralism, and monopolize opinions, all of which strengthen regime persistence.&quot;

== Government and politics ==


Macau is a special administrative region of China, with executive, legislative, and judicial powers devolved from the national government. The Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration provided for economic and administrative continuity through the handover, resulting in an executive-led governing system largely inherited from the territory&#x27;s history as a Portuguese colony. Under these terms and the &quot;one country, two systems&quot; principle, the Basic Law of Macao is the regional constitution. Because negotiations for the Joint Declaration and Basic Law began after transitional arrangements for Hong Kong were made, Macau&#x27;s structure of government is very similar to Hong Kong&#x27;s.

The regional government is composed of three branches:
* &quot;Executive:&quot; The Chief Executive is responsible for enforcing regional law, can force reconsideration of legislation, and appoints Executive Council members, a portion of the legislature, and principal officials. Acting with the Executive Council, the Chief Executive can propose new bills, issue subordinate legislation, and has authority to dissolve the legislature.
* &quot;Legislature:&quot; The unicameral Legislative Assembly enacts regional law, approves budgets, and has the power to impeach a sitting Chief Executive.
* &quot;Judiciary:&quot; The Court of Final Appeal and lower courts, whose judges are appointed by the Chief Executive on the advice of a recommendation commission, interpret laws and overturn those inconsistent with the Basic Law.

The Chief Executive is the head of government, and serves for a maximum of two five-year terms. The State Council (led by the Premier of China) appoints the Chief Executive after nomination by the Election Committee, which is composed of 400 business, community, and government leaders.

The Legislative Assembly has 33 members, each serving a four-year term: 14 are directly elected, 12 indirectly elected, and 7 appointed by the Chief Executive. Indirectly elected assemblymen are selected from limited electorates representing sectors of the economy or special interest groups. All directly elected members are chosen with proportional representation.

Twelve political parties had representatives elected to the Legislative Assembly in the 2017 election. These parties have aligned themselves into two ideological groups: the pro-establishment (the current government) and pro-democracy camps. Macau is represented in the National People&#x27;s Congress by 12 deputies chosen through an electoral college, and 29 delegates in the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference appointed by the central government.

Macau has generally congenial relations with China&#x27;s central government.
Chinese national law does not generally apply in the region, and Macau is treated as a separate jurisdiction. Its judicial system is based on Portuguese civil law, continuing the legal tradition established during colonial rule. Interpretative and amending power over the Basic Law and jurisdiction over acts of state lie with the central authority, however, making regional courts ultimately subordinate to the mainland&#x27;s socialist civil law system. Decisions made by the Standing Committee of the National People&#x27;s Congress can also override territorial judicial processes. In 2021, after similar actions were taken in Hong Kong following the protests associated with the Anti-Extradition Law Amendment Bill Movement, 21 candidates running for office in the territorial elections were disqualified as a result of allegedly failing to support the Basic Law, although no specific violations were noted by the territory&#x27;s electoral commission.

The territory&#x27;s jurisdictional independence is most apparent in its immigration and taxation policies. The Identification Department issues passports for permanent residents which differ from those issued by the mainland or Hong Kong, and the region maintains a regulated border with the rest of the country. All travellers between Macau and China and Hong Kong must pass border controls, regardless of nationality. Chinese citizens resident in mainland China do not have the right of abode in Macau and are subject to immigration controls. Public finances are handled separately from the national government, and taxes levied in Macau do not fund the central authority.

The Macao Garrison is responsible for the region&#x27;s defence. Although the Chairman of the Central Military Commission is supreme commander of the armed forces, the regional government may request assistance from the garrison. Macau residents are not required to perform military service and the law also has no provision for local enlistment, so its defence force is composed entirely of nonresidents.

The State Council and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs handle diplomatic matters, but Macau retains the ability to maintain separate economic and cultural relations with foreign nations. The territory negotiates its own trade agreements and actively participates in supranational organisations, including agencies of the World Trade Organization and United Nations. The regional government maintains trade offices in Greater China and other nations.

Public political demonstrations in Macau are generally rare.

===Lusophonia membership===
Macau is not a member of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, despite Portuguese being one of its official languages. This is due to it not being a sovereign nation, but a subnational division of China. In 2006, during the II Ministerial meeting between China and Portuguese Speaking Countries, the CPLP Executive Secretary and Deputy ambassador Tadeu Soares invited the Chief Executive of the Government of the Macau Special Administrative Region, Edmund Ho, to request the Associate Observer status for Macau. The Government of Macau has yet to make this request. In 2016, Murade Murargy, then executive secretary of CPLP said in an interview that Macau&#x27;s membership is a complicated question, since like the Galicia region in Spain, it is not an independent country, but only a part of China. However, the &quot;Instituto Internacional de Macau&quot; () and the University of São José are Consultative Observers of the CPLP.

=== Administrative divisions ===
The territory is divided into seven parishes. Cotai, a major area developed on reclaimed land between Taipa and Coloane, and areas of the Macau New Urban Zone do not have defined parishes. Historically, the parishes belonged to one of two municipalities (the Municipality of Macau or the Municipality of Ilhas) that were responsible for administering municipal services. The municipalities were abolished in 2001 and superseded by the Civic and Municipal Affairs Bureau in providing local services.

== Geography ==



Macau is located on China&#x27;s southern coast, west of Hong Kong, on the western side of the Pearl River estuary. It is surrounded by the South China Sea in the east and south, and neighbours the Guangdong city of Zhuhai to the west and north. The territory consists of Macau Peninsula, Taipa, and Coloane. A parcel of land in neighbouring Hengqin island that hosts the University of Macau also falls under the regional government&#x27;s jurisdiction. The territory&#x27;s highest point is Coloane Alto, above sea level.

Urban development is concentrated on peninsular Macau, where most of the population lives. The peninsula was originally a separate island with hilly terrain, which gradually became a tombolo as a connecting sandbar formed over time. Both natural sedimentation and land reclamation expanded the area enough to support urban growth. Macau has tripled its land area in the last century, increasing from in the late 19th century to in 2018.

Cotai, the area of reclaimed land connecting Taipa and Coloane, contains many of the newer casinos and resorts established after 1999. The region&#x27;s jurisdiction over the surrounding sea was greatly expanded in 2015, when it was granted an additional of maritime territory by the State Council. Further reclamation is underway to develop parts of the Macau New Urban Zone. The territory also has control over part of an artificial island to maintain a border checkpoint for the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge.

=== Climate ===
Despite being located south of the Tropic of Cancer, Macau has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen &quot;Cwa&quot;), characteristic of southern China. The territory is dual season dominant – summer (May to September) and winter (December to February) are the longest seasons, while spring (March and April) and autumn (October and November) are relatively brief periods. The summer monsoon brings warm and humid air from the sea, with the most frequent rainfall occurring during the season. Typhoons also occur most often then, bringing significant spikes in rainfall. During the winter, northern winds from the continent bring dry air and much less rainfall. The highest and lowest temperatures recorded at the Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau are on both 2 July 1930 and 6 July 1930 and on 26 January 1948. 

== Demographics ==
The Statistics and Census Service estimated Macau&#x27;s population at 667,400 at the end of 2018. With a population density of 21,340 people per square kilometre, Macau is the most densely populated region in the world. The overwhelming majority (88.7 per cent) are Chinese, many of whom originate from Guangdong (31.9 per cent) or Fujian (5.9 per cent). The remaining 11.6 per cent are non ethnic Chinese minorities, primarily Filipinos (4.6 per cent), Vietnamese (2.4 per cent), and Portuguese (1.8 per cent). Several thousand residents are of Macanese heritage, native-born multiracial people with mixed Portuguese ancestry. Of the total population (excluding migrants), 49.4 per cent were born in Macau, followed by 43.1 per cent in mainland China. A large portion of the population are Portuguese citizens, a legacy of colonial rule; at the time of the handover in 1999, 107,000 residents held Portuguese passports.

The predominant language is Cantonese, a variety of Chinese originating in Guangdong. It is spoken by 87.5 per cent of the population, 80.1 per cent as a first language and 7.5 per cent as a second language. Only 2.3 per cent can speak Portuguese, the other official language; 0.7 per cent are native speakers, and 1.6 per cent use it as a second language. Increased immigration from mainland China in recent years has added to the number of Mandarin speakers, making up about half of the population (50.4 per cent); 5.5 per cent are native speakers and 44.9 per cent are second language speakers. Traditional Chinese characters are used in writing, rather than the simplified characters used on the mainland. English is considered an additional working language and is spoken by over a quarter of the population (27.5 per cent); 2.8 per cent are native speakers, and 24.7 per cent speak English as a second language. Macanese Patois, a local creole generally known as &quot;Patuá&quot;, is now spoken only by a few in the older Macanese community.

According to the Government Information Bureau, 80 per cent of the population practices Buddhism, 6.7 per cent follow Christianity and 13.7 per cent follow other religion. Folk practices are also common among the citizens. According to Pew Research Center, Chinese folk religions have the most adherents (58.9 per cent) and are followed by Buddhism (17.3 per cent) and Christianity (7.2 per cent), while 15.4 per cent of the population profess no religious affiliation at all. Small minorities adhering to other religions (less than 1 per cent), including Hinduism, Judaism, and Islam, are also resident in Macau.

Life expectancy in Macau was 81.6 years for males and 87.7 years for females in 2018, the fourth highest in the world. Cancer, heart disease, and respiratory disease are the territory&#x27;s three leading causes of death. Most government-provided healthcare services are free of charge, though alternative treatment is also heavily subsidised.

Migrant workers living in Macau account for over 25 per cent of the entire workforce. They largely work in lower wage sectors of the economy, including construction, hotels, and restaurants. As a growing proportion of local residents take up employment in the gaming industry, the disparity in income between local and migrant workers has been increasing. Rising living costs have also pushed a large portion of nonresident workers to live in Zhuhai.

== Economy ==

Macau has a capitalist service economy largely based on casino gaming and tourism. It is the world&#x27;s 83rd-largest economy, with a nominal GDP of approximately MOP433 billion (US$53.9 billion). The GDP per capita was US$69,430 in 2023. Although Macau has one of the highest per capita GDPs, the territory also has a high level of wealth disparity. Macau&#x27;s gambling industry is the largest in the world, generating over MOP195 billion (US$24 billion) in revenue and about seven times larger than that of Las Vegas. Macau&#x27;s gambling revenue was $37 billion in 2018. Taxes from gambling revenues fund a robust welfare system and an annual cash payment to Macau&#x27;s citizens.

The regional economy is heavily reliant on casino gaming. The vast majority of government funding (79.6 per cent of total tax revenue) comes from gaming. Local taxes on personal income, residential property, and retail sales range from non-existent to negligible. Gambling as a share of GDP peaked in 2013 at over 60 per cent, and continues to account for 49.1 per cent of total economic output. The vast majority of casino patrons are tourists from mainland China, making up 68 per cent of all visitors. Casino gaming is illegal in both the mainland and Hong Kong, giving Macau a legal monopoly on the industry in China. Revenue from Chinese high rollers has been falling and was forecast to fall as much as 10% more in 2019. Economic uncertainty may account for some of the drop, but alternate Asian gambling venues do as well. For example, Chinese visitors to the Philippines more than doubled between 2015 and 2018, since the City of Dreams casino opened in Manila.

Casino gambling was legalised in 1962 and the gaming industry initially operated under a government-licensed monopoly granted to the Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau. This licence was renegotiated and renewed several times before ending in 2002 after 40 years. The government then allowed open bidding for casino licences to attract foreign investors. Along with an easing of travel restrictions on mainland Chinese visitors, this triggered a period of rapid economic growth; from 1999 to 2016, Macau&#x27;s gross domestic product multiplied by 7 and the unemployment rate dropped from 6.3 to 1.9 per cent. The Sands Macao, Wynn Macau, MGM Macau, and Venetian Macau were all opened during the first decade after liberalisation of casino concessions. Casinos employ about 24 per cent of the total workforce in the region. &quot;Increased competition from casinos popping up across Asia to lure away Chinese high rollers and tourists&quot; in Singapore, South Korea, Japan, Nepal, the Philippines, Australia, Vietnam and the Russian Far East led in 2019 to the lowest revenues in three years.

Export-oriented manufacturing previously contributed to a much larger share of economic output, peaking at 36.9 per cent of GDP in 1985 and falling to less than 1 per cent in 2017. The bulk of these exports were cotton textiles and apparel, but also included toys and electronics. At the handover in 1999, manufacturing, financial services, construction and real estate, and gaming were the four largest sectors of the economy. Macau&#x27;s shift to an economic model entirely dependent on gaming caused concern over its overexposure to a single sector, prompting the regional government to attempt re-diversifying its economy.

The government traditionally had a non-interventionist role in the economy and taxes corporations at very low rates. Post-handover administrations have generally been more involved in enhancing social welfare to counter the cyclical nature of the gaming industry. Economic growth has been attributed in large part to the high number of mainlander visits to Macau, and the central government exercises a role in guiding casino business growth through its control of the flow of tourists. The Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement formalised a policy of free trade between Macau and mainland China, with each jurisdiction pledging to remove remaining obstacles to trade and cross-boundary investment.

Due to a lack of available land for farming, agriculture is not significant in the economy. Food is exclusively imported to Macau and almost all foreign goods are transshipped through Hong Kong.

== Infrastructure ==
=== Transport ===

Macau has a highly developed road system, with over of roads. Automobiles drive on the left (unlike in both mainland China and Portugal), due to historical influence of the British Empire. Vehicle traffic is extremely congested, especially in the oldest part of the city, where streets are the narrowest. Public bus services operate over 80 routes, supplemented by free hotel shuttle buses that also run routes to popular tourist attractions and downtown locations. About 1,500 black taxicabs are licensed in the territory. The Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge, opened in 2018, provides a direct link with the eastern side of the Pearl River estuary. Cross-boundary traffic to mainland China may also pass through border checkpoints at the Portas do Cerco, Lótus Bridge, and Qingmao Port.

Macau International Airport serves over 8 million passengers each year and is the primary hub for local flag carrier Air Macau. Ferry services to Hong Kong and mainland China operate out of ferry terminals such as Taipa Ferry Terminal. Daily helicopter service is also available to Hong Kong and Shenzhen. Phase 1 of the territory&#x27;s first rail network, the Macau Light Rapid Transit, began operations in December 2019. The Taipa line connects 11 metro stations throughout Taipa and Cotai.

=== Healthcare ===


Macau is served by one major public hospital, the Hospital Conde S. Januário, and one major private hospital, the Kiang Wu Hospital, both located in Macau Peninsula, as well as a university associated hospital called Macau University of Science and Technology Hospital in Cotai. In addition to hospitals, Macau also has numerous health centres providing free basic medical care to residents. Consultation in traditional Chinese medicine is also available.

None of the Macau hospitals are independently assessed through international healthcare accreditation. A Western-style medical school was opened in Macau in 2019 by the Macau University of Science and Technology, with an annual intake of 50 students. Local nurses are trained at the Macao Polytechnic University and the Kiang Wu Nursing College of Macau. There are no training courses in midwifery in Macau. A study by the University of Macau, commissioned by the Macau SAR government, concluded that Macau is too small to have its own medical specialist training centre.

The Fire Services Bureau is responsible for ambulance service (Ambulância de Macau). The Macau Red Cross also operates ambulances (Toyota HiAce vans) for emergency and non-emergencies to local hospitals with volunteer staff. The organisation has a total of 739 uniformed firefighters and paramedics serving from 7 stations in Macau.

The Health Bureau in Macau is mainly responsible for coordinating the activities between the public and private organisations in the area of public health, and assure the health of citizens through specialised and primary health care services, as well as disease prevention and health promotion. The Macau Centre for Disease Control and Prevention was established in 2001, which monitors the operation of hospitals, health centres, and the blood transfusion centre in Macau. It also handles the organisation of care and prevention of diseases affecting the population, sets guidelines for hospitals and private healthcare providers, and issues licenses.

 Macau healthcare authorities send patients to Queen Mary Hospital in Hong Kong in instances where the local Macau hospitals are not equipped to deal with their scenarios, and many Macau residents intentionally seek healthcare in Hong Kong because they place more trust in Hong Kong doctors than in Mainland-trained doctors operating in Macau.

== Education ==


Education in Macau does not have a single centralised set of standards or curriculum. Individual schools follow different educational models, including Chinese, Portuguese, Hong Kong, and British systems. Children are required to attend school from the age of five until completion of lower secondary school, or at age 15. Of residents aged 3 and older, 69 per cent completed lower secondary education, 49 per cent graduated from an upper secondary school, 21 per cent earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher. Mandatory education has contributed to an adult literacy rate of 96.5 per cent. While lower than that of other developed economies, the rate is due to the influx of refugees from mainland China during the post-war colonial era. Much of the elderly population were not formally educated due to war and poverty.

Most schools in the territory are private institutions. Out of the 77 non-tertiary schools, 10 are public and the other 67 are privately run. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau maintains an important position in territorial education, managing 27 primary and secondary schools. The government provides 15 years of free education for all residents enrolled in publicly run schools, and subsidises tuition for students in private schools. Students at the secondary school level studying in neighbouring areas of Guangdong are also eligible for tuition subsidies.

The vast majority of schools use Cantonese as the medium of instruction, with written education in Chinese and compulsory classes in Mandarin. A minority of private schools use English or Portuguese as the primary teaching language. Portuguese-Chinese schools mainly use Chinese, but additionally require mandatory Portuguese-language classes as part of their curriculum.

Macau has ten universities and tertiary education institutes. The University of Macau, founded in 1981, is the territory&#x27;s only public comprehensive university. The Kiang Wu Nursing College of Macau is the oldest higher institute, specialising in educating future nursing staff for the college&#x27;s parent hospital. The University of Saint Joseph, Macau University of Science and Technology, and the City University of Macau were all established in subsequent years. Five other institutes specialise in specific vocations or provide continuing education.

== Culture ==

The mixing of Chinese and Portuguese culture and religious traditions for more than four centuries has left Macau with an inimitable collection of holidays, festivals and events. The biggest event of the year is the Macau Grand Prix each November, when the main streets of the Macau Peninsula are converted to a racetrack bearing similarities with the Monaco Grand Prix. Other annual events include Macau Arts festival in March, the International Fireworks Display Contest in September, the International Music festival in October or November, and the Macau International Marathon in December.

The Lunar Chinese New Year is the most important traditional festival, and celebration normally takes place in late January or early February. The Pou Tai Un Temple in Taipa is the place for the Feast of Tou Tei, the Earth god, in February. The Procession of the Passion of Our Lord is a well-known Roman Catholic rite and journey, which travels from Saint Austin&#x27;s Church to the cathedral, also taking place in February.

The A-Ma Temple, which honours the Goddess Matsu, is in full swing in April with many worshipers celebrating the A-Ma festival. In May, it is common to see dancing dragons at the Feast of the Drunken Dragon and twinkling-clean Buddhas at the Feast of the Bathing of Lord Buddha. In Coloane Village, the Taoist god Tam Kong is also honoured on the same day. Dragon Boat Festival is brought into play on Nam Van Lake in June and Hungry Ghosts&#x27; festival, in late August and/or early September every year. All events and festivities of the year end with Winter Solstice in December.

Macau preserves many historical properties in the urban area. Its historic centre, which includes some twenty-five historic locations, was officially listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO on 15 July 2005 during the 29th session of the World Heritage Committee, held in Durban, South Africa.
However, the Macao government is criticised for ignoring the conservation of heritage in urban planning. In 2007, local residents of Macao wrote a letter to UNESCO complaining about construction projects around world heritage Guia Lighthouse (Focal height ), including the headquarter of the Liaison Office (). UNESCO then issued a warning to the Macau government, which led former Chief Executive Edmund Ho to sign a notice regulating height restrictions on buildings around the site. In 2015, the New Macau Association submitted a report to UNESCO claiming that the government had failed to protect Macao&#x27;s cultural heritage against threats by urban development projects. One of the main examples of the report is that the headquarter of the Liaison Office of the Central People&#x27;s Government, which is located on the Guia foothill and obstructs the view of the Guia Fortress (one of the world heritages symbols of Macao). One year later, Roni Amelan, a spokesman from UNESCO Press service, said that the UNESCO has asked China for information and is still waiting for a reply. In 2016, the Macau government approved an -tall construction limit for the residential project, which reportedly goes against the city&#x27;s regulations on the height of buildings around world heritage site Guia Lighthouse.

=== Cuisine ===

Food in Macau is mainly based on both Cantonese and Portuguese cuisine, drawing influences from Indian and Malay dishes as well, reflecting a unique cultural and culinary blend after centuries of colonial rule. Portuguese recipes were adapted to use local ingredients, such as fresh seafood, turmeric, coconut milk, and adzuki beans. These adaptations produced Macanese variations of traditional Portuguese dishes including &quot;caldo verde&quot;, minchee, and &quot;cozido à portuguesa&quot;. While many restaurants claim to serve traditional Portuguese or Macanese dishes, most serve a mix of Cantonese-Portuguese fusion cuisine. &quot;Galinha à portuguesa&quot; is an example of a Chinese dish that draws from Macanese influences, but is not part of Macanese cuisine. &quot;Cha chaan teng&quot;, a type of fast casual diner originating in Hong Kong that serves that region&#x27;s interpretation of Western food, are also prevalent in Macau. &quot;Pastel de nata&quot;, pork chop buns, and almond biscuits are popular street food items.

=== Sports ===

Despite its small area, Macau is home to a variety of sports and recreational facilities that have hosted a number of major international sporting events, including the 2005 East Asian Games, the 2006 Lusophony Games, and the 2007 Asian Indoor Games.

The territory regularly hosts the Macau Grand Prix, one of the most significant annual motorsport competitions that uses city streets as the racetrack. It is the only street circuit that hosts Formula Three, touring car, and motorcycle races in the same event. The Guia Circuit, with narrow corner clearance and a winding path, is considered an extremely challenging course and a serious milestone for prospective Formula One racers.

Macau represents itself separately from mainland China with its own sports teams in international competitions. The territory maintains its own National Olympic Committee, but does not compete in the Olympic Games. International Olympic Committee rules specify that new NOCs can only be admitted if they represent sovereign states (Hong Kong has participated in the Olympics since before the regulation change in 1996).

== Twin towns and sister cities ==
Macau has six sister cities, listed chronologically by year joined:

* Lisbon, Portugal (1982)
* Uwajima, Ehime, Japan (1987)
* Monte Carlo, Monaco (1992)
* Porto, Portugal (1997)
* Linköping, Sweden (1997)
* Coimbra, Portugal (1998)
* São Paulo, Brazil (2000)
* Praia, Cape Verde (2007)
Additionally, Macau has other cultural agreements with the following cities:
* Brussels, Belgium (1991)
* San Francisco, United States (2001)
* Da Nang, Vietnam (2006)
* Phuket, Thailand (2018)

=== Union of Luso-Afro-Americo-Asiatic Capital Cities ===
Macau is part of the Union of Luso-Afro-Americo-Asiatic Capital Cities from 28 June 1985, establishing brotherly relations with the following cities:
* Bissau, Guinea-Bissau
* Dili, East Timor
* Lisbon, Portugal
* Luanda, Angola
* Maputo, Mozambique
* Panaji (Panjim), India
* Praia, Cape Verde
* Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
* São Tomé, São Tomé and Príncipe
== See also ==
* Cuiheng New Area
* Foreign relations of Macau
* Index of Macau-related articles
* Outline of Macau
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
==== Government reports ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==== Academic publications ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==== Legislation ====
* 
* 
==== Print ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==== News articles ====
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Macau . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Macau from BBC News
Government
* Gov.MO . Macau SAR Government Portal.
* Macao Government Tourism Office 
* Macau SAR News
Trade
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Macao 
Maps
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="0" end="5" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="9" end="14" title="Macau" label="Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="20" end="49" title="special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="57" end="88" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="166" end="190" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="densely populated region"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="217" end="227" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="253" end="269" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="290" end="298" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="306" end="318" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="324" end="336" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="420" end="431" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q700327" start="515" end="547" title="Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking" label="Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="601" end="614" title="Handover of Macau" label="1999 handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="636" end="665" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="790" end="814" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601433" start="897" end="912" title="Historic Centre of Macau" label="historic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="950" end="956" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="957" end="976" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1053" end="1062" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="1116" end="1158" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="GDPs per capita by purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="1193" end="1216" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057992" start="1248" end="1267" title="Government of Macau" label="Government of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="1277" end="1307" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="fourth-highest life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="1383" end="1415" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="most densely populated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="1472" end="1499" title="land reclamation" label="land reclaimed from the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q418226" start="1716" end="1721" title="Mazu (goddess)" label="Matsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149114" start="1822" end="1833" title="A-Ma Temple" label="A-Ma Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307558" start="2237" end="2269" title="Reforms of Portuguese orthography" label="reform of Portuguese orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334373" start="2412" end="2427" title="Macau Peninsula" label="Macau Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="2566" end="2571" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="2573" end="2580" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="2586" end="2593" title="Hengqin" label="Hengqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="2853" end="2864" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q948245" start="2920" end="2932" title="Panyu County" label="Panyu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023893" start="2934" end="2951" title="Nanhai District" label="Nanhai Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="2971" end="2980" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="3040" end="3051" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q59218" start="3085" end="3104" title="Dongguan Prefecture" label="Dongguan Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="3112" end="3123" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="3234" end="3246" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q59223" start="3303" end="3319" title="Zhongshan" label="Xiangshan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301657" start="3372" end="3396" title="Mongol conquest of China" label="Mongol conquest of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q425897" start="3493" end="3506" title="Jorge Álvares" label="Jorge Álvares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="3575" end="3584" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640449" start="3595" end="3600" title="Tamão" label="Tamão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758751" start="3614" end="3622" title="Tuen Mun" label="Tuen Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452540" start="4064" end="4080" title="Battle of Tunmen" label="Battle of Tunmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640449" start="4084" end="4089" title="Tamão" label="Tamão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758751" start="4094" end="4102" title="Tuen Mun" label="Tuen Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443119" start="4181" end="4201" title="Battle of Sincouwaan" label="Battle of Sincouwaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502379" start="4209" end="4222" title="Lantau Island" label="Lantau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911959" start="4288" end="4296" title="Shuangyu" label="Shuangyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q970541" start="4355" end="4370" title="Dongshan County" label="Dongshan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518426" start="4411" end="4426" title="Galeote Pereira" label="Galeote Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="4603" end="4612" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="4613" end="4619" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="4620" end="4628" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4649" end="4658" title="Gun control in China#History" label="bird guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256431" start="4664" end="4690" title="breech-loading swivel guns" label="breech-loading swivel guns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4722" end="4730" title="Franks#Crusaders and other Western Europeans as &amp;quot;Franks&amp;quot;" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581279" start="4955" end="4984" title="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)" label="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="5078" end="5083" title="taels" label="taels"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581279" start="5141" end="5154" title="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)" label="reestablished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757209" start="5323" end="5331" title="sea lane" label="sea lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5347" end="5352" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="5437" end="5445" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="5450" end="5456" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q871627" start="5578" end="5609" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15653730" start="5647" end="5673" title="Municipal Council of Macau" label="Municipal Council of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q181623" start="5802" end="5811" title="warehouse" label="warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122859" start="5919" end="5931" title="Nanban trade" label="Nanban trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q838085" start="6040" end="6058" title="Fortaleza do Monte" label="Fortaleza do Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="6090" end="6121" title="Dutch–Portuguese War" label="frequent Dutch naval incursions"/>
<link wikidata="Q704333" start="6172" end="6187" title="Battle of Macau" label="Battle of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="6418" end="6436" title="Sakoku" label="Japan halted trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501724" start="6460" end="6486" title="Portuguese Restoration War" label="Portuguese Restoration War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="6496" end="6514" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427966" start="6602" end="6615" title="transition from Ming to Qing" label="Qing conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569008" start="6632" end="6638" title="Haijin" label="Haijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152855" start="6757" end="6771" title="Kingdom of Tungning" label="Ming loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="6783" end="6797" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617767" start="6883" end="6896" title="Canton System" label="Canton System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="6986" end="6992" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126165" start="7190" end="7198" title="Mandarin (bureaucrat)" label="mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="7369" end="7384" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="7410" end="7419" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q907213" start="7699" end="7716" title="Governor of Macau" label="Governor of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="7803" end="7808" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="7813" end="7820" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125460" start="7884" end="7888" title="Wanzai, Small Hengqin and Great Hengqin islands" label="Lapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="7893" end="7901" title="Hengqin" label="Montanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q700327" start="8012" end="8044" title="Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking" label="Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q638903" start="8299" end="8315" title="5 October 1910 revolution" label="Portugal in 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="8320" end="8333" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="China in 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="8339" end="8349" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8464" end="8480" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="8486" end="8501" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232556" start="8552" end="8573" title="Portugal during World War II" label="Portuguese neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="9163" end="9180" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="9411" end="9430" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182793" start="9507" end="9520" title="12-3 incident" label="12-3 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="9672" end="9695" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="9767" end="9787" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q671479" start="9966" end="10005" title="Sino-British Joint Declaration" label="arrangements on Hong Kong&amp;#x27;s future"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10015" end="10029" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241869" start="10136" end="10178" title="Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau" label="Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="10467" end="10494" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722692" start="10505" end="10519" title="Macau Container Port" label="container port"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="10525" end="10542" title="handover of Macau" label="handover of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="11112" end="11136" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645686" start="11165" end="11194" title="Macau national security law" label="national security legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="11642" end="11680" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative region of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="11749" end="11768" title="Government of China" label="national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241869" start="11774" end="11807" title="Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau" label="Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="11872" end="11880" title="Handover of Macau" label="handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="12037" end="12061" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q837890" start="12083" end="12101" title="Macao Basic Law" label="Basic Law of Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="12118" end="12130" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741479" start="12415" end="12430" title="Chief Executive of Macau" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164088" start="12529" end="12546" title="Executive Council of Macau" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="12695" end="12718" title="Primary and secondary legislation" label="subordinate legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q550133" start="12809" end="12829" title="Legislative Assembly of Macau" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178377" start="12954" end="12975" title="Court of Final Appeal (Macau)" label="Court of Final Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921691" start="12980" end="12992" title="Judiciary of Macau" label="lower courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="13258" end="13271" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="13284" end="13300" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535081" start="13525" end="13541" title="Directly elected member (Macau)" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003279" start="13546" end="13564" title="Indirectly elected member" label="indirectly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048603" start="13572" end="13581" title="Appointed Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="appointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="13784" end="13811" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416128" start="13902" end="13915" title="2017 Macanese legislative election" label="2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924678" start="13988" end="14005" title="Pro-Beijing camp (Macau)" label="pro-establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924670" start="14035" end="14048" title="Pro-democracy camp (Macau)" label="pro-democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="14084" end="14115" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="14192" end="14247" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="14265" end="14283" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q835068" start="14364" end="14384" title="Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese national law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039817" start="14506" end="14526" title="Law of Portugal" label="Portuguese civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982322" start="14792" end="14801" title="socialist law" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="14802" end="14811" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19214" start="14842" end="14899" title="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="15019" end="15027" title="2019–2020 Hong Kong protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q114899" start="15396" end="15407" title="Visa policy of Macau" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817152" start="15468" end="15477" title="Macao Special Administrative Region passport" label="passports"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797252" start="15804" end="15827" title="right of abode in Macau" label="right of abode in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118969" start="16004" end="16018" title="Macao Garrison" label="Macao Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="16078" end="16121" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="Chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047378" start="16125" end="16142" title="Supreme Military Command of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="supreme commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="16411" end="16424" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155502" start="16433" end="16460" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15902780" start="16561" end="16591" title="Foreign relations of Macau" label="relations with foreign nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="16727" end="16751" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16756" end="16770" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="16976" end="17018" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="17674" end="17688" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia region"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="17692" end="17697" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q986430" start="17828" end="17850" title="University of Saint Joseph" label="University of São José"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="17971" end="17976" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="18027" end="18032" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="18037" end="18044" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649926" start="18063" end="18083" title="Macau New Urban Zone" label="Macau New Urban Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q841086" start="18184" end="18205" title="Municipality of Macau" label="Municipality of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135512" start="18213" end="18234" title="Municipality of Ilhas" label="Municipality of Ilhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60996169" start="18360" end="18394" title="Civic and Municipal Affairs Bureau" label="Civic and Municipal Affairs Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="18501" end="18510" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q201463" start="18539" end="18550" title="Pearl River (China)" label="Pearl River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="18584" end="18599" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="18660" end="18666" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334373" start="18716" end="18731" title="Macau Peninsula" label="Macau Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="18733" end="18738" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="18744" end="18751" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="18786" end="18793" title="Hengqin" label="Hengqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563050" start="18816" end="18835" title="University of Macau" label="University of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147805" start="18936" end="18948" title="Coloane Alto" label="Coloane Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q498274" start="19151" end="19158" title="tombolo" label="tombolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="19232" end="19248" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="19406" end="19411" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="19690" end="19703" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649926" start="19761" end="19781" title="Macau New Urban Zone" label="Macau New Urban Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q757292" start="19862" end="19879" title="border checkpoint" label="border checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191515" start="19888" end="19917" title="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge" label="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="19971" end="19987" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="20001" end="20026" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20028" end="20034" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126515" start="20311" end="20325" title="East Asian Monsoon" label="summer monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="20427" end="20434" title="Typhoon" label="Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5926090" start="20648" end="20691" title="Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau" label="Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931406" start="20781" end="20810" title="Statistics and Census Service" label="Statistics and Census Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="21044" end="21051" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="21081" end="21090" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="21110" end="21116" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="21206" end="21215" title="Filipinos" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="21232" end="21242" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="21263" end="21273" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q405487" start="21324" end="21332" title="Macanese people" label="Macanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="21355" end="21366" title="multiracial" label="multiracial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21569" end="21588" title="Portuguese nationality law#Macau" label="Portuguese citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="21728" end="21737" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="21741" end="21759" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="variety of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="21936" end="21946" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="22142" end="22150" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="22298" end="22328" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="22366" end="22387" title="Simplified Chinese characters" label="simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q35785" start="22618" end="22633" title="Macanese Patois" label="Macanese Patois"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="22643" end="22649" title="Creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q856219" start="22838" end="22846" title="Religion in Macau" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856219" start="22868" end="22880" title="Religion in Macau" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="22986" end="23005" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="23007" end="23028" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="23090" end="23098" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="23119" end="23131" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="23306" end="23314" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="23316" end="23323" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839108" start="23329" end="23334" title="Islam in Macau" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="23484" end="23490" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="23492" end="23505" title="cardiovascular disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="23511" end="23530" title="respiratory disease" label="respiratory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="24189" end="24199" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="24200" end="24215" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="24233" end="24239" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="24283" end="24303" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="83rd-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24312" end="24323" title="Gross domestic product#Nominal GDP and adjustments to GDP" label="nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="24511" end="24527" title="Economic inequality" label="wealth disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="24689" end="24698" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q839196" start="25971" end="26012" title="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau" label="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="26355" end="26377" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041578" start="26458" end="26469" title="Sands Macao" label="Sands Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414111" start="26471" end="26481" title="Wynn Macau" label="Wynn Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q995564" start="26483" end="26492" title="MGM Macau" label="MGM Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156708" start="26498" end="26512" title="Venetian Macau" label="Venetian Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139957" start="28059" end="28098" title="Mainland and Macau Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement" label="Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="28586" end="28597" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="on the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191515" start="29034" end="29063" title="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge" label="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272047" start="29243" end="29258" title="Portas do Cerco" label="Portas do Cerco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318967" start="29260" end="29272" title="Lótus Bridge" label="Lótus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30945141" start="29278" end="29290" title="Qingmao Port" label="Qingmao Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="29293" end="29320" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q407478" start="29410" end="29419" title="Air Macau" label="Air Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289281" start="29507" end="29527" title="Taipa Ferry Terminal" label="Taipa Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q866024" start="29655" end="29680" title="Macau Light Rapid Transit" label="Macau Light Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935354" start="29721" end="29731" title="Taipa line" label="Taipa line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570055" start="29859" end="29885" title="Hospital Conde S. Januário" label="Hospital Conde S. Januário"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908476" start="29923" end="29940" title="Kiang Wu Hospital" label="Kiang Wu Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722718" start="30026" end="30077" title="Macau University of Science and Technology Hospital" label="Macau University of Science and Technology Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="30081" end="30086" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="30217" end="30245" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054696" start="30329" end="30367" title="international healthcare accreditation" label="international healthcare accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="30371" end="30378" title="Western culture" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q15662456" start="30549" end="30577" title="Macao Polytechnic University" label="Macao Polytechnic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="30595" end="30602" title="Nursing" label="Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20862341" start="30654" end="30663" title="midwifery" label="midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563050" start="30689" end="30708" title="University of Macau" label="University of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133076" start="30843" end="30863" title="Fire Services Bureau" label="Fire Services Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q20063812" start="30928" end="30943" title="Macau Red Cross" label="Macau Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q981209" start="30970" end="30982" title="Toyota HiAce" label="Toyota HiAce"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="31314" end="31327" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q623543" start="31387" end="31406" title="primary health care" label="primary health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851928" start="31451" end="31467" title="health promotion" label="health promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645683" start="31473" end="31520" title="Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (Macau)" label="Macau Centre for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="31613" end="31630" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566725" start="31817" end="31825" title="medical license" label="licenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270465" start="31875" end="31894" title="Queen Mary Hospital (Hong Kong)" label="Queen Mary Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q871627" start="33160" end="33191" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807178" start="33627" end="33648" title="medium of instruction" label="medium of instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644287" start="33960" end="34010" title="List of universities and colleges in Macau" label="ten universities and tertiary education institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563050" start="34016" end="34035" title="University of Macau" label="University of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34120" end="34153" title="Kiang Wu Hospital#Kiang Wu Nursing College of Macau" label="Kiang Wu Nursing College of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q986430" start="34277" end="34303" title="University of Saint Joseph" label="University of Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q847993" start="34305" end="34347" title="Macau University of Science and Technology" label="Macau University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123484" start="34357" end="34381" title="City University of Macau" label="City University of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q828748" start="34490" end="34510" title="continuing education" label="continuing education"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="34542" end="34549" title="Culture of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746216" start="34554" end="34572" title="Portuguese culture" label="Portuguese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346003" start="34744" end="34760" title="Macau Grand Prix" label="Macau Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9102" start="34880" end="34897" title="Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="35133" end="35149" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="35833" end="35848" title="Coloane Village" label="Coloane Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="35854" end="35860" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023844" start="35865" end="35873" title="Tam Kong" label="Tam Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254268" start="35908" end="35928" title="Dragon Boat Festival" label="Dragon Boat Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q897993" start="36106" end="36121" title="Dongzhi Festival" label="Winter Solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601433" start="36202" end="36217" title="Historic Centre of Macau" label="historic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="36298" end="36317" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="36321" end="36327" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147477" start="36375" end="36399" title="World Heritage Committee" label="World Heritage Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="36409" end="36415" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="36642" end="36656" title="world heritage" label="world heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078465" start="36657" end="36672" title="Guia Lighthouse" label="Guia Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048127" start="36829" end="36838" title="Edmund Ho" label="Edmund Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495255" start="36930" end="36951" title="New Macau Association" label="New Macau Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078465" start="37304" end="37317" title="Guia Fortress" label="Guia Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="37801" end="37810" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q180817" start="37815" end="37833" title="Portuguese cuisine" label="Portuguese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="37859" end="37865" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741543" start="37870" end="37875" title="Malay cuisine" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="38055" end="38063" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="38065" end="38077" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q380279" start="38083" end="38094" title="adzuki bean" label="adzuki bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q770977" start="38193" end="38204" title="caldo verde" label="caldo verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863335" start="38212" end="38219" title="minchee" label="minchee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312252" start="38231" end="38250" title="cozido à portuguesa" label="cozido à portuguesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q910515" start="38402" end="38422" title="Galinha à portuguesa" label="Galinha à portuguesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q137746" start="38541" end="38555" title="Cha chaan teng" label="Cha chaan teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421401" start="38714" end="38728" title="Pastel de nata" label="Pastel de nata"/>
<link wikidata="Q838462" start="38736" end="38749" title="pork chop bun" label="pork chop bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196125" start="38756" end="38770" title="almond biscuit" label="almond biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369971" start="38989" end="39010" title="2005 East Asian Games" label="2005 East Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464001" start="39016" end="39036" title="2006 Lusophony Games" label="2006 Lusophony Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195316" start="39046" end="39069" title="2007 Asian Indoor Games" label="2007 Asian Indoor Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346003" start="39106" end="39122" title="Macau Grand Prix" label="Macau Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q926439" start="39239" end="39253" title="street circuit" label="street circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="39265" end="39278" title="Formula Three" label="Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="39280" end="39291" title="Touring car racing" label="touring car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536210" start="39337" end="39349" title="Guia Circuit" label="Guia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="39486" end="39497" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q370950" start="39651" end="39677" title="Sports and Olympic Committee of Macau, China" label="National Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="39707" end="39720" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="39722" end="39753" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="39977" end="39990" title="Sister city" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="40034" end="40040" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845857" start="40060" end="40074" title="Uwajima, Ehime" label="Uwajima, Ehime"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="40091" end="40102" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="40120" end="40125" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q25413" start="40145" end="40154" title="Linköping" label="Linköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="40172" end="40179" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="40199" end="40208" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751" start="40226" end="40231" title="Praia" label="Praia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="40330" end="40338" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="40357" end="40370" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="40395" end="40402" title="Da Nang" label="Da Nang"/>
<link wikidata="Q182565" start="40421" end="40427" title="Phuket Province" label="Phuket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739" start="40656" end="40662" title="Bissau" label="Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310" start="40680" end="40684" title="Dili" label="Dili"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="40699" end="40705" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="40718" end="40724" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="40735" end="40741" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="40756" end="40762" title="Panaji" label="Panaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751" start="40781" end="40786" title="Praia" label="Praia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="40801" end="40815" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="40826" end="40834" title="São Tomé" label="São Tomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q588677" start="40875" end="40891" title="Cuiheng" label="Cuiheng New Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15902780" start="40894" end="40920" title="Foreign relations of Macau" label="Foreign relations of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294078" start="40923" end="40954" title="Index of Macau-related articles" label="Index of Macau-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112341" start="40957" end="40973" title="Outline of Macau" label="Outline of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="41286" end="41304" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="41312" end="41339" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="41354" end="41362" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19069" wikidata="Q1369628" url="?curid=19069" title="History of Macau">
<text>Macau is a special administrative region (SAR) of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. It was leased to Portugal in 1557 as a trading post in exchange for a symbolic annual rent of 500 tael. Despite remaining under Chinese sovereignty and authority, the Portuguese came to consider and administer Macau as a &quot;de facto&quot; colony. Following the signing of the Treaty of Nanking between China and Britain in 1842, and the signing of treaties between China and foreign powers during the 1860s, establishing the benefit of &quot;the most favoured nation&quot; for them, the Portuguese attempted to conclude a similar treaty in 1862, but the Chinese refused, owing to a misunderstanding over the sovereignty of Macau. In 1887 the Portuguese finally managed to secure an agreement from China that Macau was Portuguese territory. In 1999 it was handed over to China. Macau was the last extant European territory in continental Asia.

==Early history==

The human history of Macau stretches back up to 6,000 years, and includes many different and diverse civilisations and periods of existence. Evidence of human and culture dating back 3,500 to 4,000 years has been discovered on the Macau Peninsula on Coloane Island.

During the Qin dynasty (221–206 BC), the region was under the jurisdiction of Panyu County, Nanhai Prefecture of the province of Guangdong. The region is first known to have been settled during the Han dynasty. It was administratively part of Dongguan Prefecture in the Jin dynasty (266–420 AD), and alternated under the control of Nanhai and Dongguan in later dynasties.

Since the 5th century, merchant ships travelling between Southeast Asia and Guangzhou used the region as a port for refuge, fresh water, and food. In 1152, during the Song dynasty (960–1279 AD), it was under the jurisdiction of the new Xiangshan County. In 1277, approximately 50,000 refugees fleeing the Mongol conquest of China settled in the coastal area.

Mong Há has long been the centre of Chinese life in Macau and the site of what may be the region&#x27;s oldest temple, a shrine devoted to the Buddhist Guanyin (Goddess of Mercy). Later in the Ming dynasty (1368–1644 AD), fishermen migrated to Macau from various parts of Guangdong and Fujian provinces and built the A-Ma Temple where they prayed for safety on the sea. The Hoklo Boat people were the first to show interest in Macau as a trading centre for the southern provinces. However, Macau did not develop as a major settlement until the Portuguese arrived in the 16th century.

==Portuguese settlement==
During the age of discovery Portuguese sailors explored the coasts of Africa and Asia. The sailors later established posts at Goa in 1510, and conquered Malacca in 1511, driving the Sultan to the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula from where he kept making raids on the Portuguese. The Portuguese under Jorge Álvares landed at Lintin Island in the Pearl River Delta of China in 1513 with a hired junk sailing from Portuguese Malacca. They erected a stone marker at Lintin Island claiming it for the King of Portugal, Manuel I. In the same year, the Indian Viceroy Afonso de Albuquerque commissioned Rafael Perestrello — a cousin of Christopher Columbus – to sail to China in order to open up trade relations. Rafael traded with the Chinese merchants in Guangzhou in that year and in 1516, but was not allowed to move further.

Portugal&#x27;s king Manuel I in 1517 commissioned a diplomatic and trade mission to Guangzhou headed by Tomé Pires and Fernão Pires de Andrade. The embassy lasted until the death of the Zhengde Emperor in Nanjing. The embassy was further rejected by the Chinese Ming court, which now became less interested in new foreign contacts. The Ming Court was also influenced by reports of misbehaviour of Portuguese elsewhere in China, and by the deposed Sultan of Malacca seeking Chinese assistance to drive the Portuguese out of Malacca.

In 1521 and 1522 several more Portuguese ships reached the trading island Tamão off the coast near Guangzhou, but were driven away by the now-hostile Ming authorities. Pires was imprisoned and died in Canton.

In their first attempts at obtaining trading posts by force, the Portuguese were defeated by the Ming Chinese at the Battle of Tunmen in Tamão or Tuen Mun in 1521 where the Portuguese lost two ships, and Battle of Sincouwaan in Lantau Island where the Portuguese also lost two ships, and Shuangyu in 1548 where several Portuguese were captured and near the Dongshan Peninsula in 1549, where two Portuguese junks and Galeote Pereira were captured. During these battles the Ming Chinese captured weapons from the defeated Portuguese which they then reverse engineered and mass-produced in China such as matchlock musket arquebuses which they named bird guns and Breech loading swivel guns which they named as Folangji (Frankish) cannon because the Portuguese were known to the Chinese under the name of Franks at this time. The Portuguese later returned to China peacefully and presented themselves under the name Portuguese instead of Franks in the Luso-Chinese agreement (1554) and rented Macau as a trading post from China by paying annual lease of hundreds of silver taels to Ming China.

Good relations between the Portuguese and Chinese Ming dynasty resumed in the 1540s, when the Portuguese aided China in eliminating coastal pirates. The two later began annual trade missions to the offshore Shangchuan Island in 1549. A few years later, Lampacau Island, closer to the Pearl River Delta, became the main base of the Portuguese trade in the region.

Diplomatic relations were further improved and salvaged by the Leonel de Sousa agreement with Cantonese authorities in 1554. In 1557, the Ming court finally gave consent for a permanent and official Portuguese trade base at Macau. In 1558, Leonel de Sousa became the second Portuguese governor of Macau.

They later built some rudimentary stone-houses around the area now called Nam Van. But not until 1557 did the Portuguese establish a permanent settlement in Macau, at an annual rent of 500 taels (~) of silver. Later that year, the Portuguese established a walled village there. Ground rent payments began in 1573. China retained sovereignty and Chinese residents were subject to Chinese law, but the territory was under Portuguese administration. In 1582 a land lease was signed, and annual rent was paid to Xiangshan County. The Portuguese continued to pay an annual tribute up to 1863 in order to stay in Macau.
The Portuguese often married Tanka women since Han Chinese women would not have relations with them. Some of the Tanka&#x27;s descendants became Macanese people. Some Tanka children were enslaved by Portuguese raiders. The Chinese poet Wu Li wrote a poem, which included a line about the Portuguese in Macau being supplied with fish by the Tanka.

==Macau&#x27;s golden age==
Both Chinese and Portuguese merchants flocked to Macau, although the Portuguese were never numerous (numbering just 900 in 1583 and 1200 out of 26,000 in 1640). It quickly became an important node in the development of Portugal&#x27;s trade along three major routes: Macau–Malacca–Goa–Lisbon, Guangzhou–Macau–Nagasaki and Macau–Manila–Mexico. The Guangzhou–Macau–Nagasaki route was particularly profitable because the Portuguese acted as middlemen, shipping Chinese silks to Japan and Japanese silver to China, pocketing huge markups in the process. This already lucrative trade became even more so when Chinese officials handed Macau&#x27;s Portuguese traders a monopoly by banning direct trade with Japan in 1547, due to piracy by Chinese and Japanese nationals.

In 1637, An English explorer John Weddell arrived at Macau.

Macau&#x27;s golden age coincided with the union of the Spanish and Portuguese crowns, between 1580 and 1640. King Philip II of Spain was encouraged to not harm the status quo, to allow trade to continue between Portuguese Macau and Spanish Manila, and to not interfere with Portuguese trade with China. In 1587, Philip promoted Macau from &quot;Settlement or Port of the Name of God&quot; to &quot;City of the Name of God&quot; (Cidade do Nome de Deus de Macau).

The alliance of Portugal with Spain meant that Portuguese colonies became targets for the Netherlands, which was embroiled at the time in a lengthy struggle for its independence from Spain, the Eighty Years&#x27; War. After the Dutch East India Company was founded in 1602, the Dutch unsuccessfully attacked Macau several times, culminating in a full-scale invasion attempt in 1622, when 800 attackers were successfully repelled by 150 Macanese and Portuguese defenders and a large number of African slaves. One of the first actions of Macau&#x27;s next governor Francisco Mascarenhas, who arrived the following year, was to strengthen the city&#x27;s defences, which included the construction of the Guia Fortress.

===Religious activity===
As well as being an important trading post, Macau was a centre of activity for Catholic missionaries, as it was seen as a gateway for the conversion of the vast populations of China and Japan. Jesuits had first arrived in the 1560s and were followed by Dominicans in the 1580s. Both orders soon set about constructing churches and schools, the most notable of which were the Jesuit Cathedral of Saint Paul and the St. Dominic&#x27;s Church built by the Dominicans. In 1576, Macau was established as an episcopal see by Pope Gregory XIII with Melchior Carneiro appointed as the first bishop.

==1637–1844: Decline==


In 1637, increasing suspicion of the intentions of Spanish and Portuguese Catholic missionaries in Japan finally led the &quot;shōgun&quot; to seal Japan off from foreign influence. Later named the sakoku period, this meant that no Japanese were allowed to leave the country (or return if they were living abroad), and no foreign ship was allowed to dock in a Japanese port. An exception was made for the Protestant Dutch, who were allowed to continue to trade with Japan from the confines of a small man-made island in Nagasaki, Deshima. Macau&#x27;s most profitable trade route, that between Japan and China, had been severed. The crisis was compounded two years later by the loss of Malacca to the Dutch in 1641, damaging the link with Goa.

The news that the Portuguese House of Braganza had regained control of the Crown from the Spanish Habsburgs took two years to reach Macau, arriving in 1642. A ten-week celebration ensued, and despite its new-found poverty, Macau sent gifts to the new King João IV along with expressions of loyalty. In return, the King rewarded Macau with the addition of the words &quot;There is none more Loyal&quot; to its existing title. Macau was now &quot;City of the Name of God, Macau, There is none more loyal&quot;. (&quot;Cidade do Nome de Deus, Macau, Nao Ha Outra Mais Leal&quot; []).

In 1685, the privileged position of the Portuguese in trade with China ended, following a decision by the Kangxi Emperor of China to allow trade with all foreign countries. Over the next century, Britain, the Dutch Republic, France, Denmark, Sweden, the United States and Russia moved in, establishing factories and offices in Guangzhou and Macau. British trading dominance in the 1790s was unsuccessfully challenged by a combined French and Spanish naval squadron at the Macau Incident of 27 January 1799.

Until 20 April 1844 Macau was under the jurisdiction of Portugal&#x27;s Indian colonies, the so-called &quot;Estado português da India&quot; (Portuguese State of India), but after this date, it, along with East Timor, was accorded recognition by Lisbon (but not by Beijing) as an overseas province of Portugal.

The Treaty of Peace, Amity, and Commerce between China and the United States was signed in a temple in Macau on 3 July 1844. The temple was used by a Chinese judicial administrator, who also oversaw matters concerning foreigners, and was located in the village of Mong Há. The Templo de Kun Iam was the site where, on 3 July 1844, the treaty of Wangxia (named after the village of Mong Ha where the temple was located) was signed by representatives of the United States and China. This marked the official beginning of Sino-US relations.

==1844–1938: The Hong Kong effect==
After China ceded Hong Kong to the British in 1842, Macau&#x27;s position as a major regional trading centre declined further still because larger ships were drawn to the deep-water port of Victoria Harbour. In 1846, Portugal dispatched João Maria Ferreira do Amaral to serve as governor of Macau. He unilaterally declared Macau a Portuguese colony, stopped annual rent payments to China, occupied the nearby Island of Taipa (which had never been Portuguese territory), and imposed a new series of taxes on Macau residents. In 1846, there was a revolt of the boatmen that was put down.

While supervising road construction, Amaral ordered the destruction of Chinese tombs in the area. In the Baishaling incident, Amaral was ambushed and killed by a group of Chinese villagers he encountered while riding outside the city gates. The Portuguese responded with a surprise attack on a nearby Chinese fort, forcing the Chinese to retreat. This was a milestone in the Portugal&#x27;s assertion of sovereignty over Macau. Portugal gained control of the island of Wanzai (Lapa by the Portuguese and now as Wanzaizhen), to the northwest of Macau and which now is under the jurisdiction of Zhuhai (Xiangzhou District), in 1849 but relinquished it in 1887. Control over Taipa and Coloane, two islands south of Macau, was obtained between 1851 and 1864. Macau and East Timor were again combined as an overseas province of Portugal under control of Goa in 1883. The Protocol Respecting the Relations Between the Two Countries (signed in Lisbon 26 March 1887) and the Beijing Treaty (signed in Beijing on 1 December 1887) confirmed &quot;perpetual occupation and government&quot; of Macau by Portugal (with Portugal&#x27;s promise &quot;never to alienate Macau and dependencies without agreement with China&quot; in the treaty). Taipa and Coloane were also ceded to Portugal, but the border with the mainland was not delimited. Ilha Verde was incorporated into Macau&#x27;s territory in 1890, and, once a kilometre offshore, by 1923 it had been absorbed into peninsula Macau through land reclamation.

In 1871, the Hospital Kiang Wu was founded as a traditional Chinese medical hospital. It was in 1892 that doctor Sun Yat-sen brought Western medicine services to the hospital.

In the 1930s, Macau&#x27;s traditional income streams related to illegal opium sales dried up, as the Royal Navy&#x27;s Eastern Fleet suppressed piracy and smuggling in support of Hong Kong&#x27;s growing commercial status. Traditional local industries of fishing, firecrackers and incense, as well as tea and tobacco processing, were all small scale, while Macau government income from &#x27;Fan-Tan&#x27; gambling was only around US$5000 (about US$100,000 in modern money) per day. So the financially pressed Portuguese government urged the colony&#x27;s administrators to develop greater economic self-sufficiency. One channel that bore fruit was as a transit point for the new trans-Pacific passenger and postal flights, for competing airlines from the US and Japan – which was at the time engaged in conflict with China. In 1935, Pan-Am secured sea-landing rights in Macau and immediately set about building related communications infrastructure in the enclave, allowing a service from San Francisco to begin in November that year.

Intertwined with this economic progress was an alleged and much discussed offer (never officially confirmed) in 1935 by Japan to buy Macau from Portugal, for US$100 million. Concerns were raised by the British, and others. In May, the Portuguese government twice denied that it would accept any such offer, and the matter was closed.

===1848–1870s: Slave trade===

From 1848 to about the early 1870s, Macau was the infamous transit port of a trade of coolies (or slave labourers) from southern China. Between 1851 and 1874 approximately 215,000 Chinese were shipped from Macau overseas, primarily to Cuba and Peru, with some being shipped to Guiana, Suriname, and Costa Rica. Coolies were obtained via variety of sources, including some who were entrapped by brokers in Macau through loans for gambling, and others who were kidnapped or coerced.

== 1938–1949: World War II ==

Macau became a refugee centre during World War II, causing its population to climb from about 200,000 to about 700,000 people within a few years. Refugee operations were organised through the Santa Casa da Misericordia.

Unlike in the case of Portuguese Timor, which was occupied by the Japanese in 1942 along with Dutch Timor, the Japanese respected Portuguese neutrality in Macau, but only up to a point. As such, Macau enjoyed a brief period of economic prosperity, being the only neutral port in South China, after the Japanese had occupied Guangzhou (Canton) and Hong Kong. In August 1943, Japanese troops seized the British steamer &quot;Sian&quot; in Macau and killed about 20 guards. The next month, they demanded the installation of Japanese &quot;advisors&quot; under the alternative of military occupation. The result was that a virtual Japanese protectorate was created over Macau.

On June 26, 1942, a Hawker Osprey III (6) of Aeronáutica Naval crashed into a residential area in Macau, killing both occupants as well as one person on the ground. This is the only fatal aircraft accident to have taken place in Macau.

Having been neutral during World War II, Portugal was not a signatory to the 1944 Bretton Woods Agreement. Combined with its geographical location, this meant that Macau was an ideal hub for the illicit gold trade among those seeking to avoid the price controls on gold imposed by the Bretton Woods Agreement. Following the 1971 U.S. abandonment of the Bretton Woods System through the Nixon shock, Macau&#x27;s significance to the gold trade declined, and its illicit gold trade ended in 1974.

When it was discovered that neutral Macau was planning to sell aviation fuel to Japan, aircraft from the &quot;USS Enterprise&quot; bombed and strafed the hangar of the Naval Aviation Centre on 16 January 1945 to destroy the fuel. American air raids on targets in Macau were also made on 25 February and 11 June 1945. Following Portuguese government protest in 1950, the United States paid US$20,255,952 compensation to the government of Portugal.

== 1949–1999: Macau and the People&#x27;s Republic of China ==

When the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) came to power in 1949, the CCP declared the Protocol of Lisbon to be invalid as an &quot;unequal treaty&quot; imposed by foreigners on China. However, Beijing was not ready to settle the treaty question, leaving the maintenance of &quot;the status quo&quot; until a more appropriate time. Beijing took a similar position on treaties relating to the Hong Kong territories of the United Kingdom.

Following World War II, the United Nations expected its member states to relinquish any colonies. Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Salazar sought to resist UN pressure to relinquish Macau. In 1951, the Salazar regime eliminated the phrase &quot;colonial empire&quot; from its constitution and sought to re-characterize Macau not as a colony but as an overseas province of Portugal, which it viewed as part of a plural-continental but nonetheless unified and indivisible Portuguese state.

During the Korean War, Macau was a major site for the smuggling of arms into China to avoid United Nations mandates. After the armistice, Macau became a semi-official gateway for North Korea&#x27;s diplomatic and financial interests, with a Macau trading company serving as North Korea&#x27;s de facto consulate in Macau.

During the 1950s and 1960s Macau&#x27;s border crossing to China Portas do Cerco was also referred to as &quot;Far Eastern Checkpoint Charlie&quot; with a major border incident happening in 1952 with Portuguese African Troops exchanging fire with Chinese Communist border guards. According to reports, the exchange lasted for one-and-three-quarter hours, leaving one dead and several dozens injured on the Macau side and more than 100 casualties claimed on the Communist Chinese side.

In 1954, the Macau Grand Prix was established, first as a treasure hunt throughout the city, and in later years as a formal car racing event.

In 1962, the gambling industry of Macau saw a major breakthrough when the government granted the &quot;Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau&quot; (STDM), a syndicate jointly formed by Hong Kong and Macau businessmen, the monopoly rights to all forms of gambling. The STDM introduced western-style games and modernised the marine transport between Macau and Hong Kong, bringing millions of gamblers from Hong Kong every year.

Riots broke out in 1966 during the Cultural Revolution, when local Chinese and the Macau authority clashed, the most serious one being the 12-3 incident. This was prompted by government delays in approving a new wing for a Communist Party elementary school in Taipa. The school board illegally commenced construction. the colonial government sent police to stop the workers, and several people were injured in the conflict. On December 3, 1966, two days of rioting occurred in which hundreds were injured and six to eight people were killed, leading also to a total climbdown by the Portuguese government. The event set in motion de facto abdication of Portuguese control over Macau, putting it on the path to eventual decolonization.
On 29 January 1967, the Portuguese governor, José Manuel de Sousa e Faro Nobre de Carvalho, with the endorsement of Portuguese prime minister Salazar, signed a statement of apology at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, under a portrait of Mao Zedong, with Ho Yin, the chamber&#x27;s president, presiding. Two agreements were signed, one with Macau&#x27;s Chinese community, and the other with mainland China. The latter committed the government to compensate local Chinese community leaders with as much as 2 million Macau patacas and to prohibit all Kuomintang activities in Macau. This move ended the conflict, and relations between the government and the leftist organisations remained largely peaceful. This success in Macau encouraged leftists in Hong Kong to &quot;do the same&quot;, leading to riots by leftists in Hong Kong in 1967.

After the 1974 Carnation Revolution overthrew the dictatorship of Marcelo Caetano, Portugal began a formal process of decolonization. Over the next several years, it made two offers to return Macau and China rejected both. In 1979, Portugal and China established formal diplomatic relations and reached a secret agreement to characterize Macau as a Chinese territory under Portuguese administration.

In 1994, the Bridge of Friendship was completed, the second bridge connecting Macau and Taipa. In November 1995, the Macau International Airport was inaugurated. Before then the territory only had 2 temporary airports for small aeroplanes, in addition to several permanent heliports. In 1997, the Macau Stadium was completed in Taipa.

Over a three year period in the late 1990s, as wave of gang violence referred to as the casino wars occurred in Macau. The casino wars were largely attributable to rival Triad groups who sought to gain control of Macau&#x27;s illicit industries before Portugal transferred the territory back to China. The Portuguese authorities of Macau mostly failed to address the violence, which resulted in 122 deaths, or to catch those responsible.

==1999: Handover to the People&#x27;s Republic of China==

Portugal and the People&#x27;s Republic of China established diplomatic relations on 8 February 1979, and Beijing acknowledged Macau as &quot;Chinese territory under Portuguese administration.&quot; A year later, Gen. Melo Egidio became the first governor of Macau to pay an official visit to Beijing.

The visit underscored both parties&#x27; interest in finding a mutually agreeable solution to Macau&#x27;s status. A joint communique signed 20 May 1986 called for negotiations on the Macau question, and four rounds of talks followed between 30 June 1986 and 26 March 1987. The Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau was signed in Beijing on 13 April 1987, setting the stage for the return of Macau to full Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region on 20 December 1999.

After four rounds of talks, &quot;the Joint Declaration of the Government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of Portugal on the Question of Macau&quot; was officially signed in April 1987. The two sides exchanged instruments of ratification on 15 January 1988 and the Joint Declaration entered into force. During the transitional period, between the date of the entry into force of the Joint Declaration and 19 December 1999, the Portuguese government was responsible for the administration of Macau.

The Basic Law of the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, was adopted by the National People&#x27;s Congress (NPC) on 31 March 1993 as the constitutional law for Macau, taking effect on 20 December 1999.

The PRC has promised that, under its &quot;one country, two systems&quot; formula, China&#x27;s socialist economic system will not be practised in Macau and that Macau will enjoy a high degree of autonomy in all matters except foreign and defence affairs until, at least, 2049, fifty years after the handover.

Upon the handover of Macau European colonisation of Asia ended.

== Recent history of Macau (1999–present) ==

===1999–2007: The rise of Macau as the Las Vegas of Asia===

In 2002, the Macau government ended the gambling monopoly system and 3 (later 6) casino operating concessions (and subconcessions) were granted to Sociedade de Jogos de Macau (SJM, an 80% owned subsidiary of STDM), Wynn Resorts, Las Vegas Sands, Galaxy Entertainment Group, the partnership of MGM Mirage and Pansy Ho Chiu-king, and the partnership of Melco and PBL, thus marking the begin of the rise of Macau as the new gambling hub in Asia.

As one of the measures to develop the gambling industry, the Cotai reclamation was completed after the handover to China, with construction of the hotel and casino industry starting in 2004. In 2007, the first of many resorts opened, The Venetian Macao. Many other resorts followed, both in Cotai and on Macau island, providing for a major tax income stream to Macau government and a drop in overall unemployment over the years down to a mere 2% in 2013.

In 2004, the Sai Van Bridge was completed, the third bridge between Macau island and Taipa island.

In 2005, the Macau East Asian Games Dome, the principal venue for the 4th East Asian Games, was inaugurated.

Also in 2005, the Macau government started a wave of social housing construction (lasting until 2013 at least), constructing over 8000 apartment units in the process.

===2007–2008: The financial crisis hits Macau===

Similar to other economies in the world, the financial crisis of 2007–08 hit Macau, leading to a stall in construction of major construction works (Sands Cotai Central) and a spike in unemployment.

===2008–2013: Expansion into Hengqin and further casino boom===

With residential and development space being sparse, Macau government officially announced on 27 June 2009 that the University of Macau will build its new campus on Hengqin island, in a stretch directly facing the Cotai area, south of the current border post. Along with this development, several other residential and business development projects on Hengqin are in the planning.

In 2011 to 2013, further major construction on several planned mega-resorts in Cotai commenced.

===2014–present: Slowing down of the gambling industry and diversification of economy===

2014 marked the first time that the gambling revenues in Macau declined on a year-to-year basis. Starting in June 2014, gambling revenues declined for the second half of the year on a month-to-month basis (compared with 2013) causing the Macau Daily Times to announce that the &quot;Decade of gambling expansion end[ed]&quot;. Some reasons for the slowdown are China&#x27;s anti-corruption drive reaching Macau, China&#x27;s economy slowing down and changes of Mainland Chinese tourists&#x27; preference of visiting other countries as a travel destination.

This led the Macau government to attempt to reconstruct the economy, to depend less on gambling revenues and focus on building world-class non-gambling tourism and leisure centres, as well as developing itself as a platform for economic and trade cooperation between China and Portuguese-speaking countries.

In 2015, the borders of Macau were redrawn by the state council, shifting the land border north to the Canal dos Patos and expanding the maritime border significantly. The changes increased the size of Macau&#x27;s maritime territory by 85 square kilometres.

Typhoon Hato hit Southern China in August 2017, causing widespread damage to Macau, never before experienced – major flooding and property damages, with citywide power and water outages lasting for at least 24 hours after the passage of the storm. Overall, 10 deaths and at least 200 injuries were reported. This caused widespread anger against the Macau government, accused of being unprepared for the typhoon as well as the delay of raising the No. 10 tropical cyclone signal; this caused the head of the Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau to resign. At the request of the Macau government, the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army Macau Garrison (for the first time in Macau&#x27;s history) deployed around 1,000 troops to assist in disaster relief and cleaning up.

On 12 December 2019, Macau officially opened its first rail transit system: the Macau Light Rapid Transit.

Overall, Macau was among the safest places in the world during the COVID-19 pandemic, with relatively few infections and a large array of medical, social, and financial response measures. Macau&#x27;s casino-reliant economy was greatly slowed by the pandemic.

==See also==
* Anders Ljungstedt
* Culture of Macau
* Gambling in Macau
* Lisbon-Macau Raid
* Military of Macau under Portuguese rule
* Jorge Álvares
* Names of Macau
* Religion in Macau
* History of Hong Kong

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Collis, Maurice. &quot;Macao: The City of the Name of God.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Apr 1951) 1#4 pp 42–49 online. 
* Gunn, Geoffrey C. &quot;Encountering Macau, A Portuguese City-State on the Periphery of China, 1557–1999&quot; (Boulder: Westview Press, 1996) In Portuguese (1998) &quot;Ao Encontro de Macau: Uma cidade-estado portuguesa a periferia da China, 1557–1999&quot; (Macau: Fundação Macau]. In Chinese (2009) &quot;澳门史：1557～1999&quot; (中央编译出版社).
* Gunn, Geoffrey C. (ed.) &quot;Wartime Macau: Under the Japanese Shadow&quot; (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2016). 
*Porter, Jonathan. &quot;&#x27;The Past Is Present&#x27;: The Construction of Macau&#x27;s Historical Legacy,&quot; &quot;History and Memory&quot; Volume 21, Number 1, Spring/Summer 2009 pp. 63–100
*Porter, Jonathan. &quot; Macau: The Imaginary City, Culture and Society, 1557 to the Present&quot; (Boulder: Westview Press, 1996)
* Souza, George Bryan. &quot;The Survival of Empire: Portuguese Trade and Society in China and the South China Sea, 1630–1754&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986)
* Coates, Austin: &quot;A Macao Narrative&quot;
* Shipp, Steve: &quot;Macau, China: A Political History of the Portuguese Colony&#x27;s Transition to Chinese Rule&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="0" end="5" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="11" end="40" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="54" end="85" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="104" end="112" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="126" end="138" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="185" end="189" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="314" end="322" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="329" end="335" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="366" end="383" title="Treaty of Nanking" label="Treaty of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="392" end="397" title="Qing dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="402" end="409" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334373" start="1184" end="1199" title="Macau Peninsula" label="Macau Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="1203" end="1217" title="Coloane Island" label="Coloane Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1231" end="1242" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q948245" start="1298" end="1310" title="Panyu County" label="Panyu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023893" start="1312" end="1329" title="Nanhai District" label="Nanhai Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="1349" end="1358" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1418" end="1429" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q59218" start="1463" end="1482" title="Dongguan Prefecture" label="Dongguan Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="1490" end="1501" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="1669" end="1678" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1760" end="1772" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q59223" start="1829" end="1845" title="Zhongshan" label="Xiangshan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301657" start="1898" end="1922" title="Mongol conquest of China" label="Mongol conquest of China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1953" end="1960" title="Mong Há" label="Mong Há"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2096" end="2104" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q715162" start="2105" end="2112" title="Guanyin" label="Guanyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="2146" end="2158" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="2239" end="2245" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149114" start="2270" end="2281" title="A-Ma Temple" label="A-Ma Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="2327" end="2344" title="Hoklo people" label="Hoklo Boat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q14606226" start="2575" end="2591" title="Portugal in the Age of Discovery" label="age of discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q553907" start="2690" end="2693" title="Old Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110453" start="2707" end="2732" title="Capture of Malacca (1511)" label="conquered Malacca in 1511"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244637" start="2746" end="2752" title="Sultan Mahmud Shah" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q425897" start="2868" end="2881" title="Jorge Álvares" label="Jorge Álvares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581731" start="2892" end="2905" title="Lintin Island" label="Lintin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="2913" end="2930" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="2979" end="2997" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="3064" end="3080" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="3082" end="3090" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="3129" end="3150" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600890" start="3164" end="3182" title="Rafael Perestrello" label="Rafael Perestrello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3197" end="3217" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="3318" end="3327" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="3413" end="3421" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735555" start="3497" end="3507" title="Tomé Pires" label="Tomé Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312125" start="3512" end="3535" title="Fernão Pires de Andrade" label="Fernão Pires de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10007" start="3579" end="3594" title="Zhengde Emperor" label="Zhengde Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="3598" end="3605" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="3655" end="3659" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640449" start="4000" end="4005" title="Tamão" label="Tamão"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452540" start="4253" end="4269" title="Battle of Tunmen" label="Battle of Tunmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640449" start="4273" end="4278" title="Tamão" label="Tamão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758751" start="4282" end="4290" title="Tuen Mun" label="Tuen Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443119" start="4340" end="4360" title="Battle of Sincouwaan" label="Battle of Sincouwaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502379" start="4364" end="4377" title="Lantau Island" label="Lantau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911959" start="4424" end="4432" title="Shuangyu" label="Shuangyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q970541" start="4493" end="4511" title="Dongshan County" label="Dongshan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518426" start="4552" end="4567" title="Galeote Pereira" label="Galeote Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="4737" end="4746" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="4747" end="4753" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="4754" end="4762" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4782" end="4791" title="Gun control in China#History" label="bird guns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4796" end="4822" title="Breech-loading swivel gun#Use" label="Breech loading swivel guns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4853" end="4861" title="Franks#Crusaders and other Western Europeans as &amp;quot;Franks&amp;quot;" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581279" start="5084" end="5113" title="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)" label="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="5205" end="5210" title="taels" label="taels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397551" start="5434" end="5451" title="Shangchuan Island" label="Shangchuan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482357" start="5480" end="5488" title="Lampacau" label="Lampacau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="5511" end="5528" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581279" start="5654" end="5714" title="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)" label="Leonel de Sousa agreement with Cantonese authorities in 1554"/>
<link wikidata="Q907213" start="5876" end="5893" title="governor of Macau" label="governor of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="6085" end="6089" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q646163" start="6539" end="6544" title="Tanka people" label="Tanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q405487" start="6655" end="6670" title="Macanese people" label="Macanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q711873" start="6746" end="6751" title="Wu Li" label="Wu Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263344" start="7681" end="7693" title="John Weddell" label="John Weddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="7756" end="7761" title="Iberian Union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="7828" end="7846" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="8372" end="8394" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="8406" end="8430" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q704333" start="8524" end="8559" title="Battle of Macau" label="full-scale invasion attempt in 1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q10284997" start="8741" end="8762" title="Francisco Mascarenhas (Governor of Macau)" label="Francisco Mascarenhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078465" start="8879" end="8892" title="Guia Fortress" label="Guia Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="9113" end="9119" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="9173" end="9182" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551411" start="9302" end="9325" title="Ruins of St. Paul&amp;#x27;s" label="Cathedral of Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130614" start="9334" end="9359" title="St. Dominic&amp;#x27;s Church (Macao)" label="St. Dominic&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="9422" end="9435" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="9439" end="9456" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894283" start="9462" end="9479" title="Melchior Carneiro" label="Melchior Carneiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="9664" end="9670" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="9735" end="9741" title="sakoku" label="sakoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q640267" start="10067" end="10074" title="Deshima" label="Deshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q853342" start="10311" end="10328" title="House of Braganza" label="House of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501724" start="10333" end="10362" title="Portuguese Restoration War" label="regained control of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="10372" end="10389" title="Spanish Habsburgs" label="Spanish Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060796" start="10538" end="10545" title="João IV" label="João IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="10970" end="10984" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="11191" end="11200" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q20870400" start="11336" end="11350" title="Macau Incident (1799)" label="Macau Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="11514" end="11539" title="Portuguese State of India" label="Portuguese State of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="11578" end="11588" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326406" start="11688" end="11760" title="Treaty of Wanghia" label="Treaty of Peace, Amity, and Commerce between China and the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q155643" start="12449" end="12465" title="Victoria Harbour" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q733757" start="12496" end="12525" title="João Maria Ferreira do Amaral" label="João Maria Ferreira do Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="12678" end="12683" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207416" start="12804" end="12825" title="Revolt of the Faitiões" label="revolt of the boatmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848678" start="12951" end="12970" title="Passaleão incident" label="Baishaling incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125460" start="13323" end="13327" title="Lapa, Dom João e Montanha" label="Lapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="13439" end="13445" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338790" start="13447" end="13465" title="Xiangzhou District, Zhuhai" label="Xiangzhou District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="13528" end="13535" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q700327" start="13813" end="13827" title="Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking" label="Beijing Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319473" start="14173" end="14183" title="Ilha Verde" label="Ilha Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="14328" end="14344" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908476" start="14360" end="14377" title="Hospital Kiang Wu" label="Hospital Kiang Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="14460" end="14471" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="14626" end="14636" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q99942378" start="14644" end="14657" title="Far East Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Eastern Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q572433" start="14917" end="14924" title="Fan-Tan" label="Fan-Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551794" start="15329" end="15348" title="Japanese invasion of Manchuria" label="conflict with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="15359" end="15365" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="15515" end="15528" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q548135" start="16014" end="16021" title="coolies" label="coolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="16163" end="16167" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="16172" end="16176" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q650667" start="16205" end="16211" title="The Guianas" label="Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="16213" end="16221" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="16227" end="16237" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="16684" end="16700" title="Portuguese Timor" label="Portuguese Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701967" start="17009" end="17018" title="Japanese occupation of Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="17298" end="17310" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428777" start="17356" end="17373" title="Hawker Hart" label="Hawker Osprey III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232676" start="17381" end="17398" title="Portuguese Naval Aviation" label="Aeronáutica Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="17655" end="17678" title="Bretton-Woods Agreement" label="Bretton Woods Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420512" start="17959" end="17970" title="Nixon shock" label="Nixon shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q369987" start="18180" end="18194" title="USS Enterprise (CV-6)" label="USS Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="18591" end="18614" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="18710" end="18724" title="unequal treaties" label="unequal treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="19140" end="19155" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="Antonio Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19368" end="19385" title="Political divisions of Portugal#Former regions" label="overseas province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="19517" end="19527" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="19633" end="19642" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="19685" end="19696" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272047" start="19894" end="19909" title="Portas do Cerco" label="Portas do Cerco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346003" start="20328" end="20344" title="Macau Grand Prix" label="Macau Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q839196" start="20561" end="20602" title="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau" label="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="20924" end="20943" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182793" start="21028" end="21041" title="12-3 incident" label="12-3 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="21861" end="21871" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10297744" start="21878" end="21884" title="Ho Yin" label="Ho Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q241214" start="22139" end="22151" title="Macanese pataca" label="Macau pataca"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="22173" end="22183" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="22479" end="22499" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q310870" start="22530" end="22545" title="Marcelo Caetano" label="Marcelo Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318003" start="22878" end="22898" title="Ponte de Amizade" label="Bridge of Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="22982" end="23009" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674107" start="23162" end="23175" title="Estádio Campo Desportivo" label="Macau Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q329978" start="23371" end="23376" title="Triad (organized crime)" label="Triad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23917" end="23928" title="Melo Egidio" label="Melo Egidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241869" start="24280" end="24322" title="Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau" label="Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="24438" end="24467" title="Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="24757" end="24769" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q837890" start="25035" end="25126" title="Macau Basic Law" label="Basic Law of the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="25147" end="25178" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="25318" end="25342" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="25613" end="25642" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="European colonisation of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839232" start="25798" end="25822" title="Gambling in Macau" label="gambling monopoly system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25905" end="25932" title="Sociedade de Jogos de Macau" label="Sociedade de Jogos de Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274089" start="25973" end="25985" title="Wynn Resorts" label="Wynn Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506045" start="25987" end="26002" title="Las Vegas Sands" label="Las Vegas Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039216" start="26004" end="26030" title="Galaxy entertainment" label="Galaxy Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q568532" start="26051" end="26061" title="MGM Mirage" label="MGM Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965221" start="26066" end="26084" title="Pansy Ho Chiu-king" label="Pansy Ho Chiu-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156708" start="26436" end="26454" title="The Venetian Macao" label="The Venetian Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137940" start="26671" end="26685" title="Sai Van Bridge" label="Sai Van Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118961" start="26771" end="26798" title="Macau East Asian Games Dome" label="Macau East Asian Games Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="27131" end="27158" title="financial crisis of 2007–08" label="financial crisis of 2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416895" start="27234" end="27253" title="Sands Cotai Central" label="Sands Cotai Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563050" start="27466" end="27485" title="University of Macau" label="University of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="27515" end="27522" title="Hengqin" label="Hengqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="27564" end="27569" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="27811" end="27816" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="28754" end="28783" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Portuguese-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031065" start="28889" end="28904" title="Canal dos Patos (Macau)" label="Canal dos Patos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37708935" start="29046" end="29058" title="Typhoon Hato" label="Typhoon Hato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5926090" start="29553" end="29596" title="Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau" label="Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118969" start="29652" end="29704" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Macau Garrison" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Macau Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q866024" start="29906" end="29931" title="Macau Light Rapid Transit" label="Macau Light Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q85872060" start="30001" end="30018" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Macau" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359246" start="30210" end="30227" title="Anders Ljungstedt" label="Anders Ljungstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007225" start="30230" end="30246" title="Culture of Macau" label="Culture of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q839232" start="30249" end="30266" title="Gambling in Macau" label="Gambling in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q115926095" start="30269" end="30286" title="Lisbon-Macau Raid" label="Lisbon-Macau Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q56271544" start="30289" end="30328" title="Military of Macau under Portuguese rule" label="Military of Macau under Portuguese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q425897" start="30331" end="30344" title="Jorge Álvares" label="Jorge Álvares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961644" start="30347" end="30361" title="Names of Macau" label="Names of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q856219" start="30364" end="30381" title="Religion in Macau" label="Religion in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q733116" start="30384" end="30404" title="History of Hong Kong" label="History of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814480" start="30942" end="30955" title="Wartime Macau" label="Wartime Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823031" start="31547" end="31561" title="Austin Coates" label="Coates, Austin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19070" wikidata="Q3045570" url="?curid=19070" title="Geography of Macau">
<text>Macau is a Special Administrative Region on the southern coast of China. It is located at the south of Guangdong Province, on the tip of the peninsula formed by the Zhujiang (Pearl River) estuary on the east and the Xijiang (West River) on the west. Macau is situated west of Hong Kong, and southwest of Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong Province. It is situated immediately east and south of Zhuhai.

The region comprises the Macau Peninsula and the islands of Taipa and Coloane. Macau was once an island but gradually a connecting sandbar turned into a narrow isthmus. Land reclamation in the 17th century made Macau into a peninsula, and a barrier gate was built to mark the separation between the peninsula and the mainland. Pre-colonial records show that Macau totalled only but began to increase as a result of Portuguese settlement. Land growth has accelerated since the last quarter of the 20th century, from in 1972 to in 1983 to in 1994. Macau&#x27;s size has gradually increased as result of continued land reclamation, especially on Taipa and Coloane. In 2014, the total land area was approximately .

There is a long border between Macau and mainland China and a forty-kilometre-long coastline. The main border crossing between Macau and China is the Portas do Cerco (Barrier Gate) Frontier Checkpoint on the Macau side, and the Gongbei checkpoint on the Chinese side.

==Location, size, border, and coastline==

Geographic coordinates: 

===Area===
*&quot;Total:&quot; 115.4 km2
*&quot;Land:&quot; 30.4 km2
*&quot;Water:&quot; 85 km2

===Land boundaries===
*&quot;Total:&quot; 0.34 km
*&quot;Border city:&quot; Zhuhai, Guangdong Province 0.34 km

===Coastline===
*&quot;Coastline:&quot; 50.63 km
*&quot;Maritime claims:&quot; not specified

==Topography==

Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and China

Terrain: generally flat
&lt;br&gt;Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest point:&quot; South China Sea 0 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest point:&quot; Coloane Alto 

===List of highest hills in Macau SAR===

Macau has generally flat terrain resulting from extensive land reclamation, but numerous steep hills mark the original natural land mass. The modern high-rise skyline of Macau obscures much of the hilly landscape. The Macau skyline both defines and obscures its topography.

The Macau Peninsula is narrow in shape but varies in terrain.

==Climate==
Although Macau is located in the tropics, it has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cwa&quot;), because the Siberian pressure system in the winter pushes cool air further south than similar semipermanent permanent high pressure systems. Its average year-round temperature is . Summers are very hot and humid: the July average temperature is and the highest daytime temperature could reach . However, the heat is generally less intense than many places in mainland China due to the coastal location. Winters are short and mild: the January average is and the lowest temperature could drop to , but very rarely any lower. There is about of rainfall annually, with drier winters.

Macau is exposed to tropical storms originating from the southern Pacific Ocean during the summer. Major destruction occurred in September 1874, when a devastating typhoon hit Macau and high seas swept across the low-lying area of the peninsula. There are always a few tropical storm occurrences in Macau each year (typically between May and October), although they vary in strengths. When they occur, they usually bring strong winds, rainfall and lower temperatures.

Prevailing winds and weather types change follow the monsoon pattern. It is warm and moist when the southeast and southwest winds are coming from the Pacific Ocean, and typhoons are relatively common during summertime. It is dry and slightly cold when the north winds are coming from Siberia or the northern part of mainland China.

During the transition period from northeast monsoon to southwest monsoon (March and April), the weather is moist and foggy. It is Macau&#x27;s spring season. Summer is from May to September, when the southeast and southwest monsoon prevailing. It is rather hot and rainy. The weather in autumn (the end of September and October) is sunny and warm, when the southwest monsoon withdrawing gradually and the northeast monsoon advancing south. It is generally regarded as the most comfortable season there. Winter is from November to February next year, when the northeast monsoon prevailing. It is mainly dry, with occasional cold fronts arriving.

There are moderate to high levels of humidity year-round, with an annual average of 79.3%. Annual sunshine totals are moderate, at more than 1800 hours.

==Natural resources==
Negligible. In the past, large amounts of granite were extracted from Macau&#x27;s hills for use as building material.

===Fresh water===
Relying on water supply from the Xijiang River, in 2006 Macau suffered its worse crisis of salinity in freshwater during the dry season, which takes place in late winter and early spring.
To address salinity issues, as of 2018 three water supply pipelines to Macau have been built and a fourth pipeline was planned for completion in 2019.

==Land use and reclamation==


Until early 20th century, the Macau peninsula was dotted with small farms on its northern area, beyond the walls protecting the city. Currently, in the Macau peninsula, no arable land, natural pastures or woodland exists and forests have been cleared and plant species have been subjected to profound changes. Coloane on the other hand, due to its later colonisation, still has its forests and is dotted with small farms, namely around the Coloane, Hac Sa and Ka Ho villages.

&quot;arable land:&quot; 0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent crops:&quot; 0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot; 100% (2011)

In 2010 plans were announced for an additional 3.5 square kilometres of land reclamation in Macau, to be carried out over five years and divided into six phases. These areas cover an area east of the Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal, an area south of Avenida Sun Yat Sen, and the north side of Taipa Island.

The change of total area of Macau (in km square) since the year of 1912:
;Note
:* - not included in &quot;Total area of Macau&quot;
==Environmental factors==
Dense urban environment.

Geography – note: essentially urban; three bridges connect the two islands of Coloane and Taipa to the peninsula on mainland, and an isthmus connects Coloane and Taipa.

==See also==
* Geography of China
* Geography of Hong Kong

==References==
==External links==
* Map of Macau in 1997 - University of Macau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="0" end="5" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="11" end="40" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="103" end="112" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="141" end="150" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q201463" start="165" end="173" title="Pearl River (China)" label="Zhujiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="188" end="195" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q216941" start="216" end="223" title="Xijiang River" label="Xijiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="276" end="285" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="304" end="313" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="395" end="401" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334373" start="429" end="444" title="Macau Peninsula" label="Macau Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="464" end="469" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="474" end="481" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q93267" start="564" end="571" title="isthmus" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="573" end="589" title="Land reclamation" label="Land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272047" start="645" end="657" title="Portas do Cerco" label="barrier gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="819" end="840" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="1157" end="1171" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272047" start="1266" end="1281" title="Portas do Cerco" label="Portas do Cerco"/>
<link wikidata="Q877129" start="1344" end="1362" title="Gongbei Port of Entry" label="Gongbei checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="1428" end="1450" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="1627" end="1633" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="1811" end="1826" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147805" start="1985" end="1997" title="Coloane Alto" label="Coloane Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="2327" end="2336" title="Peninsula" label="Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="2370" end="2377" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2443" end="2468" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2470" end="2499" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="2877" end="2891" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="3120" end="3134" title="tropical storm" label="tropical storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="3264" end="3271" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="3853" end="3860" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="4766" end="4773" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="4824" end="4841" title="building material" label="building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q216941" start="4895" end="4908" title="Xijiang River" label="Xijiang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="4965" end="4975" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q842280" start="6022" end="6050" title="Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal, Macau" label="Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q839778" start="6496" end="6514" title="Geography of China" label="Geography of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510174" start="6517" end="6539" title="Geography of Hong Kong" label="Geography of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563050" start="6600" end="6619" title="University of Macau" label="University of Macau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19071" wikidata="Q3044004" url="?curid=19071" title="Demographics of Macau">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Macau include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

Macau&#x27;s population is 95% Chinese ethnicity, primarily Cantonese and some Hakka, both from the nearby Guangdong Province. The majority of the remainder are of Portuguese or mixed Chinese-Portuguese ancestry. Some Japanese, including descendants of Japanese Catholics who were expelled by shōguns, also live in Macau.

The official languages are Portuguese and Chinese. The residents commonly (85.7%) speak Cantonese, Mandarin is spoken by 3.2% at home, about 40% are able to communicate in standard Mandarin. English and Portuguese are spoken as a first language by 1.5% and 0.6% respectively, while English is widely taught as a second language. The other popular topolect is Hokkien, spoken by a small percentage of the population. The creole Macanese language (&quot;Patuá&quot; or &quot;Macaista Chapado&quot;) is almost extinct.

==Population size and structure==
: 624,000 (2014 Qtr2 est.)
=== Structure of the population ===
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020): 
==Vital statistics==
The following are data on vital statistics.
=== Current vital statistics ===


=== Life expectancy at birth ===
Macao is the territory with the world&#x27;s second highest life expectancy behind Hong Kong.

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

==Ethnic groups==
The following are information on ethnicity and nationalities based on data from the Statistics and Census Service.
===Place of birth===
Immigration is an essential component of the population. Results of the 2011 Population Census indicated that 326,376 (59.1% of the total population) were born outside Macau, an increase of 3.0 percentage points over the last ten years. Analysed by place of birth, 255,186 (46.2%) were born in Mainland China, down by 1.2 percentage points from 2001. 226,127 (40.9%) were born in Macau, 19,355 (3.5%) in Hong Kong and 1,835 (0.3%) in Portugal. There were more persons born in other countries or territories as the number of non-resident workers increased. Among them, 14,544 were born in the Philippines, 7,199 in Vietnam and 6,269 in Indonesia, altogether taking up 5.1% of the total population. 1,942 were born in Europe other than Portugal, 2,252 in Americas, 959 in Africa and 672 in Oceania. Analysed by age group, 85.2% of the youth population (aged 0–14) were born in Macau, and 62.9% of those aged 35 and above were born in Mainland China.

 35,578 people in Macau were originally from Fujian province in Mainland China, making up about 25% of the Mainland China-born people. The number of Fujianese in Macau increased after the 1999 handover.

===Nationality===
Analysed by nationality, 509,788 (92.3% of the total population) were of Chinese nationality, down by 2.9 percentage points from the 2001 Census; meanwhile, only 0.9% was of Portuguese nationality, a decrease of 1.1 percentage points. These figures can be misleading, because more than a 100,000 people in Macau are holders of a Portuguese passport, making them in effect Portuguese citizens. Over the last ten years, diversity of the various components of the population is enhanced as economic development has drawn people to invest, work or study in Macau; consequently, 37,695 (6.8%) were of other nationalities, up by 4.0 percentage points, with 2.7% being Filipinos.
Macau is a Chinese community and those of Chinese ethnicity totaled 510,383, an increase of 94,030 over the past ten years; however, its proportion to the total population decreased by 3.3 percentage points to 92.4%. Those of wholly or partly Portuguese ethnicity totaled 8,106, up slightly by 333 compared with 2001; its proportion to the total decreased by 0.3 percentage point to 1.5%.

==Religion==
: 30% Shenism, 10% Buddhism or Taoism, 5% Christianity, 50% not declaring religious affiliation, 10% others (2009). Another survey conducted between 2005, 2007 and 2009 has found that 30% of the population follows folk faiths, 10% are adherents of Buddhism or Taoism, 5% are Christians, and the remaining part do not declare religious adherence.

==Languages==

: Portuguese and Chinese are official languages. The Chinese standard (Cantonese or Mandarin) is not specified in the law. 

==See also==
*Macau people

== References ==
== External links ==
* Demographic Statistics – Statistics and Census Service</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="42" end="47" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="56" end="74" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="76" end="85" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="206" end="211" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q423803" start="266" end="275" title="Cantonese people" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="285" end="290" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="313" end="322" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="370" end="380" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="424" end="432" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9290867" start="556" end="566" title="Macanese Portuguese" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="571" end="578" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="617" end="626" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="888" end="895" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="949" end="955" title="creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q35785" start="956" end="973" title="Macanese language" label="Macanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1417" end="1426" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="3887" end="3894" title="Shenism" label="Shenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3900" end="3908" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="3912" end="3918" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3923" end="3935" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916903" start="4382" end="4394" title="Macau people" label="Macau people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19072" wikidata="Q1153685" url="?curid=19072" title="Politics of Macau">
<text>Politics of Macau is a framework of a politically constrained multi-party presidential system, dominated by the People&#x27;s Republic of China. It includes the legislature, the judiciary, the government, and a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, led by the Chief Executive.

==Constitutional role of Macau==
In accordance with Article 31 of the Constitution of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, Macau has Special Administrative Region status, which provides constitutional guarantees for implementing the policy of &quot;one country, two systems&quot; and the constitutional basis for enacting the Basic Law of the Macau Special Administrative Region. Although geographically part of Guangdong Province, the Macau Special Administrative Region is directly under the authority of the central government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in Beijing, which controls the foreign affairs and defence of Macau but otherwise grants the region &quot;a high degree of authority.&quot; The Basic Law took force upon handover of sovereignty from Portugal on 20 December 1999, and is to remain in effect for fifty years (that is, until 2049).

Macau&#x27;s seven deputies to the National People&#x27;s Congress (NPC) are selected by an electoral conference; they attended their first session of the NPC in Beijing in March 2000. Previously, in December 1999, the NPC Standing Committee approved the membership of the NPC Committee for the Basic Law of the Macau Special Administrative Region, chaired by NPC Vice Chairman Qiao Xiaoyang, for a five-year term. Half of the ten members are from Macau, the others from mainland China. Macau also has representation on the National Committee of the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference.

Relations between the government of Macau and China&#x27;s central government are typically congenial.
== Head of Government ==

| &quot;General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (paramount leader)&quot;
|&quot;Xi Jinping&quot;
|&quot;Chinese Communist Party&quot;
|&quot;15 November 2012&quot;
| &quot;President of the PRC (head of state)&quot;
|&quot;Xi Jinping&quot;
|&quot;Chinese Communist Party&quot;
|&quot;14 March 2013&quot;
|&quot;Premier of the State Council (head of central government)&quot;
|&quot;Li Qiang&quot;
|&quot;Chinese Communist Party&quot;
|&quot;11 March 2023&quot;
|Chief Executive of the Macau SAR (head of region AND head of regional government)
|Sam Hou Fai
|Non-partisan
|20 December 2019

The Chief Executive of Macau is appointed by the People&#x27;s Republic of China&#x27;s central government after selection by an election committee, whose members are nominated by corporate bodies. The chief executive appears before a cabinet, the Executive Council, of between 7 and 11 members. The term of office of the chief executive is 5 years, and no individual may serve for more than two consecutive terms. The governor has strong policymaking and executive powers similar to those of a president. These powers are, however, limited from above by the central government in Beijing, to whom the governor reports directly, and from below (to a more limited extent) by the legislature.

In May 1999, Edmund Ho, a community leader and banker, was the first PRC-appointed chief executive of the Macau SAR, having replaced General de Rocha Viera on 20 December 1999. He was elected by the 200-member Chief Executive Selection Committee. Ho, born in Macau in 1955, was the first Chinese person to govern the region since the 1550s. Prior to 20 December 1999, Ho nominated major officials in the new government and carried out other transfer tasks. Ho was re-elected for a second term in 2004 and was succeeded by Fernando Chui in 2009.

The executive branch of the Macau government has the following cabinet departments, each headed by a secretary: Administration and Justice, Economic and Financial Affairs, Security, Social Affairs and Culture, and Transport and Public Works. There also are two commissions, Against Corruption and Audit, and a chief public prosecutor. Upon Macau&#x27;s reversion to China, the executive offices were moved from Macau Government House temporarily to the Banco Tai Fung.

==Executive==
The executive council decides on matters of policy, the introduction of bills to the Legislative Assembly of Macau and the drafting of subordinate legislation. The council consists of 11 members including the chief executive.

===Cabinet===
The cabinet consists of 5 secretariats of departments led by a chief:

* Chief of Cabinet (Macau)
* Secretariat for Transport and Public Works
* Secretariat for Social Affairs and Culture
* Secretariat for Security
* Secretariat for Economy and Finance
* Secretariat for Administration and Justice

===Principal officials===
* Commissioner of the Macau Customs Service
* Commissioner of the Unitary Police Service of Macau
* Commissioner Against Corruption
* Procurator General of Macau

==Legislative branch==
The legislative organ of the territory is the Legislative Assembly, a 33-member body comprising fourteen directly elected members, twelve indirectly elected members representing functional constituencies and seven members appointed by the chief executive. The Legislative Assembly is responsible for general lawmaking, including taxation, the passing of the budget and socioeconomic legislation. Terms are for four years, with annual sessions running from 15 October to 16 August. There are several standing committees in the assembly that perform the following functions: examination and issuance of reports and statements on projects and proposals of law, on resolutions and deliberations, and on proposals of alteration presented to the Legislative Assembly; examination of petitions submitted to the Legislative Assembly; voting on issues as approved in general by the Legislative Assembly General Meeting; and answering questions raised by the president or the General Meeting.

The last election was held in 2017 and the current Legislative Assembly is chaired by its president, businessman Ho Iat Seng (賀一誠), who is assisted by the vice president, Chui Sai Cheong (崔世昌), the elder brother of Chief Executive Fernando Chui Sai On.

==Elections==
==Judiciary==
The Court of Final Appeal is the court of last resort in the Macau Special Administrative Region.

The legal system is based largely on Portuguese law. The territory has its own independent judicial system, with a high court. Judges are selected by a committee and appointed by the chief executive. Foreign judges may serve on the courts. In July 1999 the chief executive appointed a seven-person committee to select judges for the SAR. Twenty-four judges were recommended by the committee and were then appointed by Mr. Ho. Included are three judges who serve on the Macau SAR&#x27;s highest court, the Court of Final Appeal (CFA): 39-year-old Sam Hou Fai (who will be chief justice), 32-year-old Chu Kin, and the 46-year-old Viriato Manuel Pinhiero de Lima.

==Political pressure groups and leaders==
Public political demonstration is rare in Macau.

* Roman Catholic Church (José Lai, bishop)
* Macau Society of Tourism and Entertainment or STDM (Stanley Ho, managing director)
* Union for Democracy Development (Antonio Ng Kuok cheong, leader)

== Foreign affairs ==
The central government in Beijing controls the foreign affairs of Macau. The Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in the Macao Special Administrative Region opened its office in Macau on 20 December 1999. As a central government agency, the commission interacts with the Macau government in matters of foreign policy. It also processes applications from foreign nations and international organisations wishing to establish consulates or representative offices in Macau. Macau is also authorised to handle some external affairs on its own. These affairs include economic and cultural relations and agreements it concludes with states, regions, and international organisations. In such matters, Macau functions under the name &quot;Macao, China.&quot; Macau displays the flag and national emblem of the People&#x27;s Republic of China but is also authorised to display its own regional flag and emblem. Taiwanese organisations in Macau are allowed to continue operations and are required to abide by the Basic Law.

==International organisation participation==
CCC, ESCAP (associate), International Maritime Organization (associate), Interpol (subbureau), UNESCO (associate), WMO, WToO (associate), WTrO

==See also==
* Politics of the People&#x27;s Republic of China

== References ==
&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153685" start="0" end="17" title="Politics of Macau" label="Politics of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="112" end="143" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q550133" start="161" end="172" title="Legislative Assembly of Macau" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921691" start="178" end="187" title="Judiciary of Macau" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057992" start="193" end="203" title="Government of Macau" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="211" end="229" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="231" end="246" title="Executive (government)" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="378" end="429" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="441" end="470" title="Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="557" end="581" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q837890" start="634" end="686" title="Basic Law of the Macau Special Administrative Region" label="Basic Law of the Macau Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="720" end="729" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1076" end="1084" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="1208" end="1239" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250127" start="1551" end="1564" title="Qiao Xiaoyang" label="Qiao Xiaoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="1723" end="1778" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="1918" end="1966" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="1968" end="1984" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="1999" end="2009" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2023" end="2046" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="2091" end="2111" title="President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="President of the PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2113" end="2126" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="2141" end="2151" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2165" end="2188" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="2229" end="2257" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier of the State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="2259" end="2285" title="Head of government" label="head of central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414390" start="2300" end="2308" title="Li Qiang" label="Li Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2322" end="2345" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741479" start="2380" end="2412" title="Chief Executive of Macau" label="Chief Executive of the Macau SAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407632" start="2463" end="2474" title="Sam Hou Fai" label="Sam Hou Fai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="2476" end="2488" title="Non-partisan" label="Non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741479" start="2512" end="2536" title="Chief Executive of Macau" label="Chief Executive of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048127" start="3213" end="3222" title="Edmund Ho" label="Edmund Ho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3333" end="3355" title="General de Rocha Viera" label="General de Rocha Viera"/>
<link wikidata="Q222441" start="3722" end="3735" title="Fernando Chui" label="Fernando Chui"/>
<link wikidata="Q550133" start="4315" end="4344" title="Legislative Assembly of Macau" label="Legislative Assembly of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4544" end="4568" title="Chief of Cabinet (Macau)" label="Chief of Cabinet (Macau)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294739" start="4571" end="4613" title="Secretariat for Transport and Public Works (Macau)" label="Secretariat for Transport and Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294600" start="4616" end="4658" title="Secretariat for Social Affairs and Culture (Macau)" label="Secretariat for Social Affairs and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294299" start="4661" end="4685" title="Secretariat for Security (Macau)" label="Secretariat for Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294834" start="4688" end="4723" title="Secretariat for Economy and Finance (Macau)" label="Secretariat for Economy and Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294571" start="4726" end="4768" title="Secretariat for Administration and Justice (Macau)" label="Secretariat for Administration and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4798" end="4839" title="Secretariat for Security (Macau)#Commissioners" label="Commissioner of the Macau Customs Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4842" end="4893" title="Secretariat for Security (Macau)#Commissioners" label="Commissioner of the Unitary Police Service of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152622" start="4896" end="4927" title="Commission Against Corruption (Macau)" label="Commissioner Against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247540" start="4930" end="4957" title="Procurator General of Macau" label="Procurator General of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q550133" start="5028" end="5048" title="Assembleia Legislativa de Macau" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003279" start="5160" end="5185" title="Functional constituency (Macau)" label="functional constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9346254" start="6079" end="6090" title="Ho Iat Seng" label="Ho Iat Seng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166149" start="6137" end="6152" title="Chui Sai Cheong" label="Chui Sai Cheong"/>
<link wikidata="Q222441" start="6197" end="6217" title="Fernando Chui" label="Fernando Chui Sai On"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178377" start="6252" end="6273" title="Court of Final Appeal (Macau)" label="Court of Final Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039817" start="6384" end="6398" title="Portuguese law" label="Portuguese law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407632" start="6893" end="6904" title="Sam Hou Fai" label="Sam Hou Fai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6946" end="6953" title="Chu Kin" label="Chu Kin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6983" end="7006" title="Manuel Pinhiero de Lima" label="Manuel Pinhiero de Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7103" end="7124" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7146" end="7188" title="Macau Society of Tourism and Entertainment" label="Macau Society of Tourism and Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q735458" start="7198" end="7208" title="Stanley Ho" label="Stanley Ho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7231" end="7262" title="Union for Democracy Development" label="Union for Democracy Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776833" start="7264" end="7286" title="Antonio Ng" label="Antonio Ng Kuok cheong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926380" start="7396" end="7539" title="Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China in the Macao Special Administrative Region" label="Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China in the Macao Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="8442" end="8445" title="Customs Cooperation Council" label="CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="8447" end="8452" title="Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="ESCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="8466" end="8501" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="8515" end="8523" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="8537" end="8543" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="8557" end="8560" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="8562" end="8566" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="8580" end="8584" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q904852" start="8601" end="8648" title="Politics of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Politics of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19073" wikidata="Q1991699" url="?curid=19073" title="Economy of Macau">
<text>The economy of [[Macau]] is a highly developed market economy. Macau&#x27;s economy has remained one of the most open in the world since its handover to China in 1999. Apparel exports and gambling-related tourism are mainstays of the economy. Since Macau has little arable land and few natural resources, it depends on mainland China for most of its food, fresh water, and energy imports. Japan and Hong Kong are the main suppliers of raw materials and capital goods. Although Macau was hit hard by the 1997–98 Asian financial crisis and the early 2000s recession, its economy grew approximately 13.1% annually on average between 2001 and 2006. Macau is a full Member of the World Trade Organization. Public security has greatly improved after handover to the People&#x27;s Republic of China. With the tax revenue from the profitable gambling industry, the Macau government is able to introduce the social welfare program of 15 years of free education to all Macau citizens. In 2015, Macau&#x27;s economy saw a sharp decrease (-26.4% year-on-year in Q2 2015) due to the reduced spending by visitors from Mainland China since the Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping.

During the first three-quarters of 2007, Macau registered year-on-year GDP increases of 31.4%. A rapid rise in the number of mainland visitors due to China&#x27;s easing of travel restrictions, increased public works expenditures, and significant investment inflows associated with the liberalisation of Macau&#x27;s gaming industry drove the five-year recovery. The budget also returned to surplus after 2002 because of the surge in visitors from China and a hike in taxes on gambling profits, which generated about 70% of government revenue. The Hong Kong dollar is itself a reserve currency for the Macanese pataca, which is pegged at the official rate of around 1 Hong Kong dollar to 1.03 Macanese pataca.

==History==
Macau was a barren fishing village with a population of about 400 before the Portuguese arrived in the 16th century, during the Age of Discovery. In 1535, the Portuguese traders obtained by bribing the right to anchor ships in Macau harbours and engage in trading activities. Portuguese and Chinese merchants flocked to Macau, and it quickly became an important regional trading center in Portugal&#x27;s lucrative trade along three major routes: Macau-Malacca-Goa-Lisbon, Guangzhou-Macau-Nagasaki and Macau-Manila-Mexico. However, with the decline of Portugal as a world power in the 17th and 18th centuries, the trading routes were challenged by other powers such as the Dutch and the British. After China ceded Hong Kong to the British in 1842, Macau&#x27;s position as a major regional trading center declined further still because larger ships were drawn to the deep water port of Victoria Harbour. In an attempt to reverse the decline, from 1848 to the early 1870s Macau engaged in the infamous trade of coolies (slave labourers) as a transit port, shipping locals from southern China to Cuba, Peru, and other South American ports to work on plantations or in mines.

Fishing re-emerged as a dominant economic activity in Macau as it lost its position as a regional trading center. In the early 1920s, over 70% of Macau&#x27;s 84,000 residents were engaged in fishing. Meanwhile, some other businesses started to develop, such as matches, firecrackers, incense and fishing-boat building. But the most notable was the gambling business. Gambling was first legalised in the 19th century in an attempt to generate revenues for the government. The first casino monopoly concession was granted to the Tai Xing Company in 1937. The company was, however, too conservative to fully exploit the economic potential of gambling. The industry saw a major breakthrough in 1962 when the government granted the &quot;Sociedade de Turismo e Diversoes de Macau&quot; (STDM), a syndicate jointly formed by Hong Kong and Macau businessmen, the monopoly rights to all forms of gambling. The STDM introduced western-style games and modernised the marine transport between Macau and Hong Kong, bringing millions of gamblers from Hong Kong every year.

In the 1970s Macau also saw a rapid development in its manufacturing sector. With Macau&#x27;s low-cost operating environment and its surplus quotas under the Multi Fiber Arrangement (MFA), many Hong Kong industrialists established textile and garment manufacturing bases in Macau. At its golden age in the 1980s, the manufacturing sector accounted for about 40% of Macau&#x27;s GDP; textiles and garments accounted for about 90% of Macau&#x27;s total visible exports. However, the manufacturing sector has experienced a gradual decline since the early 1990s due to phasing out of the MFA quota system and the rising labour costs relative to mainland China and Southeast Asian countries.
==Labor and employment==

The work force in Macau is mainly composed of manufacturing; construction; wholesale and retail; hotels and restaurants; financial services, real estate, and other business activities; public administration and other personal and social services, including gaming; transport, storage and communications. Due to the double-digit economic growth in recent years, the unemployment rate dropped from the record high 6.8% in 2000 to 3.1% in Qtr 3, 2007.

With the opening of several casino resorts and other major constructions underway, it is reported that many sectors, especially the construction sector, experience a shortage of labour. The government responds by importing labour from other neighbouring regions, including mainland China, Hong Kong, the Philippines and India. Currently the number of imported labours stands at a record high of 75,391 (Q2 2007), representing more than a quarter of the labour force in Macau. Some local workers complain about the lack of jobs due to the influx of cheap imported labour. Some also claim that the problem of illegal labour is severe. Another concern is the widening of income inequality in the region: Macau&#x27;s Gini coefficient, a popular measure of income inequality where a low value indicates a more equal income distribution, rises from 0.43 in 1998 to 0.48 in 2006. It is higher than those of other neighbouring regions, such as mainland China (0.447), South Korea (0.316) and Singapore (0.425).

==The monetary system==

Macau adopts the so-called currency board system under which the legal tender, pataca (MOP), is 100 percent backed by foreign exchange reserves, the Hong Kong dollar (HKD). Moreover, the currency board, Monetary Authority of Macao (AMCM), has a statutory obligation to issue and redeem pataca on demand against Hong Kong dollar at a fixed exchange rate and without limit. The pataca is pegged to the Hong Kong dollar at a rate of 1.03 MOP per HKD, which is maintained by the AMCM.

Each pataca divides into 100 avos. Coins are issued in 10, 20, and 50 avos and 1, 2, 5, and 10 patacas (2 and 10 patacas coins are rarely used in the territory); notes are in 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 pataca denominations. Hong Kong dollar is freely used and accounts for more than half of the total deposits in Macau&#x27;s banks. In addition, Chinese yuan is also widely accepted. Two banks issue currency: the Banco Nacional Ultramarino and the Bank of China (starting from October 1995).
The historical exchange rates between the pataca and the US dollar (USD) are given below.
==Trade==
In 2003, China&#x27;s Ministry of Commerce established Forum Macao in 2003. The Forum&#x27;s objective is to increase economic ties between China and the Portuguese-speaking countries. Its permanent secretariat is located in Macau.

In 2011, Macau&#x27;s market economy produced total exports of US$1.119 billion (MOP 8.94 billion) and consisted mainly of clothing, textiles, footwear, toys, electronics, machinery and parts. Total imports for the same period reached US$8.926 billion (MOP 71.32 billion), and consisted mostly of raw materials and semi-manufactured goods, consumer goods (foodstuffs, beverages, tobacco), capital goods, mineral fuels and oils. Macau&#x27;s primary export partner in 2011 was Hong Kong (44.6%). Other exports go to Mainland China (15.9%) and United States (7.9%). Macau import partners are Mainland China (30.4%), Hong Kong (12%), France (10.4%), Switzerland (7.5%), Italy (7.5%), Japan (6.2%), and United States (6.1%).

In the second half of the 20th century, Macau&#x27;s economy was diversified with the development of light industry, the influx of migrants from mainland China to serve as a labor force, and increased tourism. Portugal&#x27;s efforts to develop economic and cultural links between Macau and Brazil and Portuguese holdings in Africa, however, were not successful. Economic ties to the European Union and Taiwan are considered important aspects of Macau&#x27;s economic role as part of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Direct access to the neighbouring Zhuhai Special Economic Zone facilitates trade with mainland China. As a special administrative region, Macau functions as a free port and as a separate customs territory.

==Sectors==

===Tourism and gambling===

Tourism is the backbone of Macau&#x27;s economy, and much of it geared towards gambling, which was legalised in the 19th century and has since been the linchpin of the economy and an important source of revenue for the government. As of at least 2015, 90% of tourist revenues in Macau are derived from gambling. For the Macau government, taxes derived from the table game of baccarat are the largest single source of public funds.

From 1962, the gambling industry operated under a government-issued monopoly licence by Stanley Ho&#x27;s Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau (STDM), which replaced the Tai Heng Entertainment Corporation that had held a gaming monopoly for the previous 24 years. The monopoly ended in 2001 when the gaming industry was liberalised and several casino operators from Las Vegas entered the market. These new operators include Las Vegas Sands, which opened Sands Macao, the largest casino in the world as measured by total number of table games, in 2004 and Venetian Macau in 2007; Wynn Resorts, which opened Wynn Macau in 2006; and MGM Mirage, which opened MGM Grand Macau in 2007.

In addition, other casino owners, including Australian Crown Casino and Hong Kong Galaxy Entertainment Group have also opened several hotel casinos in Macau. As a result of the surge in number of casinos and construction from other new casino entrants, Macau&#x27;s economy has grown rapidly, and gambling revenues from Macau&#x27;s casinos are now greater than those of Las Vegas Strip, making Macau the highest-volume gambling center in the world. Numerous other hotel casinos, including Galaxy Cotai Megaresort and Ponte 16, are also to be opened in near future.
Due to the opening of the new hotel casinos and China&#x27;s easing of travel restrictions, there has been a rapid rise in the number of mainland visitors. From 9.1 million visitors in 2000, arrivals to Macau has grown to 18.7 million visitors in 2005 and 22 million visitors in 2006, with over 50% of the arrivals coming from mainland China and another 30% from Hong Kong. Macau is expected to receive between 24 and 25 million visitors in 2007. Macau also received the Future Award 2007, voted by 26,000 German travel trade members of GoAsia, for being regarded as the most promising future tourism destination in Asia. Macau is currently rated as one of the world&#x27;s top tourism destinations by the World Tourism Organization.

Because Macau benefits from favorable taxation rules, it is a favored location for tourists from elsewhere in China to purchase luxury goods like cosmetics, jewelry, and designer fashion goods.

===Manufacturing===

Macau&#x27;s manufacturing industries emerged in the first few decades of the 20th century, which mainly consisted of junk building, factories for matches, firecrackers and incense. Modern industries, however, did not take off until the 1970s when the textiles and garments industry was rising rapidly, while other light industries such as plastics, electronics, toys, and artificial flowers also experienced respectable growth. Textiles and garments further increased its dominance in the manufacturing sector towards the end of the 1980s.

Much of Macau&#x27;s textile industry has moved to the mainland as the Multi-Fiber Agreement is phased out. The territory has relied more on gambling and tourism-related services to generate growth.

===Banking===
Macau is an offshore financial centre, a tax haven, and a free port with no foreign exchange control regimes.
 The offshore finance business is regulated and supervised by the Monetary Authority of Macao, while the regulation and supervision of the offshore non-finance business is mainly controlled by the Macau Trade and Investment Promotion Institute. In 2007, Moody&#x27;s Investors Service upgraded Macau&#x27;s foreign and local currency government issuer ratings to &#x27;Aa3&#x27; from &#x27;A1&#x27;, citing its government&#x27;s solid finances as a large net creditor. The rating agency also upgraded Macau&#x27;s foreign currency bank deposit ceiling to &#x27;Aa3&#x27; from &#x27;A1&#x27;.

There are twenty other licensed banks, sixteen of which are foreign. Macau has five of the top 500 commercial banks in Asia, including Banco Tai Fung and Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.

===Construction===

In 2014, the construction sectors in Macau engaged 45,368 people. The value of construction was MOP78.15 billion, in which MOP66.88 billion belong to the private sectors. The intermediate consumption was MOP61.03 billion and labor cost was MOP11.35 billion.

===Transportation companies===
Air Macau is Macau&#x27;s Flag carrier and is based out of Macau International Airport.

===Media===
Macau has reportedly the highest &quot;media density&quot; in the world - nine Chinese-language dailies, three Portuguese-language dailies, two English-language dailies and about half a dozen Chinese-language weeklies and one Portuguese-language weekly. About two dozen newspapers from Hong Kong, mainland China, Taiwan and the Philippines are shipped to Macau every early morning.

==Economic diversification==
The large role of gambling and tourism underscores a degree of risk for Macau&#x27;s economy. Because the economy is so reliant on tourism and gambling for its well-being, if the flow of tourists slows, it could come as a shock to the small market. The push for diversification came in the closing years of Portuguese administration, under Governor General Vasco Rocha Vieira, and has continued to the present, under Chief Executive Edmund Ho. The government is seeking foreign investment as a means of economic diversification as well. Much of the foreign investment into Macau, however, has gone into the gaming sector after the end of the monopoly in 2001. Otherwise, foreign companies have entered into the mobile phone market and internet services after telecommunications market liberalisation in 2001.

==Political economy and social welfare==

Prior to the 1930s Macau had a Laissez-Faire type of welfare provision. Publicly funded schools available were taught in Portuguese. The first welfare program was created in the late 1930s – it was called the Public Charity Society. The main objective of the organization is to provide for the poor and orphans. The development of a welfare state was gradual and primitive. In 1947, a number of reforms were made. Most notably, the social relief card was established which was only given to those in need. In the 60s the Public Relief Society became the Public Relief Branch. Services broaden to cover other areas such as disaster relief. This is an important addition because Macau have high risks of frequent typhoons. In addition, many facilities were also built, including rehabilitation centers and center for blind and deaf assistance. Throughout the 60s and 70s, housing was provided to the poor, disabled and elderly. Financial aid for health care and education is also provided to poor. During this period the government have also started subsidizing private schools. Another restructuring of the system happened in 1980. The Department of Social Welfare was officially established. Further adjustments were made in the late 80s that separated the department into three branches, including the Macao Governor, Social Welfare Committee and the Department for Social Welfare. It established four principles &quot;equality, efficiency, mutual assistance and participation&quot;. Four offices were also set up in Santo António e São Lázaro, São Lourenço e Sé, Nossa Senhora de Fátima, and Ilias. The purpose of these offices is to make it more convenient for people to make a visit and for the workers to also get closer to the locals in their region. In the 90s, an additional office was set up in llhas Verde due to high demand in the Northern region. The department also became increasingly involved in familial issues by offering counseling.

The Social Welfare Bureau – which remained to this day - was established after the handover to China in 1999. Initially Macau faced challenges from a weak economy and high unemployment rate but in 2002, gaming was legalized and increased the government revenue. Due to the rapid economic growth driven by the gambling industry, foreign investments and tourism, the government is now able to provide more public services. Macau&#x27;s social welfare programs have grown to be comparable to the most developed countries in the world. Free healthcare is universal and offered in public hospitals but private services is also subsidized by 30%, for pregnant women, students, civil servants and people 65 and above, it is completely subsidized. The government extend benefits for many of these citizens. Improvements in the rise of employment and income is also linked to higher satisfaction with quality of life. The government provide 15 years of free education, social insurance and social assistance to all citizens. Similar to a lot of East Asian countries, the social welfare model in Macau does not fit neatly in &quot;the three worlds of welfare capitalism&quot;. It has been argued that it functions more like a regulatory welfare regime.

Nevertheless, Macau&#x27;s public sector appears to be quite small. Workers in the public sector is one of the highest paid occupation due to constitutional law that was set during the handover. Therefore, as a result the government often offer short-term or part-time contracts to make it more affordable although contracts usually get renewed. It is reported that many workers in the police force have left to work in casinos for better pay. Economic growth also brings inequality, competition is getting higher as more foreigner and mainland workers are overtaking local poor in skills. This evidently produced an increase in citizen participation in elections and protests. The focus on the gambling and tourism industry also come at the expense of other sectors. As of 2009, 44.9% of labor work in the tourist industry. It is reported in 2006 that 44 times the population of Macau visited the city that year. Furthermore, all profitable big business like hotels and casinos are owned by foreign investors, which comes at the expense of local family businesses. This had led to a violent protest on Labor Day in 2007. No such civil unrest has ever been record in Macau history before or after the handover but it caught real attention because the city had a GDP growth of 17% the year prior.

==Energy==

Electricity – production: 1.893 billion kWh (2004)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;fossil fuel:&quot; 100%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;hydro:&quot; 0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;nuclear:&quot; 0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot; 0% (1998)
&lt;br&gt;Electricity – consumption: 1.899 billion kWh (2004)
&lt;br&gt;Electricity – exports: 0 kWh (2004)
&lt;br&gt;Electricity – imports: 153.3 million kWh (2004)

==See also==
* Economy of China
* Gambling in Macau
* Tourism in Macau
* Individual Visit Scheme
* Shipyards in Macau

==References==
==Notes==
==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1991699" start="4" end="24" title="Economy of Macau" label="economy of [[Macau]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="30" end="46" title="Advanced economy" label="highly developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="47" end="61" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929451" start="108" end="117" title="Open economy" label="most open"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="141" end="158" title="Handover of Macau" label="handover to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q839232" start="188" end="196" title="Gambling in Macau" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="249" end="254" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="319" end="333" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="511" end="533" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326574" start="542" end="563" title="early 2000s recession" label="early 2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="675" end="699" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q294240" start="701" end="716" title="Public security" label="Public security"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="899" end="913" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10845594" start="1129" end="1170" title="Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping" label="Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q31015" start="1721" end="1737" title="Hong Kong dollar" label="Hong Kong dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q756202" start="1750" end="1766" title="reserve currency" label="reserve currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q241214" start="1775" end="1790" title="Macanese pataca" label="Macanese pataca"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1973" end="1983" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14606226" start="2024" end="2040" title="History of Portugal (1415–1542)" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="2349" end="2356" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="2357" end="2360" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="2361" end="2367" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="2369" end="2378" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="2385" end="2393" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="2404" end="2410" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2411" end="2417" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q155643" start="2782" end="2798" title="Victoria Harbour" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q548135" start="2906" end="2913" title="coolies" label="coolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2990" end="2994" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q839196" start="3804" end="3845" title="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversoes de Macau" label="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversoes de Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164531" start="4291" end="4314" title="Multi Fiber Arrangement" label="Multi Fiber Arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="5211" end="5228" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5600" end="5611" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5616" end="5621" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="6010" end="6026" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="6257" end="6268" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6281" end="6290" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q496819" start="6353" end="6374" title="Currency board" label="currency board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="6391" end="6403" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q241214" start="6405" end="6411" title="Macanese pataca" label="pataca"/>
<link wikidata="Q31015" start="6475" end="6491" title="Hong Kong dollar" label="Hong Kong dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q986615" start="6529" end="6556" title="Monetary Authority of Macao" label="Monetary Authority of Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="7161" end="7173" title="Chinese yuan" label="Chinese yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q806190" start="7229" end="7255" title="Banco Nacional Ultramarino" label="Banco Nacional Ultramarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="7264" end="7277" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064994" start="7430" end="7450" title="Ministry of Commerce (China)" label="Ministry of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q122766944" start="7463" end="7474" title="Forum Macao" label="Forum Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8747" end="8761" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8766" end="8772" title="Republic of China" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="8918" end="8924" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="8925" end="8946" title="Special Economic Zone" label="Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="9043" end="9052" title="free port" label="free port"/>
<link wikidata="Q739895" start="9507" end="9515" title="baccarat" label="baccarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q735458" start="9652" end="9662" title="Stanley Ho" label="Stanley Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q839196" start="9670" end="9711" title="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau" label="Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9739" end="9773" title="Tai Heng Entertainment Corporation" label="Tai Heng Entertainment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="9935" end="9944" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506045" start="9993" end="10008" title="Las Vegas Sands" label="Las Vegas Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041578" start="10023" end="10034" title="Sands Macao" label="Sands Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156708" start="10124" end="10138" title="Venetian Macau" label="Venetian Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274089" start="10148" end="10160" title="Wynn Resorts" label="Wynn Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414111" start="10175" end="10185" title="Wynn Macau" label="Wynn Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q568532" start="10199" end="10209" title="MGM Mirage" label="MGM Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q995564" start="10224" end="10239" title="MGM Grand Macau" label="MGM Grand Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145115" start="10305" end="10317" title="Crown Melbourne" label="Crown Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039216" start="10332" end="10358" title="Galaxy entertainment" label="Galaxy Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="10621" end="10636" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976242" start="11477" end="11514" title="World Tourism Rankings" label="world&amp;#x27;s top tourism destinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="11522" end="11548" title="World Tourism Organization" label="World Tourism Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164531" start="12380" end="12401" title="Multi-Fiber Agreement" label="Multi-Fiber Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="12535" end="12560" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="12564" end="12573" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="12581" end="12590" title="free port" label="free port"/>
<link wikidata="Q986615" start="12699" end="12726" title="Monetary Authority of Macao" label="Monetary Authority of Macao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="12887" end="12917" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13361" end="13375" title="Tai Fung Bank" label="Banco Tai Fung"/>
<link wikidata="Q26463" start="13380" end="13419" title="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China" label="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q407478" start="13732" end="13741" title="Air Macau" label="Air Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="13758" end="13770" title="Flag carrier" label="Flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="13791" end="13818" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10397639" start="13833" end="13853" title="Media of Macau" label="Macau has reportedly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="14263" end="14271" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q843303" start="14594" end="14620" title="Vasco Joaquim Rocha Vieira" label="General Vasco Rocha Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048127" start="14678" end="14687" title="Edmund Ho" label="Edmund Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="15128" end="15141" title="Laissez-Faire" label="Laissez-Faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q900406" start="15492" end="15499" title="reforms" label="reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="15808" end="15816" title="typhoons" label="typhoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q26830865" start="17036" end="17046" title="counseling" label="counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="17221" end="17233" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="17377" end="17396" title="foreign investments" label="foreign investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="17401" end="17408" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="17547" end="17566" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="17586" end="17596" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q488399" start="18190" end="18208" title="welfare capitalism" label="welfare capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="18320" end="18333" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="18947" end="18956" title="elections" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="18961" end="18969" title="protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="19555" end="19558" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="19980" end="19996" title="Economy of China" label="Economy of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q839232" start="19999" end="20016" title="Gambling in Macau" label="Gambling in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7221081" start="20019" end="20035" title="Tourism in Macau" label="Tourism in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423098" start="20038" end="20061" title="Individual Visit Scheme" label="Individual Visit Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800859" start="20064" end="20082" title="Shipyards in Macau" label="Shipyards in Macau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19074" wikidata="Q836700" url="?curid=19074" title="Telecommunications in Macau">
<text>With Macau&#x27;s small population (about 680,000) and market, only a few local media options are available for the local people. Because radio signals, newspapers and magazines from Hong Kong are available in Macau, the local media are always a minority group in terms of sales and number of viewers.

==Newspapers==
There are eighteen newspapers (twelve in Chinese, four in Portuguese and two in English). &quot;O Mun Yat Po&quot; or &quot;Macau Daily News&quot;) is owned by the Chinese Communist Party and has the largest circulation (4,000). Additionally, Chinese-language newspapers from Hong Kong are popular.

Macau has eight Chinese-language, three Portuguese-language and two English-language dailies. The &quot;Macau Daily Times&quot; is Macau&#x27;s only English-language newspaper edited seven days a week. &quot;Macau Post Daily&quot; is published from Monday to Friday. It is owned by a local publishing company, Everbright Co. Ltd., which is locally owned.

==Radio==
There are 250,000 radios; two twenty-hour FM radio stations, one Portuguese, one Chinese; and four AM stations. Hong Kong radio stations also are popular in Macau.
* Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 0 (2005)
* Radios: 160,000 (1997)

==Television==
There are 70,300 television sets (1997 estimate); two general television channels from TDM: one Portuguese and one Chinese. Hong Kong television networks TVB and ViuTV can be received and are widely watched by Macau residents.
* Television broadcast stations: 3 (2006)
* Televisions: 49,000 (1997)

Macau government owns the television station called TDM. It has 16 digital television channels (6 channels are its own channel, 1 channel for transmitting TDM radio, 9 channels are transmitting television channels from mainland China).

==Telephone==
The number of telephone lines has been increasing since the mid-1990s. In 1997 there were 222,456 telephones; by 1999, 300,066 lines were in use. In 1999 there were 686 telephone lines per 1,000 people. Cellular-telephone-use statistics were not available. International access is via Hong Kong and Mainland China and via Intelsat (Indian Ocean). Alcatel-Lucent was granted a contract in February 2007 to collocate a CDMA2000 1xEV-DO (Revision A) high-speed wireless network in Macau for China Unicom. Following the completion of the upgrades in related software and hardware, China Unicom will be equipped with the facilities needed to provide high-speed mobile data services for users in Macau, including broadcasting and video telephony.
* Telephone main lines in use: 175,592 (July 2006)
* Mobile cellular telephones: 325,016 (July 2006)

Telephone system: fairly modern communication facilities maintained for domestic and international services
* domestic: N/A
* international: HF radiotelephone communication facility; access to international communications carriers provided via Hong Kong and Mainland China; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
* Users: 88,653 (2005)

CTM is the only carrier to offer eSIM. 3 Macau is the only carrier to offer VoWiFi. SmarTone MAC is the only carrier not yet to offer VoLTE, till its operation ceased. 

On 21 August 2024, The Macau SAR Government has received an application from SmarTone to forgo the 4G license and plans to cease renewing the 3G license after expiration. According to the Post and Telecommunications Bureau (CTT), SmarTone (at that time) had a relatively small market share in Macau, only a single-digit percentage.

===Mobile phone operators===
===Decommissioning of GSM===
GSM mobile phone networks for consumers in Macau were set to be decommissioned in July 2012. Networks will only be left in place for visitors to roam onto. The planned shutdown will make Macau be the first region in the world to phase out networks using the GSM standard, but it was postponed until 2019.

==Internet==

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): CTM (Companhia de Telecomunicações de Macau S.A.R.L.), MTel

Country code (Top level domain): .mo

===Broadband Internet access===
The Macao Telecommunications Company (CTM) in 2000 launched the first broadband Internet access in the territory, on a network built by Cisco Systems.

MTel Telecommunications also provides broadband internet service and is CTM&#x27;s main competitor, though much smaller market share.

=== Censorship ===
Macau is outside the Great Firewall, therefore there is no internet censorship besides illegal content in Macau.

==See also==
* Media of Macau
* Communications in Hong Kong
* Communications in Taiwan
* Communications in China
* List of Chinese-language television channels
* CTM (Macau)

==References and notes==
==External links==
* CIA - The World Factbook - Macau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="5" end="10" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="376" end="386" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491013" start="442" end="458" title="Macau Daily News" label="Macau Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="482" end="505" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630479" start="578" end="603" title="Newspapers of Hong Kong" label="newspapers from Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722698" start="722" end="739" title="Macau Daily Times" label="Macau Daily Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="1310" end="1328" title="television channel" label="television channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1344" end="1354" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q21175575" start="1410" end="1415" title="ViuTV" label="ViuTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394739" start="1599" end="1602" title="TDM (Macau)" label="TDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="2120" end="2128" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="2130" end="2142" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="2145" end="2159" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023122" start="2215" end="2223" title="CDMA2000" label="CDMA2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2224" end="2244" title="Evolution-Data Optimized#TIA-856 Rev. A" label="1xEV-DO (Revision A)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11375" start="2256" end="2272" title="wireless network" label="wireless network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068485" start="2286" end="2298" title="China Unicom" label="China Unicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="2352" end="2360" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="2365" end="2373" title="computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2454" end="2460" title="mobile phone" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="2505" end="2517" title="broadcasting" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="2522" end="2537" title="video telephony" label="video telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q56315412" start="3024" end="3028" title="eSIM" label="eSIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373822" start="3067" end="3073" title="VoWiFi" label="VoWiFi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18136234" start="3125" end="3130" title="VoLTE" label="VoLTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="3552" end="3555" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="3872" end="3897" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990317" start="3912" end="3950" title="CTM (Macau)" label="Companhia de Telecomunicações de Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="3968" end="3980" title="Country codes" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q43539" start="4001" end="4004" title=".mo" label=".mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990317" start="4042" end="4074" title="CTM (Macau)" label="Macao Telecommunications Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="4108" end="4126" title="broadband Internet" label="broadband Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="4174" end="4187" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370363" start="4365" end="4379" title="Great Firewall" label="Great Firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162504" start="4431" end="4455" title="Legal system of Macau" label="illegal content in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10397639" start="4473" end="4487" title="Media of Macau" label="Media of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454027" start="4490" end="4517" title="Communications in Hong Kong" label="Communications in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546592" start="4520" end="4544" title="Communications in Taiwan" label="Communications in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285321" start="4547" end="4570" title="Communications in China" label="Communications in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567005" start="4573" end="4617" title="List of Chinese-language television channels" label="List of Chinese-language television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990317" start="4620" end="4631" title="CTM (Macau)" label="CTM (Macau)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19075" wikidata="Q4410190" url="?curid=19075" title="Transport in Macau">
<text>Transport in Macau includes road, sea, rail and air transport. Road transport is the primary mode of transport within Macau, although a new rail system opened in December 2019 serving the areas of Taipa and Cotai. The main forms of public transport are buses and taxis.

Modes of transport out of Macau include ferries to Hong Kong and mainland China from two ferry terminals, as well as helicopter service to Hong Kong. International flights are available from Macau International Airport.

==Internal==
===Road=== 

Buses and taxis are the major modes of public transport in Macau. Bus services are frequent and inexpensive, linking the Macau peninsula, Taipa, Cotai and Coloane. Transmac and TCM are the only operators of Macau&#x27;s bus services. Nova Era (zh), which took over the operations of Reolian, merged with TCM on 1 August, 2018. Most hotels (four-starred or above) and gaming venues operate their own fleet of shuttle bus service between the Hong Kong-Macau Ferry Terminal, Taipa Ferry Terminal or Portas do Cerco (Macau&#x27;s border to mainland China) and their premises.

Taxis are plentiful near the airport/Taipa ferry terminal, the Hong Kong-Macau and Taipa ferry terminal, and major gaming venues/hotels in the city though it is harder to get one during rush hours on the streets. Most of Macau&#x27;s taxis have a black body with cream color top livery. Radio taxis are available for the black cabs.

In order to enhance the quality of taxi services, such as eliminate the language barrier between taxi drivers and passengers, the Tourist Office has provided most taxis with a destination guide which includes the names of the most requested destinations in Chinese, Portuguese and English.

The trishaw, a hybrid of the tricycle and the rickshaw, is a unique mode of transport in Macau, though it is mainly for sightseeing purposes but they were a type of mainly used transportation system before the 1970s because of their cheap price. They can easily be found next to Hotel Lisboa and the Macau ferry terminal waiting for passengers.
===Railways===

There is one railway line open in Macau called the Macau Light Rail Transit system. Phase 1 of the Taipa line opened for operations in December 2019. Similar to the Singapore Light Rapid Transit system, the tracks will be a mix of elevated guideways and tunnels, ensuring a dedicated right-of-way separated from road traffic. When completed it will serve passengers on Macau Peninsula, Taipa island, the Cotai reclamation area, the Macau International Airport and the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge.

Proposals have been put forward to link Macau to the Chinese railway network by extending the Guangzhou Railway (or, possibly, Guangzhou-Zhuhai Intercity Mass Rapid Transit) to Cotai through Hengqin Island. However, no decisions have yet been made so far.

Zhuhai Railway Station of the Guangzhou–Zhuhai Intercity Railway terminates adjacent to the northern border entrance into Macau at Portas do Cerco.

Other systems include the Teleférico da Guia gondola lift system on Guia Hill, and the Elevador Inclinado da Colina da Taipa Grande, an inclined lift.

===Others===
The Macau Maritime Museum used to have two sailing vessels (which were based on the ancient &quot;junk&quot; form but were remodeled) serving for touring trips between the inner and outer harbours. Along the trip, the crew would introduce the general lifestyle and customs of the local boat dwellers. However, due to the land reclamation works in the harbour and the maintenance of the boats, all trips have been suspended.

==External==
===Sea===

Over 150 sea-crossing services are scheduled daily between Macau and Hong Kong, and the Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal serves as the major terminal for Macau&#x27;s passenger traffic by sea. The route is served by high speed catamarans (with passenger capacity of about 400) and jetfoils (with passenger capacity of about 260) and the journey takes approximately one hour. There are also daily scheduled ferry services between Macau and Shenzhen. At present the services are operated by TurboJET from Sheung Wan, Tsim Sha Tsui and Hong Kong International Airport. Cotai Water Jet also operates services between Taipa Ferry Terminal and the Sheung Wan, Tsim Sha Tsui and Hong Kong International Airport. Apart from the sea routes there are also regular scheduled helicopter services between Hong Kong and Macau, which are operated by Sky Shuttle. The trip takes approximately 20 minutes.

A sea-crossing service has been launched by TurboJET which travels between the Hong Kong International Airport and Macau. This differs from the above Macau-Hong Kong route since travelers who arrive in Hong Kong by air do not have to go through Hong Kong immigration&#x27;s passport control and can board a direct ferry to Macau through a special transfer terminal within the airport. On the return trip, travelers can directly reach the Hong Kong International Airport by ferry (a dedicated check-in desk for the service is available at the Hong Kong-Macau Ferry Terminal) and arrive at the airport without going through Hong Kong immigration&#x27;s passport control, though airline check-in has to be done for some airlines within the airport prior to boarding a plane. Later on, the Cotai Water Jet launched the same service linking Hong Kong Airport and Macau but mostly embarked at Taipa Ferry Terminal.

A new ferry terminal in Taipa, which is adjacent to the Macau International Airport, was opened in 2017 and some of the passenger traffic by sea will be diverted to the new facility. It is expected to act as a major hub for passenger transfer between the Hong Kong International Airport and the Macau International Airport.

From the Inner Harbour Ferry Terminal (Terminal Marítimo de Passageiros do Porto Interior), ferry services were available between Macau and Wanzai, Zhuhai until January, 2016 due to safety issues at the Wanzai Ferry Terminal. On 31 December 2019, the Macau government announced that the Wanzai Port will officially reopen on January 23 with an hourly immigration capacity of 3,840 crossings. To transport passengers between Macau and Zhuhai, the mainland ferry company Yuet Tung will arrange one ferry every 15 minutes, amounting to four ferries every hour. Each ferry can take a maximum of 280 passengers.

===Air===
Air service in Macau began in the 1930s with Pan American Airways operating seaplanes from Macau to Hong Kong and lasted until 1941. In 1948 Cathay Pacific Airways commenced Hong Kong to Macau seaplane service under their subsidiary Macau Air Transport Company (MATCO). MATCO operated from the Outer Harbour Terminal along Avenida da Amizade to Kai Tak Airport in Hong Kong. The scheduled passenger service continued until 1961 when MATCO ceased operations.

The Macau International Airport, located at Taipa, serves as the terminal for Macau&#x27;s international air traffic. It was inaugurated on 9 November 1995 and has since established a number of regular flights between Macau and major cities in Northeast and Southeast Asia, such as Bangkok, Beijing, Kaohsiung, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Osaka, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore, and Taipei.

Passengers who would like to enter mainland China by land can use the &quot;Two Customs, One Checkpoint&quot; service (or the AIR-TO-LAND Flow Express Bus - Two Customs, One Checkpoint) provided by the Macau International Airport. Passengers can request the &quot;Express Link&quot; service at the check-in counter of their respective airlines. When arriving at the Macau International Airport, they can simply follow the &quot;Express Link&quot; signs and board the Air-to-Land transfer. Passengers do not have to go through Macau&#x27;s immigration and customs checkpoint until they reach the border of mainland China.

Owing to its relatively low landing fees and the business opportunities brought by the booming gaming industry in Macau, the airport has attracted several of Asia&#x27;s low-cost carriers such as AirAsia, Tigerair, Cebu Pacific, etc. to establish regular flights between Macau and several major cities in Southeast Asia. As a result, it has been gradually developing into a major hub for low-cost air travel within the region. Other traditional carriers, such as the local flag carrier Air Macau, the Taiwanese carrier EVA Air, and even carriers which operate similar routes from Hong Kong, are facing potential challenges from these newcomers.

Due to a lack of intercontinental flights from Macau, air passengers are also served by Hong Kong International Airport and Shenzhen Bao&#x27;an International Airport. Passengers can take ferries from the Outer Harbor and Taipa terminals to the Skypier in Hong Kong, or Fuyong Ferry Terminal in Shenzhen, without clearing customs or immigration at the other side. There is also a helicopter service to Shenzhen.

==Roads, bridges and tunnels==

Macau has 321 kilometres of public roads, three bridges (viaducts) linking the Macau Peninsula and Taipa, and a tunnel through the Guia Hill linking the Horta e Costa area and the New Port Area (NAPE). The three bridges are (from east to west) the Friendship Bridge (&quot;Ponte de Amizade&quot;); the Macau-Taipa Bridge (&quot;Ponte Governador Nobre de Carvalho&quot;); and the Sai Van Bridge (&quot;Ponte de Sai Van&quot;).

The Lotus Bridge links Cotai with Hengqin New Area of Zhuhai. Unlike mainland China, where traffic drives on the right, traffic in Macau and Hong Kong drives on the left, therefore a special design has been used to build this bridge to facilitate the change in driving directions.

Roads are generally narrow at the heart of the city and parked cars are always found on both sides of the road. Traffic congestion has been a major problem throughout the day owing to the lack of an efficient mass transit system and a relatively high car to population ratio.

There are four land cross-border checkpoints, Portas do Cerco, Parque Industrial Transfronteiriço, located at Ilha Verde, Cotai (Lotus) Checkpoint, and the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge Checkpoint for connection Mainland China. Except for Portas do Cerco, which operates from 06:00 to 01:00, the other checkpoints are in 24-hour operation.

The recent opening of the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge, opened in October 2018 has formed the first single road link between Hong Kong, Macau and the Chinese mainland at Zhuhai. This 50 km link consists of a series of bridges and tunnels crossing the Lingdingyang channel, that connects these three major cities on the Pearl River Delta in China.

==Ports==
* Macau Container Port, located at the Inner Harbour area on the west side of the Macau peninsula
* Ká Hó Port, located on the Coloane Island

==Airports==
===Airports===
There is only one airport located within Macau. Service began in 1995. Previously, seaplanes operated in Macau.

===Heliports and helipads===
There are two heliports in Macau.

==References==
==External links==

* Macau Ferry Information
* Land, Public Works and Transport Bureau of Macau
* City Guide of Macau
* Macau SAR Government Official Website
*Macau International Airport Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4410190" start="0" end="18" title="Transport in Macau" label="Transport in Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="63" end="67" title="Road" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="118" end="123" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="197" end="202" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="207" end="212" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="253" end="258" title="buses" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="263" end="267" title="taxi" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="311" end="318" title="ferries" label="ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="322" end="331" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="336" end="350" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="388" end="398" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="462" end="489" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054608" start="584" end="587" title="Transmac" label="Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334373" start="639" end="654" title="Macau Peninsula" label="Macau peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="656" end="661" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="663" end="668" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="673" end="680" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054608" start="682" end="690" title="Transmac" label="Transmac"/>
<link wikidata="Q838868" start="695" end="698" title="Sociedade de Transportes Colectivos de Macau" label="TCM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="752" end="760" title="Macau Nova Era de Autocarros Públicos" label="Nova Era"/>
<link wikidata="" start="762" end="764" title=":zh:澳門新時代公共汽車有限公司" label="zh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313866" start="801" end="808" title="Reolian Public Transport Co." label="Reolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842280" start="958" end="988" title="Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal" label="Hong Kong-Macau Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289281" start="990" end="1010" title="Taipa Temporary Ferry Terminal" label="Taipa Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="1522" end="1526" title="Taxicab" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="1682" end="1689" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1691" end="1701" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1706" end="1713" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="1720" end="1727" title="cycle rickshaw" label="trishaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q536135" start="1745" end="1753" title="tricycle" label="tricycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337999" start="1762" end="1770" title="Pulled rickshaw" label="rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q866024" start="2128" end="2152" title="Macau Light Rail Transit" label="Macau Light Rail Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231347" start="2242" end="2271" title="Light Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="Singapore Light Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601555" start="2308" end="2316" title="Elevated railway" label="elevated"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="2509" end="2536" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191515" start="2545" end="2574" title="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge" label="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380995" start="2704" end="2749" title="Guangzhou-Zhuhai Intercity Mass Rapid Transit" label="Guangzhou-Zhuhai Intercity Mass Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="2768" end="2782" title="Hengqin" label="Hengqin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071212" start="2834" end="2856" title="Zhuhai Railway Station" label="Zhuhai Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380995" start="2864" end="2898" title="Guangzhou–Zhuhai Intercity Railway" label="Guangzhou–Zhuhai Intercity Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272047" start="2965" end="2980" title="Portas do Cerco" label="Portas do Cerco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857719" start="3009" end="3027" title="Cable Guia" label="Teleférico da Guia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576693" start="3028" end="3040" title="gondola lift" label="gondola lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078465" start="3051" end="3060" title="Guia Fortress" label="Guia Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q27728382" start="3102" end="3114" title="Taipa Grande" label="Taipa Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876952" start="3119" end="3132" title="inclined lift" label="inclined lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="3469" end="3485" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842280" start="3685" end="3713" title="Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal, Macau" label="Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="3820" end="3829" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q536743" start="3874" end="3881" title="jetfoil" label="jetfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="4032" end="4040" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q839291" start="4082" end="4090" title="TurboJET" label="TurboJET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207485" start="4096" end="4106" title="Hong Kong–Macau Ferry Terminal" label="Sheung Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099721" start="4108" end="4121" title="China Hong Kong City" label="Tsim Sha Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537961" start="4126" end="4157" title="Skypier" label="Hong Kong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175280" start="4159" end="4174" title="Cotai Water Jet" label="Cotai Water Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289281" start="4206" end="4226" title="Taipa Ferry Terminal" label="Taipa Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207485" start="4235" end="4245" title="Hong Kong–Macau Ferry Terminal" label="Sheung Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537501" start="4428" end="4439" title="Sky Shuttle" label="Sky Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q839291" start="4527" end="4535" title="TurboJET" label="TurboJET"/>
<link wikidata="Q17704" start="4562" end="4593" title="Hong Kong International Airport" label="Hong Kong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17704" start="4921" end="4952" title="Hong Kong International Airport" label="Hong Kong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="5449" end="5476" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17704" start="5648" end="5679" title="Hong Kong International Airport" label="Hong Kong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702671" start="5727" end="5755" title="Inner Harbour Ferry Terminal" label="Inner Harbour Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="5866" end="5872" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5921" end="5942" title="Wanzai Ferry Terminal" label="Wanzai Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="6381" end="6401" title="Pan American Airways" label="Pan American Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="6412" end="6420" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q32141" start="6477" end="6499" title="Cathay Pacific Airways" label="Cathay Pacific Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628876" start="6569" end="6596" title="Macau Air Transport Company" label="Macau Air Transport Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q673202" start="6681" end="6696" title="Kai Tak Airport" label="Kai Tak Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="6700" end="6709" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="6799" end="6826" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="7077" end="7084" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7086" end="7093" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="7095" end="7104" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="7106" end="7118" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="7120" end="7126" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="7128" end="7133" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="7135" end="7140" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="7142" end="7150" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="7152" end="7161" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="7167" end="7173" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="7968" end="7984" title="low-cost carrier" label="low-cost carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q406643" start="7994" end="8001" title="AirAsia" label="AirAsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483281" start="8003" end="8011" title="Tigerair" label="Tigerair"/>
<link wikidata="Q995151" start="8013" end="8025" title="Cebu Pacific" label="Cebu Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q407478" start="8284" end="8293" title="Air Macau" label="Air Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q715113" start="8317" end="8324" title="EVA Air" label="EVA Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q17704" start="8532" end="8563" title="Hong Kong International Airport" label="Hong Kong International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q842297" start="8568" end="8610" title="Shenzhen Bao&amp;#x27;an International Airport" label="Shenzhen Bao&amp;#x27;an International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537961" start="8689" end="8696" title="Skypier" label="Skypier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926219" start="8714" end="8735" title="Fuyong Ferry Terminal" label="Fuyong Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318003" start="9137" end="9185" title="Ponte de Amizade" label="Friendship Bridge (&amp;quot;Ponte de Amizade&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q977841" start="9191" end="9258" title="Ponte Governador Nobre de Carvalho" label="Macau-Taipa Bridge (&amp;quot;Ponte Governador Nobre de Carvalho&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137940" start="9268" end="9313" title="Ponte de Sai Van" label="Sai Van Bridge (&amp;quot;Ponte de Sai Van&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318967" start="9320" end="9332" title="Lótus Bridge" label="Lotus Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="9350" end="9366" title="Hengqin New Area" label="Hengqin New Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="9385" end="9399" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191515" start="10031" end="10060" title="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge" label="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191515" start="10242" end="10271" title="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge" label="Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="10342" end="10351" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="10353" end="10358" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="10387" end="10393" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497118" start="10468" end="10480" title="Lingdingyang" label="Lingdingyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="10536" end="10553" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10557" end="10562" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722692" start="10577" end="10597" title="Macau Container Port" label="Macau Container Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="10657" end="10662" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347393" start="10675" end="10685" title="Kai Ho Port" label="Ká Hó Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022920" start="10702" end="10709" title="Coloane" label="Coloane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19076" wikidata="Q6118969" url="?curid=19076" title="Macao Garrison">
<text>The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Macao Garrison is a garrison of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA), responsible for defense duties in the Macau Special Administrative Region (SAR) since the sovereignty of Macau was transferred to China in 1999.

The PLA stations between 500 and 600 troops in Macau, primarily as a symbolic presence to underscore Chinese sovereignty. The remainder of the 1,200-strong Macau garrison resides just across the Chinese border in Zhuhai.

Although the Macao Basic Law states that the Macau SAR government may &quot;when necessary&quot; ask the central government to allow the garrison to assist in maintaining public order or disaster relief, Chief Executive Edmund Ho has said that, in keeping with the Basic Law the garrison will play no role in internal security. The garrison has maintained a low profile, with soldiers generally wearing civilian clothing when off base and not engaging in business activities.

== Mission ==
According to the Law on Stationing Troops in the Macau Special Administrative Region (or Macao Garrison Law, passed by the NPC Standing Committee on June 28, 1999), the mission of the PLA in Macau is to defend the special administrative region by &quot;preventing and resisting aggression; safe-guarding the security of Macau; undertaking defense services; managing military facilities; and handling related foreign military affairs.&quot; The PLA can also be called upon by the chief executive to help maintain public order and assist with disaster relief efforts. The members of the garrison are mainly ground force troops.

===2017 Typhoon Hato===
At the request of Macau SAR Government, the PLA Macao Garrison was deployed to assist in disaster relief and cleaning up in the aftermath of Typhoon Hato in August 2017, the first time for domestic affairs in Macau history. About 1,000 troops were called in to help remove debris and clear roads.

==Organization==
The PLA Macao Garrison is under the command and control of the Central Military Commission and under the operational supervision of the Southern Theater Command, and its budget is administered by the central government in Beijing. A PLA major general heads the Macao Garrison.

; Garrison Commanders
* Maj. General Liu Yuejun 1999–2002
* Maj. General Liu Lianhua 2002–2008
* Maj. General Wang Yuren 2008–2010
* Maj. General Zhu Qingsheng 2010–2014
* Maj. General Wang Wen 2014–2018
* Maj. General Liao Zhengrong 2018
* Maj. General Xu Liangcai 2019–present

; Political Commissars
* Maj. General He Xianshu 1999–2001
* Maj. General Liu Liangkai 2001–2003
* Maj. General Yang Zhongmin 2003–2006
* Maj. General Li Wenchao 2006–2007
* Maj. General Zhao Cunsheng 2007–2008
* Maj. General Xu Jinlin 2008–2013
* Maj. General Ma Biqiang 2013–2014
* Maj. General Zhang Zhimeng 2014–2017
* Maj. General Zhou Wugang 2017–present

==Troops==
* 1 motorized infantry
* 1 armoured company

==Equipment==

==Bases==
The garrison was temporarily stationed at the 11 storey Edificação Long Cheng/Long Cheng Mansion. It is now stationed on Taipa located amongst the new casinos in Cotai (Estrada da Baía de Nossa Sra. da Esperança across from Hotel Venetian and Galaxy Macau).

There are more troops at the barracks in Zhuhai (Zhengling).

== See also ==

* Military of Macau under Portuguese rule
* Hong Kong Garrison

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6118969" start="4" end="48" title="Macao Garrison" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Macao Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="70" end="99" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="145" end="150" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="151" end="180" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="197" end="208" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="222" end="233" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Macau" label="transferred"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="237" end="242" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="466" end="472" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q837890" start="488" end="503" title="Macao Basic Law" label="Macao Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="580" end="598" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741479" start="679" end="694" title="Chief Executive of Macau" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048127" start="695" end="704" title="Edmund Ho" label="Edmund Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047930" start="784" end="801" title="internal security" label="internal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="1571" end="1590" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="ground force troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057992" start="1635" end="1655" title="Government of Macau" label="Macau SAR Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q37708935" start="1758" end="1770" title="Typhoon Hato" label="Typhoon Hato"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="1995" end="2022" title="Central Military Commission (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q22442974" start="2068" end="2092" title="Southern Theater Command" label="Southern Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="2132" end="2161" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="central government in Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8291658" start="2247" end="2257" title="Liu Yuejun" label="Liu Yuejun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2283" end="2294" title="Liu Lianhua" label="Liu Lianhua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2320" end="2330" title="Wang Yuren" label="Wang Yuren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2356" end="2369" title="Zhu Qingsheng" label="Zhu Qingsheng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2395" end="2403" title="Wang Wen" label="Wang Wen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2429" end="2443" title="Liao Zhengrong" label="Liao Zhengrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676123" start="2464" end="2475" title="Xu Liangcai" label="Xu Liangcai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2528" end="2538" title="He Xianshu" label="He Xianshu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2564" end="2576" title="Liu Liangkai" label="Liu Liangkai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2602" end="2615" title="Yang Zhongmin" label="Yang Zhongmin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2641" end="2651" title="Li Wenchao" label="Li Wenchao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2677" end="2690" title="Zhao Cunsheng" label="Zhao Cunsheng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2716" end="2725" title="Xu Jinlin" label="Xu Jinlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2751" end="2761" title="Ma Biqiang" label="Ma Biqiang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2787" end="2800" title="Zhang Zhimeng" label="Zhang Zhimeng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2826" end="2837" title="Zhou Wugang" label="Zhou Wugang"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="2867" end="2885" title="motorized infantry" label="motorized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="2890" end="2906" title="Armoured warfare" label="armoured company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073822" start="3054" end="3059" title="Taipa" label="Taipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362196" start="3095" end="3100" title="Cotai" label="Cotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="3233" end="3239" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56271544" start="3272" end="3311" title="Military of Macau under Portuguese rule" label="Military of Macau under Portuguese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q832561" start="3314" end="3332" title="Hong Kong Garrison" label="Hong Kong Garrison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19078" wikidata="Q103251" url="?curid=19078" title="Macedonia (region)">
<text>Macedonia ( ) is a geographical and historical region of the Balkan Peninsula in Southeast Europe. Its boundaries have changed considerably over time; however, it came to be defined as the modern geographical region by the mid-19th century. Today the region is considered to include parts of six Balkan countries: all of North Macedonia, large parts of Greece and Bulgaria, and smaller parts of Albania, Serbia, and Kosovo. It covers approximately and has a population of around five million. Greek Macedonia comprises about half of Macedonia&#x27;s area and population.

Its oldest known settlements date back approximately to 7,000 BC. From the middle of the 4th century BC, the Kingdom of Macedon became the dominant power on the Balkan Peninsula; since then Macedonia has had a diverse history.

==Etymology==

Both proper nouns &quot;Makedṓn&quot; and &quot;Makednós&quot; are morphologically derived from the Ancient Greek adjective &quot;makednós&quot; meaning &quot;tall, slim&quot;, and are related to the term Macedonia.

==Boundaries and definitions==
===Ancient times===

The definition of Macedonia has changed several times throughout history. Prior to its expansion under Alexander the Great, the ancient kingdom of Macedonia, to which the modern region owes its name, lay entirely within the central and western parts of the current Greek province of Macedonia and consisted of 17 provinces/districts or eparchies (Ancient Greek: επαρχία).

Expansion of Kingdom of Macedon:
# Kingdom of Perdiccas I: Macedonian Kingdom of Emathia consisting of six provinces Emathia, Pieria, Bottiaea, Mygdonia, Eordaea and Almopia.
# Kingdom of Alexander I: All the above provinces plus the eastern annexations Crestonia, Bisaltia and the western annexations Elimiotis, Orestis and Lynkestis.
# Kingdom of Philip II: All the above provinces plus the appendages of Pelagonia and Macedonian Paeonia to the north, Sintike, Odomantis and Edonis to the east and the Chalkidike to the south.

===Roman era===
In the 2nd century, Macedonia covered approximately the area where it is considered to be today, but the northern regions of today Republic of North Macedonia were not identified as Macedonian lands. For reasons that are still unclear, over the next eleven centuries Macedonia&#x27;s location was changed significantly. The Roman province of Macedonia consisted of what is today Northern and Central Greece, much of the geographical area of the Republic of North Macedonia and southeast Albania. Simply put, the Romans created a much larger administrative area under that name than the original ancient Macedon. In late Roman times, the provincial boundaries were reorganized to form the Diocese of Macedonia, consisting of most of modern mainland Greece right across the Aegean to include Crete, southern Albania, southwest Bulgaria, and most of Republic of North Macedonia.

===Byzantine era===
In the Byzantine Empire, a province under the name of Macedonia was carved out of the original Theme of Thrace, which was well east of the Struma River. This &quot;thema&quot; variously included parts of Thrace and gave its name to the Macedonian dynasty. Hence, Byzantine documents of this era that mention Macedonia are most probably referring to the Macedonian thema. The region of Macedonia, on the other hand, which was ruled by the First Bulgarian Empire throughout the 9th and the 10th century, was incorporated into the Byzantine Empire in 1018 as the Themе of Bulgaria.

===Ottoman era===
With the gradual conquest of southeastern Europe by the Ottomans in the late 14th century, the name of Macedonia disappeared as an administrative designation for several centuries and was rarely displayed on maps. The name was again revived to mean a distinct geographical region in the 19th century, defining the region bounded by Mount Olympus, the Pindus range, mounts Shar and Osogovo, the western Rhodopes, the lower course of the river Mesta (Greek Nestos) and the Aegean Sea, developing roughly the same borders that it has today.

==Demographics==
During medieval and modern times, Macedonia has been known as a Balkan region inhabited by many ethnic groups. Today, as a frontier region where several very different cultures meet, Macedonia has an extremely diverse demographic profile. The current demographics of Macedonia include:
* Macedonian Greeks self-identify culturally and regionally as &quot;Macedonians&quot; (Greek: Μακεδόνες, &quot;Makedónes&quot;). They form the majority of the region&#x27;s population (~51%). They number approximately 2,500,000 and, today, they live almost entirely in Greek Macedonia. The Greek Macedonian population is mixed, with other indigenous groups and with a large influx of Greek refugees descending from Asia Minor, Pontic Greeks, and East Thracian Greeks in the early 20th century. This is due to the population exchange between Greece and Turkey, during which over 1.2 million Anatolian Greek refugees replaced departing Turks and settled in Greece, including 638,000 in the Greek province of Macedonia. Smaller Greek minorities exist in Bulgaria and the Republic of North Macedonia, although their numbers are difficult to ascertain. In official census results, only 86 persons declared themselves Greeks in Bulgarian Macedonia (Blagoevgrad Province) in 2011, out of a total of 1,379 in all of Bulgaria; while only 294 persons described themselves as Greeks in the 2021 census in the Republic of North Macedonia.
* Ethnic Macedonians self-identify as &quot;Macedonians&quot; (Macedonian: Македонци, &quot;Makedonci&quot;) in an ethnic sense as well as in the regional sense. They are the second largest ethnic group in the region. Being a South Slavic ethnic group they are also known as &quot;Macedonian Slavs&quot; and &quot;Slav Macedonians&quot; (Greek: Σλαβομακεδόνες, &quot;Slavomakedones&quot;) in Greece, though this term can be viewed as derogatory by ethnic Macedonians, including those in Greek Macedonia. They form the majority of the population in the Republic of North Macedonia where according to the 2021 census, approximately 1,100,000 people declared themselves as Macedonians. In 1999, the Greek Helsinki Monitor estimated a significant minority of ethnic Macedonians ranging from 10,000 to 30,000 that exist among the Slavic-speakers of Greek Macedonia. There has not been a census in Greece on the question of mother tongue since 1951, when the census recorded 41,017 Slavic-speakers, mostly in the West Macedonia periphery of Greece. The linguistic classification of the Slavic dialects spoken by these people are nowadays typically classified as Macedonian, with the exception of some eastern dialects which can also be classified as Bulgarian, although the people themselves call their native language a variety of terms, including &quot;makedonski&quot;, &quot;makedoniski&quot; (&quot;Macedonian&quot;), &quot;slaviká&quot; (, &quot;Slavic&quot;), &quot;dópia&quot; or &quot;entópia&quot; (, &quot;local/indigenous [language]&quot;), &quot;balgàrtzki&quot;, &quot;bògartski&quot; (&quot;Bulgarian&quot;) along with &quot;naši&quot; (&quot;our own&quot;) and &quot;stariski&quot; (&quot;old&quot;). Most Slavic-speakers declare themselves as ethnic Greeks (Slavophone Greeks), although there are small groups espousing ethnic Macedonian and Bulgarian national identities, however some groups reject all these ethnic designations and prefer terms such as &quot;natives&quot; instead. The Macedonian minority in Albania are an officially recognised minority in Albania and are primarily concentrated around the Prespa region and Golo Brdo and are primarily Eastern Orthodox Christian with the exception of the later region where Macedonians are predominantly Muslim. In the 2011 Albanian census, 5,870 Albanian citizens declared themselves Macedonians. According to the latest Bulgarian census held in 2011, there are 561 people declaring themselves ethnic Macedonians in the Blagoevgrad Province of Bulgaria (Pirin Macedonia). The official number of ethnic Macedonians in Bulgaria is 1,654.
* Macedonian Bulgarians are ethnic Bulgarians who self-identify regionally as &quot;Macedonians&quot; (Bulgarian: Mакедонци, &quot;Makedontsi&quot;). They represent the bulk of the population of Bulgarian Macedonia (also known as &quot;Pirin Macedonia&quot;). They number approximately 250,000 in the Blagoevgrad Province where they are mainly situated. There are small Bulgarian-identifying groups in Albania, Greece and the Republic of North Macedonia. In the Republic of North Macedonia, 3,504 people claimed a Bulgarian ethnic identity in the 2021 census.
* Albanians are another major ethnic group in the region. Ethnic Albanians make up the majority in certain northern and western parts of the Republic of North Macedonia, and account for 24.3% of the total population of the Republic of North Macedonia, according to the 2021 census.
* Smaller numbers of Turks, Bosniaks, Roma, Serbs, Aromanians, Megleno-Romanians, Egyptians, Armenians and Jews (Sephardim and Romaniotes) can also be found in Macedonia.

===Religion===


Most present-day inhabitants of the region are Eastern Orthodox Christians, principally of the Bulgarian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Macedonian Orthodox and Serbian Orthodox Churches. Notable Muslim minorities are present among the Albanian, Bulgarian (Pomaks), Macedonian (Torbeš), Bosniak, and Turkish populations.

During the period of classical antiquity, main religion in the region of Macedonia was the Ancient Greek religion. After the Roman conquest of Macedonia, the Ancient Roman religion was also introduced. Many ancient religious monuments, dedicated to Greek and Roman deities are preserved in this region. During the period of Early Christianity, ecclesiastical structure was established in the region of Macedonia, and the see of Thessaloniki became the metropolitan diocese of the Roman province of Macedonia. The archbishop of Thessaloniki also became the senior ecclesiastical primate of the entire Eastern Illyricum, and in 535 his jurisdiction was reduced to the administrative territory of the Diocese of Macedonia. Later it came under the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople.

During the Middle Ages and up to 1767, western and northern regions of Macedonia were under the jurisdiction of the Archbishopric of Ohrid. Northern fringes of the region (areas surrounding Skopje and Tetovo) had temporary jurisdiction under the Serbian Patriarchate of Peć. Both the Archbishopric of Ohrid and the Patriarchate of Peć became abolished and absorbed into the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople in the middle of the 18th century. During the period of Ottoman rule, a partial islamization was also recorded. In spite of that, the Eastern Orthodox Christianity remained the dominant religion of local population.

During the 19th century, religious life in the region was strongly influenced by rising national movements. Several major ethnoreligious disputes arose in the region of Macedonia, main of them being schisms between the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople and the newly created Bulgarian Exarchate (1872), and later between the Serbian Orthodox Church and the newly created Macedonian Orthodox Church (1967).

==History==
===Early Neolithic===
While Macedonia shows signs of human habitation as old as the paleolithic period (among which is the Petralona cave with the oldest European humanoid), the earliest known settlements, such as Nea Nikomedeia in Imathia (today&#x27;s Greek Macedonia), date back 9,000 years. The houses at Nea Nikomedeia were constructed—as were most structures throughout the Neolithic in northern Greece—of wattle and daub on a timber frame. The cultural assemblage includes well-made pottery in simple shapes with occasional decoration in white on a red background, clay female figurines of the &#x27;rod-headed&#x27; type known from Thessaly to the Danube Valley, stone axes and adzes, chert blades, and ornaments of stone including curious &#x27;nose plugs&#x27; of uncertain function. The assemblage of associated objects differs from one house to the next, suggesting some degree of craft specialisation had already been established from the beginning of the site&#x27;s history. The farming economy was based on the cultivation of cereal crops such as wheat and barley and pulses and on the herding of sheep and goats, with some cattle and pigs. Hunting played a relatively minor role in the economy. Surviving from 7000 to 5500 BCE, this Early Neolithic settlement was occupied for over a thousand years.

===Middle Neolithic===
The Middle Neolithic period ( to 4500 BCE) is at present best represented at Servia in the Haliacmon Valley in western Macedonia, where the typical red-on-cream pottery in the Sesklo style emphasises the settlement&#x27;s southern orientation. Pottery of this date has been found at a number of sites in Central and Eastern Macedonia but so far none has been extensively excavated.

===Late Neolithic===

The Late Neolithic period ( to 3500 BCE) is well represented by both excavated and unexcavated sites throughout the region (though in Eastern Macedonia levels of this period are still called Middle Neolithic according to the terminology used in the Balkans). Rapid changes in pottery styles, and the discovery of fragments of pottery showing trade with quite distant regions, indicate that society, economy and technology were all changing rapidly. Among the most important of these changes were the start of copper working, convincingly demonstrated by Renfrew to have been learnt from the cultural groups of Bulgaria and Roumania to the North. Principal excavated settlements of this period include Makryialos and Paliambela near the western shore of the Thermaic gulf, Thermi to the south of Thessaloniki and Sitagroi and Dikili Tas in the Drama plain. Some of these sites were densely occupied and formed large mounds (known to the local inhabitants of the region today as &#x27;toumbas&#x27;). Others were much less densely occupied and spread for as much as a kilometer (Makryialos). Both types are found at the same time in the same districts and it is presumed that differences in social organisation are reflected by these differences in settlement organisation. Some communities were clearly concerned to protect themselves with different kinds of defensive arrangements: ditches at Makryialos and concentric walls at Paliambela. The best preserved buildings were discovered at Dikili Tas, where long timber-framed structures had been organised in rows and some had been decorated with bulls&#x27; skulls fastened to the outside of the walls and plastered over with clay.

Remarkable evidence for cult activity has been found at Promachonas-Topolnica, which straddles the Greek Bulgarian border to the north of Serres. Here a deep pit appeared to have been roofed to make a subterranean room; in it were successive layers of debris including large numbers of figurines, bulls&#x27; skulls, and pottery, including several rare and unusual shapes.

The farming economy of this period continued the practices established at the beginning of the Neolithic, although sheep and goats were less dominant among the animals than they had previously been, and the cultivation of vines (&quot;Vitis vinifera&quot;) is well attested.

Only a few burials have been discovered from the whole of the Neolithic period in northern Greece and no clear pattern can be deduced. Grave offerings, however, seem to have been very limited.

===Ancient Macedonia (500 to 146 BCE)===

In classical times, the region of Macedonia comprised parts of what at the time was known as Macedonia, Illyria and Thrace. Among others, in its lands were located the kingdoms of Paeonia, Dardania, Macedonia and Pelagonia, historical tribes like the Agrianes, and colonies of southern Greek city states. Prior to the Macedonian ascendancy, parts of southern Macedonia were populated by the Bryges, while western, (i. e., Upper) Macedonia, was inhabited by Macedonian and Illyrian tribes. Whilst numerous wars are later recorded between the Illyrian and Macedonian Kingdoms, the Bryges might have co-existed peacefully with the Macedonians. In the time of Classical Greece, Paionia, whose exact boundaries are obscure, originally included the whole Axius River valley and the surrounding areas, in what is now the northern part of the Greek region of Macedonia, most of the Republic of North Macedonia, and a small part of western Bulgaria. By 500 BCE, the ancient kingdom of Macedon was centered somewhere between the southern slopes of Lower Olympus and the lowest reach of the Haliakmon River. Since 512/511 BCE, the kingdom of Macedonia was subject to the Persians, but after the battle of Plataia it regained its independence. Under Philip II and Alexander the Great, the kingdom of Macedonia forcefully expanded, placing the whole of the region of Macedonia under their rule.
Alexander&#x27;s conquests produced a lasting extension of Hellenistic culture and thought across the ancient Near East, but his empire broke up on his death. His generals divided the empire between them, founding their own states and dynasties. The kingdom of Macedon was taken by Cassander, who ruled it until his death in 297 BC. At the time, Macedonian control over the Thracoillyrian states of the region slowly waned, although the kingdom of Macedonia remained the most potent regional power. This period also saw several Celtic invasions into Macedonia. However, the Celts were each time successfully repelled by Cassander, and later Antigonus, leaving little overall influence on the region.

===Roman Macedonia (146 BC–395 AD)===


Macedonian sovereignty in the region was brought to an end at the hands of the rising power of Rome in the 2nd century BC. Philip V of Macedon took his kingdom to war against the Romans in two wars during his reign (221–179 BC). The First Macedonian War (215–205 BC) was fairly successful for the Macedonians but Philip was decisively defeated in the Second Macedonian War in (200–197 BC). Although he survived war with Rome, his successor Perseus of Macedon (reigned 179–168 BC) did not; having taken Macedon into the Third Macedonian War in (171–168 BC), he lost his kingdom when he was defeated. Macedonia was initially divided into four republics subject to Rome before finally being annexed in 146 BC as a Roman province. Around this time, vulgar Latin was introduced in the Balkans by Latin-speaking colonists and military personnel. With the division of the Roman Empire into west and east in 298 AD, Macedonia came under the rule of Rome&#x27;s Byzantine successors. The population of the entire region was, however, depleted by destructive invasions of various Gothic and Hun tribes c. 300 – 5th century AD. Despite this, other parts of the Byzantine empire continued to flourish, in particular some coastal cities such as Thessaloniki became important trade and cultural centres.

===Medieval Macedonia===
Despite the Byzantine empire&#x27;s power, from the beginning of the 6th century the Byzantine dominions were subject to frequent raids by various Slavic tribes which, in the course of centuries, eventually resulted in drastic demographic and cultural changes in the Empire&#x27;s Balkan provinces. Although traditional scholarship attributes these changes to large-scale colonizations by Slavic-speaking groups, it has been proposed that a generalized dissipation of Roman identity might have commenced in the 3rd century, especially among rural provincials who were crippled by harsh taxation and famines. Given this background, penetrations carried by successive waves of relatively small numbers of Slavic warriors and their families might have been capable of assimilating large numbers of indigenes into their cultural model, which was sometimes seen as a more attractive alternative. In this way and in the course of time, great parts of Macedonia came to be controlled by Slavic-speaking communities. Despite numerous attacks on Thessaloniki, the city held out, and Byzantine-Roman culture continued to flourish, although Slavic cultural influence steadily increased.

The Slavic settlements organized themselves along tribal and territorially based lines which were referred to by Byzantine Greek historians as &quot;Sklaviniai&quot;. The Sklaviniai continued to intermittently assault the Byzantine Empire, either independently, or aided by Bulgar or Avar contingents. Around 680 AD a &quot;Bulgar&quot; group (which was largely composed of the descendants of former Roman Christians taken captive by the Avars), led by Khan Kuber (theorized to have belonged to the same clan as the Danubian Bulgarian khan Asparukh), settled in the Pelagonian plain, and launched campaigns to the region of Thessaloniki. When the Empire could spare imperial troops, it attempted to regain control of its lost Balkan territories. By the time of Constans II a significant number of the Slavs of Macedonia were captured and transferred to central Asia Minor where they were forced to recognize the authority of the Byzantine emperor and serve in his ranks. In the late 7th century, Justinian II again organized a massive expedition against the Sklaviniai and Bulgars of Macedonia. Launching from Constantinople, he subdued many Slavic tribes and established the &quot;Theme of Thrace&quot; in the hinterland of the Great City, and pushed on into Thessaloniki. However, on his return he was ambushed by the Slavo-Bulgars of Kuber, losing a great part of his army, booty, and subsequently his throne. Despite these temporary successes, rule in the region was far from stable since not all of the Sklaviniae were pacified, and those that were often rebelled. The emperors rather resorted to withdrawing their defensive line south along the Aegean coast, until the late 8th century. Although a new theme—that of &quot;Macedonia&quot;—was subsequently created, it did not correspond to today&#x27;s geographic territory, but one farther east (centred on Adrianople), carved out of the already existing Thracian and Helladic themes.

There are no Byzantine records of &quot;Sklaviniai&quot; after 836/837 as they were absorbed into the expanding First Bulgarian Empire. Slavic influence in the region strengthened along with the rise of this state, which incorporated parts of the region to its domain in 837. In the early 860s Saints Cyril and Methodius, two Byzantine Greek brothers from Thessaloniki, created the first Slavic Glagolitic alphabet in which the Old Church Slavonic language was first transcribed, and are thus commonly referred to as the apostles of the Slavic world. Their cultural heritage was acquired and developed in medieval Bulgaria, where after 885 the region of Ohrid (present-day Republic of North Macedonia) became a significant ecclesiastical center with the nomination of the Saint Clement of Ohrid for &quot;first archbishop in Bulgarian language&quot; with residence in this region. In conjunction with another disciple of Saints Cyril and Methodius, Saint Naum, Clement created a flourishing Slavic cultural center around Ohrid, where pupils were taught theology in the Old Church Slavonic language and the Glagolitic and Cyrillic script at what is now called Ohrid Literary School. The Bulgarian-Byzantine boundary in the beginning of 10th century passed approximately north of Thessaloniki according to the inscription of Narash. According to the Byzantine author John Kaminiates, at that time the neighbouring settlements around Thessaloniki were inhabited by &quot;Scythians&quot; (Bulgarians) and the Slavic tribes of Drugubites and Sagudates, in addition to Greeks.

At the end of the 10th century, what is now the Republic of North Macedonia became the political and cultural heartland of the First Bulgarian Empire, after Byzantine emperors John I Tzimiskes conquered the eastern part of the Bulgarian state during the Rus&#x27;–Byzantine War of 970–971. The Bulgarian capital Preslav and the Bulgarian Tsar Boris II were captured, and with the deposition of the Bulgarian regalia in the Hagia Sophia, Bulgaria was officially annexed to Byzantium. A new capital was established at Ohrid, which also became the seat of the Bulgarian Patriarchate. A new dynasty, that of the Comitopuli under Tsar Samuil and his successors, continued resistance against the Byzantines for several more decades, before also succumbing in 1018. The western part of Bulgaria including Macedonia was incorporated into the Byzantine Empire as the province of Bulgaria (Theme of Bulgaria) and the Bulgarian Patriarchate was reduced in rank to an Archbishopric.

Intermittent Bulgarian uprisings continued to occur, often with the support of the Serbian princedoms to the north. Any temporary independence that might have been gained was usually crushed swiftly by the Byzantines. It was also marked by periods of war between the Normans and Byzantium. The Normans launched offensives from their lands acquired in southern Italy, and temporarily gained rule over small areas in the northwestern coast.

At the end of the 12th century, some northern parts of Macedonia were temporarily conquered by Stefan Nemanja of Serbia. In the 13th century, following the Fourth Crusade, Macedonia was disputed among Byzantine Greeks, Latin crusaders of the short-lived Kingdom of Thessalonica, and the revived Bulgarian state. Most of southern Macedonia was secured by the Despotate of Epirus and then by the Empire of Nicaea, while the north was ruled by Bulgaria. After 1261 however, all of Macedonia returned to Byzantine rule, where it largely remained until the Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347. Taking advantage of this conflict, the Serb ruler Stefan Dushan expanded his realm and founded the Serbian Empire, which included all of Macedonia, northern and central Greece – excluding Thessaloniki, Athens and the Peloponnese. Dushan&#x27;s empire however broke up shortly after his death in 1355. After his death local rulers in the regions of Macedonia were despot Jovan Uglješa in eastern Macedonia, and kings Vukašin Mrnjavčević and his son Marko Mrnjavčević in western regions of Macedonia.

===Ottoman Macedonia===

Since the middle of the 14th century, the Ottoman threat was looming in the Balkans, as the Ottomans defeated the various Christian principalities, whether Serb, Bulgarian or Greek. After the Ottoman victory in the Battle of Maritsa in 1371, most of Macedonia accepted vassalage to the Ottomans and by the end of the 14th century the Ottoman Empire gradually annexed the region. The final Ottoman capture of Thessalonica (1430) was seen as the prelude to the fall of Constantinople itself. Macedonia remained a part of the Ottoman Empire for nearly 500 years, during which time it gained a substantial Turkish minority. Thessaloniki later become the home of a large Sephardi Jewish population following the expulsions of Jews after 1492 from Spain.

===Birth of nationalism and of Macedonian identities===
Over the centuries Macedonia had become a multicultural region. The historical references mention Greeks, Bulgarians, Turks, Albanians, Gypsies, Jews, Aromanians and Megleno-Romanians. It is often claimed that macédoine, the fruit or vegetable salad, was named after the area&#x27;s very mixed population, as it could be witnessed at the end of the 19th century. From the Middle Ages to the early 20th century the Slavic-speaking population in Macedonia was identified mostly as Bulgarian.

During the period of Bulgarian National Revival many Bulgarians from these regions supported the struggle for creation of Bulgarian cultural educational and religious institutions, including Bulgarian Exarchate. Eventually, in the 20th century, &#x27;Bulgarians&#x27; came to be understood as synonymous with &#x27;Macedonian Slavs&#x27; and, eventually, &#x27;ethnic Macedonians&#x27;. Krste Misirkov, a philologist and publicist, wrote his work &quot;On the Macedonian Matters&quot; (1903), for which he is heralded by Macedonians as one of the founders of the Macedonian nation.

After the revival of Greek, Serbian, and Bulgarian statehood in the 19th century, the Ottoman lands in Europe that became identified as &quot;Macedonia&quot;, were contested by all three governments, leading to the creation in the 1890s and 1900s of rival armed groups who divided their efforts between fighting the Turks and one another. The most important of these was the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization, which organized the so-called Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising in 1903, fighting for an autonomous or independent Macedonian state, and the Greek efforts from 1904 until 1908 (Greek Struggle for Macedonia). Diplomatic intervention by the European powers led to plans for an autonomous Macedonia under Ottoman rule.

The restricted borders of the modern Greek state at its inception in 1830 disappointed the inhabitants of northern Greece (Epirus and Macedonia). Addressing these concerns in 1844, the Greek Prime Minister Kolettis addressed the constitutional assembly in Athens that &quot;the Kingdom of Greece is not Greece; it is only a part, the smallest and poorest, of Greece. The Greek is not only he who inhabits the kingdom, but also he who lives in Ioannina, or Thessaloniki, or Serres, or Odrin&quot; . He mentions cities and islands that were under Ottoman possession as composing the Great Idea (Greek: Μεγάλη Ιδέα, &quot;Megáli Idéa&quot;) which meant the reconstruction of the classical Greek world or the revival of the Byzantine Empire. The important idea here is that for Greece, Macedonia was a region with large Greek populations expecting annexation to the new Greek state.

The 1878 Congress of Berlin changed the Balkan map again. The treaty restored Macedonia and Thrace to the Ottoman Empire. Serbia, Romania and Montenegro were granted full independence, and some territorial expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire. Russia would maintain military advisors in Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia until May 1879. Austria-Hungary was permitted to occupy Bosnia, Herzegovina and the Sanjak of Novi Pazar. The Congress of Berlin also forced Bulgaria, newly given autonomy by the 1878 Treaty of San Stefano, to return over half of its newly gained territory to the Ottoman Empire. This included Macedonia, a large part of which was given to Bulgaria, due to Russian pressure and the presence of significant numbers of Bulgarians and adherents to the Bulgarian Exarchate. The territorial losses dissatisfied Bulgaria; this fuelled the ambitions of many Bulgarian politicians for the following seventy years, who wanted to review the treaty – by peaceful or military means and to reunite all lands which they claimed had a Bulgarian majority. Besides, Serbia was now interested in the Macedonian lands, until then only Greece was Bulgaria&#x27;s main contender, which after the addition of Thessaly to Greece in (1881) was bordering Macedonia. Thus, the Berlin Congress renewed the struggle for Turkey in Europe, including the so-called Macedonia region, rather than setting up a permanent regime. In the following years, all of the neighboring states struggled over Turkey in Europe; they were only kept at bay by their own restraints, the Ottoman Army and the territorial ambitions of the Great Powers in the region.

Serbian policy had a distinct anti-Bulgarian flavor, attempting to prevent the Bulgarian influencing the inhabitants of Macedonia. On the other hand, Bulgaria was using the power of its religious institutions (Bulgarian Exarchate established in 1870) to promote its language and make more people identify with Bulgaria. Greece, in addition, was in an advantageous position for protecting its interests through the influence of Patriarchate of Constantinople which traditionally sponsored Greek-language and Greek-culture schools also in villages with few Greeks. This put the Patriarchate in dispute with the Exarchate, which established schools with Bulgarian education. Indeed, belonging to one or another institution could define a person&#x27;s national identity. Simply, if a person supported the Patriarchate they were regarded as Greek, whereas if they supported the Exarchate they were regarded as Bulgarian. Locally, however, villagers were not always able to express freely their association with one or the other institution as there were numerous armed groups trying to defend and/or expand the territory of each. Some were locally recruited and self-organized while others were sent and armed by the protecting states.

The aim of the adversaries, however, was not primarily to extend their influence over Macedonia but merely to prevent Macedonia succumbing to the influence of the other. This often violent attempt to persuade the people that they belonged to one ethnic group or another pushed some people to reject both. The severe pressure on the peaceful peasants of Macedonia worked against the plans of the Serbians and Bulgarians to make them adopt their ethnic idea and eventually a social divide became apparent. The British Ambassador in Belgrade in 1927 said: &quot;At present the unfortunate Macedonian peasant is between the hammer and the anvil. One day &#x27;comitadjis&#x27; come to his house and demand under threat lodging, food and money and the next day the gendarm hales him off to prison for having given them; the Macedonian is really a peaceable, fairly industrious agriculturist and if the (Serbian) government give him adequate protection, education, freedom from malaria and decent communications, there seems no reason why he should not become just as Serbian in sentiment as he was Bulgarian 10 years ago&quot;. As a result of this game of tug-of-war, the development of a distinct Macedonian national identity was impeded and delayed. Moreover, when the imperialistic plans of the surrounding states made possible the division of Macedonia, some Macedonian intellectuals such as Misirkov mentioned the necessity of creating a Macedonian national identity which would distinguish the Macedonian Slavs from Bulgarians, Serbians or Greeks.

Baptizing Macedonian Slavs as Serbian or Bulgarian aimed therefore to justify these countries&#x27; territorial claims over Macedonia. The Greek side, with the assistance of the Patriarchate that was responsible for the schools, could more easily maintain control, because they were spreading Greek identity. For the very same reason the Bulgarians, when preparing the Exarchate&#x27;s government (1871) included Macedonians in the assembly as &quot;brothers&quot; to prevent any ethnic diversification. On the other hand, the Serbs, unable to establish Serbian-speaking schools, used propaganda. Their main concern was to prevent the Slavic-speaking Macedonians from acquiring Bulgarian identity through concentrating on the myth of the ancient origins of the Macedonians and simultaneously by the classification of Bulgarians as Tatars and not as Slavs, emphasizing their &#x27;Macedonian&#x27; characteristics as an intermediate stage between Serbs and Bulgarians. To sum up the Serbian propaganda attempted to inspire the Macedonians with a separate ethnic identity to diminish the Bulgarian influence. This choice was the &#x27;Macedonian ethnicity&#x27;. The Bulgarians never accepted an ethnic diversity from the Slav Macedonians, giving geographic meaning to the term. In 1893 they established the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (VMRO) aiming to confront the Serbian and Greek action in Macedonia. VMRO hoped to answer the Macedonian question through a revolutionary movement, and so they instigated the Ilinden Uprising (1903) to release some Ottoman territory. Bulgaria used this to internationalize the Macedonian question. Ilinden changed Greece&#x27;s stance which decided to take Para-military action. In order to protect the Greek Macedonians and Greek interests, Greece sent officers to train guerrillas and organize militias (Macedonian Struggle), known as &quot;makedonomahi&quot; (Macedonian fighters), essentially to fight the Bulgarians. After that it was obvious that the Macedonian question could be answered only with a war.

The rise of the Albanian and the Turkish nationalism after 1908, however, prompted Greece, Serbia and Bulgaria to bury their differences with regard to Macedonia and to form a joint coalition against the Ottoman Empire in 1912. Disregarding public opinion in Bulgaria, which was in support of the establishment of an autonomous Macedonian province under a Christian governor, the Bulgarian government entered a pre-war treaty with Serbia which divided the region into two parts. The part of Macedonia west and north of the line of partition was contested by both Serbia and Bulgaria and was subject to the arbitration of the Russian Tsar after the war. Serbia formally renounced any claims to the part of Macedonia south and east of the line, which was declared to be within the Bulgarian sphere of interest. The pre-treaty between Greece and Bulgaria, however, did not include any agreement on the division of the conquered territories – evidently both countries hoped to occupy as much territory as possible having their sights primarily set on Thessaloniki.

In the First Balkan War, Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece and Montenegro occupied almost all Ottoman-held territories in Europe. Bulgaria bore the brunt of the war fighting on the Thracian front against the main Ottoman forces. Both her war expenditures and casualties in the First Balkan War were higher than those of Serbia, Greece and Montenegro combined. Macedonia itself was occupied by Greek, Serbian and Bulgarian forces. The Ottoman Empire in the Treaty of London in May 1913 assigned the whole of Macedonia to the Balkan League, without, specifying the division of the region, to promote problems between the allies. Dissatisfied with the creation of an autonomous Albanian state, which denied her access to the Adriatic, Serbia asked for the suspension of the pre-war division treaty and demanded from Bulgaria greater territorial concessions in Macedonia. Later in May the same year, Greece and Serbia signed a secret treaty in Thessaloniki stipulating the division of Macedonia according to the existing lines of control. Both Serbia and Greece, as well as Bulgaria, started to prepare for a final war of partition.
In June 1913, Bulgarian Tsar Ferdinand, without consulting the government, and without any declaration of war, ordered Bulgarian troops to attack the Greek and Serbian troops in Macedonia, initiating the Second Balkan War. The Bulgarian army was in full retreat in all fronts. The Serbian army chose to stop its operations when achieved all its territorial goals and only then the Bulgarian army took a breath. During the last two days the Bulgarians managed to achieve a defensive victory against the advancing Greek army in the Kresna Gorge. However at the same time the Romanian army crossed the undefended northern border and easily advanced towards Sofia. Romania interfered in the war, in order to satisfy its territorial claims against Bulgaria. The Ottoman Empire also interfered, easily reassuming control of Eastern Thrace with Edirne. The Second Balkan War, also known as Inter-Ally War, left Bulgaria only with the Struma valley and a small part of Thrace with minor ports at the Aegean sea. Vardar Macedonia was incorporated into Serbia and thereafter referred to as South Serbia. Southern (Aegean) Macedonia was incorporated into Greece and thereafter was referred to as northern Greece. The region suffered heavily during the Second Balkan War. During its advance at the end of June, the Greek army set fire to the Bulgarian quarter of the town of Kilkis and over 160 villages around Kilkis and Serres driving some 50,000 refugees into Bulgaria proper. The Bulgarian army retaliated by burning the Greek quarter of Serres and by arming Muslims from the region of Drama which led to a massacre of Greek civilians.

In September 1915, the Greek government authorized the landing of the troops in Thessaloniki. In 1916 the pro-German King of Greece agreed with the Germans to allow military forces of the Central Powers to enter Greek Macedonia to attack Bulgarian forces in Thessaloniki. As a result, Bulgarian troops occupied the eastern part of Greek Macedonia, including the port of Kavala. The region was, however, restored to Greece following the victory of the Allies in 1918. After the destruction of the Greek Army in Asia Minor in 1922 Greece and Turkey exchanged most of Macedonia&#x27;s Turkish minority and the Greek inhabitants of Thrace and Anatolia, as a result of which Aegean Macedonia experienced a large addition to its population and became overwhelmingly Greek in ethnic composition. Serbian-ruled Macedonia was incorporated into the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia) in 1918. Yugoslav Macedonia was subsequently subjected to an intense process of &quot;Serbianization&quot; during the 1920s and 1930s.

During World War II the boundaries of the region shifted yet again. When the German forces occupied the area, most of Yugoslav Macedonia and part of Aegean Macedonia were transferred for administration to Bulgaria. During the Bulgarian administration of Eastern Greek Macedonia, some 100,000 Bulgarian refugees from the region were resettled there and perhaps as many Greeks were deported or fled to other parts of Greece. Western Aegean Macedonia was occupied by Italy, with the western parts of Yugoslav Macedonia being annexed to Italian-occupied Albania. The remainder of Greek Macedonia (including all of the coast) was occupied by Nazi Germany. One of the worst episodes of the Holocaust happened here when 60,000 Jews from Thessaloniki were deported to extermination camps in occupied Poland. Only a few thousand survived.

Macedonia was liberated in 1944, when the Red Army&#x27;s advance in the Balkan Peninsula forced the German forces to retreat. The pre-war borders were restored under U.S. and British pressure because the Bulgarian government was insisting to keep its military units on Greek soil. The Bulgarian Macedonia returned fairly rapidly to normality, but the Bulgarian patriots in Yugoslav Macedonia underwent a process of ethnic cleansing by the Belgrade authorities, and Greek Macedonia was ravaged by the Greek Civil War, which broke out in December 1944 and did not end until October 1949.

After this civil war, a large number of former ELAS fighters who took refuge in communist Bulgaria and Yugoslavia and described themselves as &quot;ethnic Macedonians&quot; were prohibited from reestablishing to their former estates by the Greek authorities. Most of them were accused in Greece for crimes committed during the period of the German occupation.

===Macedonia in the Balkan Wars, World War I and II===
====Balkan Wars====

The imminent collapse of the Ottoman Empire was welcomed by the Balkan states, as it promised to restore their European territory. The Young Turk Revolution of 1908 proved a nationalistic movement thwarting the peoples&#x27; expectations of the empire&#x27;s modernization and hastened the end of the Ottoman occupation of the Balkans. To this end, an alliance was struck among the Balkan states in Spring 1913. The First Balkan War, which lasted six weeks, commenced in August 1912, when Montenegro declared war on the Ottoman Empire, whose forces ultimately engaged four different wars in Thrace, Macedonia, Northern and Southern Albania and Kosovo. The Macedonian campaign was fought in atrocious conditions. The retreat of the Ottoman army from Macedonia succeeded the desperate effort of the Greek and Bulgarian forces to reach the city of Thessalonica, the &quot;single prize of the first Balkan War&quot; for whose status no prior agreements were done. In this case possession would be equal to acquisition. The Greek forces entered the city first liberating officially, a progress only positive for them. Glenny says: &quot;for the Greeks it was a good war&quot;.

The first Balkan War managed to liberate Balkans from Turks and settled the major issues except Macedonia. In the spring 1913 the Serbs and Greeks begun the &#x27;Serbianization&#x27; and the &#x27;Hellenization&#x27; of the parts in Macedonia they already controlled, while Bulgarians faced some difficulties against the Jews and the Turkish populations. Moreover, the possession of Thessalonica was a living dream for the Bulgarians that were preparing for a new war. For this, the Bulgarian troops had a secret order in June 1913 to launch surprise attacks on the Serbs. Greece and Serbia signed a previous bilateral defensive agreement (May 1913). Consequently, Bulgaria decided to attack Greece and Serbia. After some initial gains the Bulgarians were forced to retreat back to Bulgaria proper and lose nearly all of the land they had conquered during the first war.

The Treaty of Bucharest (August 1913) took off most of the Bulgarian conquests of the previous years. A large part of Macedonia became southern Serbia, including the territory of what today is the Republic of North Macedonia, and southern Macedonia became northern Greece. Greece almost doubled its territory and population size and its northern frontiers remain today, more or less the same since the Balkan Wars. However, when Serbia acquired &#x27;Vardarska Banovina&#x27; (the present-day Republic of North Macedonia), it launched having expansionist views aiming to descend to the Aegean, with Thessalonica as the highest ambition. However, Greece after the population exchange with Bulgaria, soon after its victory in the Balkan wars, managed to give national homogeneity in the Aegean and any remaining Slavic-speakers were absorbed.

Many volunteers from Macedonia joined Bulgarian army and participated in the battles against Bulgarian enemies in these wars—on the strength of the Macedonian-Adrianopolitan Volunteer Corps and other units.

====World War I====

After World War I Macedonian Campaign the status quo of Macedonia remained the same. The establishment of the &#x27;Kingdom of Serbians, Croats and Slovenes&#x27; in 1918, which in 1929 was renamed &#x27;Yugoslavia&#x27; (South Slavia) predicted no special regime for Skopje neither recognized any Macedonian national identity. In fact, the claims to Macedonian identity remained silent at a propaganda level because, eventually, North Macedonia had been a Serbian conquest.

The situation in Serbian Macedonia changed after the Communist Revolution in Russia (1918–1919). According to Sfetas, Comintern was handling Macedonia as a matter of tactics, depending on the political circumstances. In the early 1920s it supported the position for a single and independent Macedonia in a Balkan Soviet Democracy. Actually, the Soviets desired a common front of the Bulgarian communist agriculturists and the Bulgarian-Macedonian societies to destabilize the Balkan Peninsula. The Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO), under the protection of Comintern, promoted the idea of an independent Macedonia in a Federation of Balkan states, unifying all Macedonians. However, the possible participation of Bulgaria in a new war, on the Axis side, ended the Soviet support some years later.

====World War II====

Bulgaria joined the Axis powers in 1941, when German troops prepared to invade Greece from Romania reached the Bulgarian borders and demanded permission to pass through Bulgarian territory. Threatened by direct military confrontation, Tsar Boris III had no choice but to join the Tripartite pact, which officially happened on 1 March 1941. There was little popular opposition, since the Soviet Union was in a non-aggression pact with Germany.

On 6 April 1941, despite having officially joined the Axis Powers, the Bulgarian government maintained a course of military passivity during the initial stages of the invasion of Yugoslavia and the Battle of Greece. As German, Italian, and Hungarian troops crushed Yugoslavia and Greece, the Bulgarians remained on the sidelines. The Yugoslav government surrendered on 17 April. The Greek government was to hold out until 30 April. On 20 April, the period of Bulgarian passivity ended. The Bulgarian Army entered the Aegean region. The goal was to gain an Aegean Sea outlet in Thrace and Eastern Macedonia and much of eastern Serbia. The so-called Vardar Banovina was divided between Bulgaria and Italians which occupied West Macedonia. The Bulgarian occupation of Macedonia was technically viewed as interim administration in anticipation of a conclusive internationally recognized settlement of the legal status of the so-called &quot;New Lands&quot; after the end of the Second World War. Bulgarian administration greatly contributed to economic rebirth of the region – the poorest one in the former Kingdom of Yugoslavia – through introducing measures such as allotment of arable lands to local landless peasantry and by establishing plenty of new elementary and secondary schools. Local population with Bulgarian ethnic origins was given full Bulgarian citizenship. In general, Bulgarians themselves regarded the incorporation of former Yugoslav Vardar Banovina as a way to achieve national unity. Two new oblasts (provinces) were formed and most public vacancies were filled up with representatives of the local population.

During the German occupation of Greece (1941–1944), the Greek Communist Party-KKE was the main resistance factor with its military branch EAM-ELAS (National Liberation Front). Although many members of EAM were Slavic-speaking, they had either Bulgarian, Greek or distinct Macedonian conscience. To take advantage of the situation KKE established SNOF with the cooperation of the Yugoslav leader Tito, who was ambitious enough to make plans for Greek Macedonia. For this he established the Anti-Fascistic Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia (ASNOM) giving an actual liberating character to the whole region of Macedonia. Besides, KKE was very positive to the option of a greater Macedonia, including the Greek region, since it realized that a victory in the Greek Civil War was utopic. Later EAM and SNOF disagreed in issues of policy and they finally crashed and the latter was expelled from Greece (1944).

====Post–World War II====
The end of the War did not bring peace to Greece and a strenuous civil war between the Government forces and EAM broke out with about 50,000 casualties for both sides. The defeat of the Communists in 1949 forced their Slav-speaking members to either leave Greece or fully adopt Greek language and surnames. The Slav minorities were discriminated against, and not even recognised as a minority. Since 1923 the only internationally recognized minority in Greece are the Muslims in Western Thrace.

Yugoslav Macedonia was the only region where Yugoslav communist leader Josip Broz Tito had not developed a Partisan movement because of the Bulgarian occupation of a large part of that area. To improve the situation, in 1943 the Communist Party of Macedonia was established in Tetovo with the prospect that it would support the resistance against the Axis. In the meantime, the Bulgarians&#x27; violent repression led to loss of moral support from the civilian population. By the end of the war &quot;a Macedonian national consciousness hardly existed beyond a general conviction, gained from bitter experience, that rule from Sofia was as unpalatable as that from Belgrade. But if there were no Macedonian nation there was a Communist Party of Macedonia, around which the People&#x27;s Republic of Macedonia was built&quot;.

Tito thus separated Yugoslav Macedonia from Serbia after the war. It became a republic of the new federal Yugoslavia (as the Socialist Republic of Macedonia) in 1946, with its capital at Skopje. Tito also promoted the concept of a separate Macedonian nation, as a means of severing the ties of the Slav population of Yugoslav Macedonia with Bulgaria. A separate Macedonian Orthodox Church was established, splitting off from the Serbian Orthodox Church. The Communist Party sought to deter pro-Bulgarian sentiment, which was punished severely.

Across the border in Greece, Slavophones were seen as a potentially disloyal &quot;fifth column&quot; within the Greek state by both the US and Greece, and their existence as a minority was officially denied. Greeks were resettled in the region many of whom emigrated (especially to Australia) along with many Greek-speaking natives, because of the hard economic conditions after the Second World War and the Greek Civil War. Although there was some liberalization between 1959 and 1967, the Greek military dictatorship re-imposed harsh restrictions. The situation gradually eased after Greece&#x27;s return to democracy, although even as recently as the 1990s Greece has been criticised by international human rights activists for &quot;harassing&quot; Macedonian Slav political activists, who, nonetheless, are free to maintain their own political party (Rainbow). Elsewhere in Greek Macedonia, economic development after the war was brisk and the area rapidly became the most prosperous part of the region. The coast was heavily developed for tourism, particularly on the Halkidiki peninsula.

Under Georgi Dimitrov, Soviet loyalist and head of the Comintern, Bulgaria initially accepted the existence of a distinctive Macedonian identity. It had been agreed that Pirin Macedonia would join Yugoslav Macedonia and for this reason the population was forced to declare itself &quot;Macedonian&quot; in the 1946 census. This caused resentment and many people were imprisoned or interned in rural areas outside Pirin Macedonia. After Tito&#x27;s split from the Soviet bloc this position was abandoned and the existence of a Macedonian ethnicity or language was denied.

==See also==

* Macedonia (terminology)
* Demographic history of Macedonia
* Macedonia (Greece)
* Republic of North Macedonia
* Blagoevgrad Province
* History of Albania
* History of the Balkans
* History of Bulgaria
* History of Greece
* History of Greek Macedonia
* History of the Republic of North Macedonia
* History of Serbia
* Macedonian nationalism
* Irredentism
* List of homonymous states and regions

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="0" end="9" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="19" end="31" title="geographical" label="geographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="36" end="46" title="historical" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="47" end="53" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="61" end="77" title="Balkan Peninsula" label="Balkan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="81" end="97" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="321" end="336" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="353" end="359" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="364" end="372" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="395" end="402" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="404" end="410" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="416" end="422" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="493" end="508" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="681" end="699" title="Kingdom of Macedon" label="Kingdom of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="820" end="831" title="proper noun" label="proper noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130408" start="1020" end="1029" title="Macedonia (terminology)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1187" end="1206" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1231" end="1240" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="1367" end="1376" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1431" end="1444" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q313889" start="1503" end="1514" title="Perdiccas I" label="Perdiccas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409210" start="1574" end="1581" title="Emathia" label="Emathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896675" start="1583" end="1589" title="Pieria (regional unit)" label="Pieria"/>
<link wikidata="Q378855" start="1591" end="1599" title="Bottiaea" label="Bottiaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q639861" start="1601" end="1609" title="Mygdonia" label="Mygdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346328" start="1611" end="1618" title="Eordaea" label="Eordaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12873422" start="1623" end="1630" title="Almopia" label="Almopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297086" start="1645" end="1656" title="Alexander I of Macedon" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542709" start="1711" end="1720" title="Crestonia" label="Crestonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420241" start="1722" end="1730" title="Bisaltia" label="Bisaltia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329498" start="1759" end="1768" title="Elimiotis" label="Elimiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183431" start="1770" end="1777" title="Orestis (region)" label="Orestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247667" start="1782" end="1791" title="Lynkestis" label="Lynkestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="1806" end="1815" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138800" start="1864" end="1873" title="Pelagonia" label="Pelagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="1878" end="1896" title="Paeonia (kingdom)" label="Macedonian Paeonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961944" start="1911" end="1918" title="Sintike" label="Sintike"/>
<link wikidata="Q283571" start="1920" end="1929" title="Odomantis" label="Odomantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719711" start="1934" end="1940" title="Edonis (region)" label="Edonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="1961" end="1971" title="Chalkidike" label="Chalkidike"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="2327" end="2354" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Roman province of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="2606" end="2613" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404016" start="2691" end="2711" title="Diocese of Macedonia" label="Diocese of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2793" end="2798" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q804311" start="2818" end="2836" title="Blagoevgrad province" label="southwest Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811611" start="2927" end="2963" title="Theme of Macedonia" label="province under the name of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491574" start="2995" end="3010" title="Theme of Thrace" label="Theme of Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="3064" end="3069" title="Theme (Byzantine district)" label="thema"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="3104" end="3110" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q332531" start="3136" end="3154" title="Macedonian dynasty" label="Macedonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="3338" end="3360" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003703" start="3460" end="3477" title="Bulgaria (theme)" label="Themе of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="3554" end="3562" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="3830" end="3843" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201582" start="3849" end="3855" title="Pindus" label="Pindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q391195" start="3870" end="3874" title="Šar Mountains" label="Shar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010089" start="3879" end="3886" title="Osogovo" label="Osogovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="3900" end="3908" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193904" start="3953" end="3959" title="Nestos (river)" label="Nestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="3969" end="3979" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401272" start="4342" end="4359" title="Macedonians (Greek)" label="Macedonian Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="4610" end="4625" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4756" end="4766" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q679524" start="4768" end="4781" title="Pontians" label="Pontic Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="4787" end="4807" title="Eastern Thrace" label="East Thracian Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="4854" end="4899" title="population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="population exchange between Greece and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q63884107" start="4931" end="4946" title="Asia Minor Greeks" label="Anatolian Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="5470" end="5488" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Ethnic Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="5694" end="5706" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="5707" end="5719" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="5955" end="5970" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="6020" end="6047" title="North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667279" start="6164" end="6186" title="International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights" label="Greek Helsinki Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991432" start="6293" end="6327" title="Slavic-speakers of Greek Macedonia" label="Slavic-speakers of Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35952" start="6444" end="6459" title="Slavic language (Greece)" label="Slavic-speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q165408" start="6475" end="6489" title="West Macedonia" label="West Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35952" start="6548" end="6563" title="Slavic dialects of Greece" label="Slavic dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="6624" end="6634" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="6712" end="6721" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991432" start="7237" end="7254" title="Slavic speaking minority in northern Greece" label="Slavophone Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410450" start="7467" end="7497" title="Macedonians in Albania" label="Macedonian minority in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15188520" start="7589" end="7595" title="Pustec" label="Prespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469062" start="7607" end="7616" title="Gollobordë" label="Golo Brdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="7635" end="7661" title="Eastern Orthodox Christian" label="Eastern Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q804311" start="7954" end="7974" title="Blagoevgrad Province" label="Blagoevgrad Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275099" start="7988" end="8003" title="Pirin Macedonia" label="Pirin Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397587" start="8029" end="8059" title="ethnic Macedonians in Bulgaria" label="ethnic Macedonians in Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886313" start="8072" end="8093" title="Macedonian Bulgarians" label="Macedonian Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275099" start="8265" end="8284" title="Bulgarian Macedonia" label="Bulgarian Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275099" start="8306" end="8321" title="Pirin Macedonia" label="Pirin Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804311" start="8371" end="8391" title="Blagoevgrad Province" label="Blagoevgrad Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="8632" end="8641" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="8933" end="8938" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="8940" end="8948" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="8950" end="8954" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="8956" end="8961" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="8963" end="8973" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287652" start="8975" end="8992" title="Megleno-Romanians" label="Megleno-Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q282427" start="8994" end="9003" title="Egyptians (Balkans)" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="9005" end="9014" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="9019" end="9023" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="9025" end="9034" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265699" start="9039" end="9049" title="Romaniotes" label="Romaniotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9148" end="9164" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="9165" end="9175" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q242758" start="9196" end="9214" title="Bulgarian Orthodox" label="Bulgarian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q59778" start="9216" end="9230" title="Church of Greece" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q906685" start="9232" end="9251" title="Macedonian Orthodox Church" label="Macedonian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="9256" end="9272" title="Serbian Orthodox" label="Serbian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="9291" end="9297" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117056" start="9341" end="9350" title="Bulgarian Muslims" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38915" start="9352" end="9358" title="Pomaks" label="Pomaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262476" start="9361" end="9371" title="Macedonian Muslims" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262476" start="9373" end="9379" title="Torbeš" label="Torbeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="9382" end="9389" title="Bosniak" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="9395" end="9402" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="9438" end="9457" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="9508" end="9530" title="Ancient Greek religion" label="Ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="9575" end="9597" title="Ancient Roman religion" label="Ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="9741" end="9759" title="Early Christianity" label="Early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214523" start="9838" end="9857" title="Metropolis of Thessaloniki" label="see of Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q427961" start="9869" end="9889" title="metropolitan diocese" label="metropolitan diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="9915" end="9924" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214523" start="9930" end="9956" title="Metropolis of Thessaloniki" label="archbishop of Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q42173" start="10017" end="10034" title="Eastern Illyricum" label="Eastern Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404016" start="10115" end="10135" title="Diocese of Macedonia" label="Diocese of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="10181" end="10219" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q134168" start="10338" end="10360" title="Archbishopric of Ohrid" label="Archbishopric of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="10412" end="10418" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q157024" start="10423" end="10429" title="Tetovo" label="Tetovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623761" start="10468" end="10495" title="Serbian Patriarchate of Peć" label="Serbian Patriarchate of Peć"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="10596" end="10634" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451496" start="10691" end="10698" title="Ottoman Bulgaria" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="10715" end="10727" title="islamization" label="islamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="10769" end="10798" title="Eastern Orthodox Christianity" label="Eastern Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="10974" end="10988" title="ethnoreligious" label="ethnoreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="11071" end="11109" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042945" start="11132" end="11151" title="Bulgarian Exarchate" label="Bulgarian Exarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="11182" end="11205" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q906685" start="11228" end="11254" title="Macedonian Orthodox Church" label="Macedonian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="11360" end="11371" title="paleolithic" label="paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302464" start="11399" end="11413" title="Petralona cave" label="Petralona cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315475" start="11490" end="11504" title="Nea Nikomedeia" label="Nea Nikomedeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207840" start="11508" end="11515" title="Imathia" label="Imathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368940" start="11688" end="11703" title="wattle and daub" label="wattle and daub"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="11916" end="11924" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="11932" end="11945" title="Danube Valley" label="Danube Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="12360" end="12366" title="pulse (legume)" label="pulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711138" start="12694" end="12700" title="Servia, Greece" label="Servia"/>
<link wikidata="Q640366" start="12708" end="12717" title="Haliacmon" label="Haliacmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38281192" start="12793" end="12799" title="Sesklo" label="Sesklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="13817" end="13829" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405927" start="13834" end="13842" title="Sitagroi" label="Sitagroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607947" start="14761" end="14772" title="Promachonas" label="Promachonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q206957" start="14843" end="14849" title="Serres" label="Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q30046" start="15314" end="15328" title="Vitis vinifera" label="Vitis vinifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724065" start="15982" end="15988" title="Bryges" label="Bryges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779996" start="16013" end="16018" title="Upper Macedonia" label="Upper"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="16063" end="16078" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="16247" end="16263" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="16265" end="16272" title="Paionia" label="Paionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189596" start="16340" end="16345" title="Vardar" label="Axius"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="16442" end="16451" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="16465" end="16492" title="North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="16567" end="16574" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640713" start="16736" end="16743" title="Achaemenid Macedonia" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="16751" end="16759" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q204636" start="16775" end="16792" title="Battle of Plataea" label="battle of Plataia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="17083" end="17092" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q207183" start="17255" end="17264" title="Cassander" label="Cassander"/>
<link wikidata="Q830912" start="17547" end="17552" title="Gallic invasion of the Balkans" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="17714" end="17721" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q237248" start="17837" end="17856" title="Philip V of Macedon" label="Philip V of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75626" start="17947" end="17967" title="First Macedonian War" label="First Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q75665" start="18065" end="18086" title="Second Macedonian War" label="Second Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207363" start="18154" end="18172" title="Perseus of Macedon" label="Perseus of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76118" start="18233" end="18253" title="Third Macedonian War" label="Third Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="18425" end="18439" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="18579" end="18591" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="18667" end="18676" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="18784" end="18790" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="18795" end="18805" title="Huns" label="Hun tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="18946" end="18958" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="19177" end="19190" title="Early Slavs" label="Slavic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="20481" end="20487" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="20491" end="20495" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q552042" start="20665" end="20670" title="Kuber" label="Kuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q858431" start="20711" end="20715" title="Dulo clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189450" start="20747" end="20755" title="Asparukh" label="Asparukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138800" start="20773" end="20789" title="Pelagonia" label="Pelagonian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41613" start="20968" end="20979" title="Constans II" label="Constans II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42021" start="21203" end="21215" title="Justinian II" label="Justinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="22261" end="22283" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="22443" end="22469" title="Saints Cyril and Methodius" label="Saints Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="22475" end="22490" title="Byzantine Greek" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="22544" end="22563" title="Glagolitic alphabet" label="Glagolitic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="22577" end="22596" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="22803" end="22808" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q158504" start="22927" end="22943" title="Clement of Ohrid" label="Clement of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q350061" start="23098" end="23108" title="Saint Naum" label="Saint Naum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="23218" end="23237" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="23270" end="23285" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q524741" start="23308" end="23329" title="Ohrid Literary School" label="Ohrid Literary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q121550" start="23514" end="23529" title="John Kaminiates" label="John Kaminiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281882" start="23671" end="23681" title="Drugubites" label="Drugubites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293363" start="23686" end="23695" title="Sagudates" label="Sagudates"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="23848" end="23870" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41603" start="23897" end="23913" title="John I Tzimiskes" label="John I Tzimiskes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991800" start="23975" end="24009" title="Rus&amp;#x27;–Byzantine War (970–971)" label="Rus&amp;#x27;–Byzantine War of 970–971"/>
<link wikidata="Q243616" start="24033" end="24040" title="Preslav" label="Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="24144" end="24156" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242758" start="24278" end="24300" title="Bulgarian Patriarchate" label="Bulgarian Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348896" start="24329" end="24339" title="Comitopuli" label="Comitopuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q270740" start="24351" end="24357" title="Samuil of Bulgaria" label="Samuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817295" start="24460" end="24470" title="Byzantine conquest of Bulgaria" label="succumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003703" start="24601" end="24618" title="Theme of Bulgaria" label="Theme of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134168" start="24677" end="24690" title="Bulgarian Archbishopric of Ohrid" label="Archbishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q327150" start="24933" end="24947" title="Byzantine-Norman Wars" label="periods of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="24960" end="24967" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q298612" start="25228" end="25242" title="Stefan Nemanja" label="Stefan Nemanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311990" start="25246" end="25252" title="Grand Principality of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="25289" end="25303" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="25334" end="25350" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="25352" end="25357" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q325461" start="25387" end="25410" title="Kingdom of Thessalonica" label="Kingdom of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q420759" start="25420" end="25443" title="Second Bulgarian Empire" label="revived Bulgarian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="25491" end="25510" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Despotate of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="25527" end="25543" title="Empire of Nicaea" label="Empire of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658255" start="25685" end="25717" title="Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347" label="Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="25769" end="25782" title="Stefan Dushan" label="Stefan Dushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="25818" end="25832" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q700889" start="26089" end="26102" title="Jovan Uglješa" label="Jovan Uglješa"/>
<link wikidata="Q380071" start="26135" end="26154" title="Vukašin Mrnjavčević" label="Vukašin Mrnjavčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q316462" start="26167" end="26184" title="Marko Mrnjavčević" label="Marko Mrnjavčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q939570" start="26459" end="26476" title="Battle of Maritsa" label="Battle of Maritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="26652" end="26664" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="26711" end="26725" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="26767" end="26781" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="26846" end="26853" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="26910" end="26925" title="Sephardi" label="Sephardi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="26986" end="26991" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277967" start="27260" end="27269" title="Macedonia (food)" label="macédoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29202024" start="27464" end="27503" title="Slavic speakers in Ottoman Macedonia" label="Slavic-speaking population in Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004004" start="27562" end="27588" title="Bulgarian National Revival" label="Bulgarian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042945" start="27732" end="27751" title="Bulgarian Exarchate" label="Bulgarian Exarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586864" start="27928" end="27942" title="Krste Misirkov" label="Krste Misirkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280226" start="27994" end="28019" title="On the Macedonian Matters" label="On the Macedonian Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="28062" end="28073" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="28499" end="28545" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145682" start="28577" end="28607" title="Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising" label="Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277369" start="28721" end="28749" title="Greek Struggle for Macedonia" label="Greek Struggle for Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="29139" end="29156" title="Kingdom of Greece (Wittelsbach)" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="29442" end="29452" title="Great Idea" label="Great Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="29537" end="29558" title="Ancient Greece" label="classical Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="29581" end="29597" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="29750" end="29768" title="Treaty of Berlin, 1878" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194113" start="30251" end="30272" title="Treaty of San Stefano" label="Treaty of San Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042945" start="30516" end="30535" title="Bulgarian Exarchate" label="Bulgarian Exarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29202024" start="34802" end="34829" title="Slavic speakers in Ottoman Macedonia" label="Slavic-speaking Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="35473" end="35519" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255948" start="35614" end="35633" title="Macedonian question" label="Macedonian question"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145682" start="35695" end="35711" title="Ilinden–Preobrazhenie Uprising" label="Ilinden Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277369" start="36026" end="36045" title="Macedonian Struggle" label="Macedonian Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="36437" end="36451" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="37302" end="37318" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q584617" start="37742" end="37758" title="Treaty of London (1913)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q239225" start="37810" end="37823" title="Balkan League" label="Balkan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="38008" end="38016" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="38444" end="38453" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="38619" end="38636" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110967" start="38945" end="38957" title="Kresna Gorge" label="Kresna Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="39069" end="39074" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="39172" end="39186" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="39253" end="39259" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015968" start="39778" end="39784" title="Kilkis" label="Kilkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206957" start="39945" end="39951" title="Serres, Greece" label="Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="39993" end="39998" title="Drama" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="40014" end="40022" title="massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q187352" start="40414" end="40420" title="Kavala" label="Kavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="40495" end="40501" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="40683" end="40691" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="40883" end="40920" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="40932" end="40953" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289594" start="41041" end="41055" title="Serbianization" label="Serbianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41098" end="41110" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="41555" end="41560" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="41728" end="41740" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="41771" end="41784" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="41851" end="41870" title="extermination camps" label="extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="41883" end="41889" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="42423" end="42438" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="42960" end="42990" title="dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="collapse of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="43082" end="43103" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="43792" end="43804" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289594" start="44283" end="44297" title="Serbianization" label="Serbianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="44318" end="44331" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="45249" end="45264" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="northern Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q407408" start="45983" end="46024" title="Macedonian-Adrianopolitan Volunteer Corps" label="Macedonian-Adrianopolitan Volunteer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="46082" end="46101" title="Macedonian front (World War I)" label="Macedonian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="47038" end="47084" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="47303" end="47307" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="47400" end="47411" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="47615" end="47629" title="Tsar Boris III" label="Tsar Boris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="47660" end="47675" title="Tripartite pact" label="Tripartite pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="47991" end="48013" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="48022" end="48038" title="Battle of Greece" label="Battle of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="48380" end="48390" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q939101" start="48472" end="48487" title="Vardar Banovina" label="Vardar Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="48927" end="48948" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939101" start="49275" end="49290" title="Vardar Banovina" label="Vardar Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192254" start="49593" end="49596" title="Ethniko Apeleftherotiko Metopo" label="EAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="49597" end="49601" title="Ethnikos Laikos Apeleftherotikos Stratos" label="ELAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399114" start="49801" end="49805" title="SNOF" label="SNOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="50970" end="50985" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q157024" start="51176" end="51182" title="Tetovo" label="Tetovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="51913" end="51919" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="52024" end="52061" title="Macedonian Slav" label="Slav population of Yugoslav Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q906685" start="52088" end="52114" title="Macedonian Orthodox Church" label="Macedonian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="52155" end="52178" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991432" start="52300" end="52311" title="Slavic speaking minority in northern Greece" label="Slavophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="52354" end="52366" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="52554" end="52563" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397277" start="53128" end="53135" title="Rainbow (political party)" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="53346" end="53355" title="Halkidiki" label="Halkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q155074" start="53374" end="53389" title="Georgi Dimitrov" label="Georgi Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="53391" end="53397" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="53423" end="53432" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275099" start="53538" end="53553" title="Pirin Macedonia" label="Pirin Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="53831" end="53842" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130408" start="53956" end="53979" title="Macedonia (terminology)" label="Macedonia (terminology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255948" start="53982" end="54014" title="Demographic history of Macedonia" label="Demographic history of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="54017" end="54035" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia (Greece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="54038" end="54065" title="North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804311" start="54068" end="54088" title="Blagoevgrad Province" label="Blagoevgrad Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q213833" start="54091" end="54109" title="History of Albania" label="History of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266338" start="54112" end="54134" title="History of the Balkans" label="History of the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800" start="54137" end="54156" title="History of Bulgaria" label="History of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794" start="54159" end="54176" title="History of Greece" label="History of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868227" start="54179" end="54205" title="History of modern Macedonia (Greece)" label="History of Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556450" start="54208" end="54250" title="History of North Macedonia" label="History of the Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223195" start="54253" end="54270" title="History of Serbia" label="History of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407487" start="54273" end="54295" title="Macedonian nationalism" label="Macedonian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="54298" end="54309" title="Irredentism" label="Irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623422" start="54312" end="54349" title="List of homonymous states and regions" label="List of homonymous states and regions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19079" wikidata="Q556450" url="?curid=19079" title="History of North Macedonia">
<text>The history of North Macedonia encompasses the history of the territory of the modern state of North Macedonia.

== Prehistory ==
The Vinča culture was an early culture of Southeastern Europe (between the 6th and the 3rd millennium BC), stretching around the course of the Danube in Serbia, Croatia, northern parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, Romania, Bulgaria, and the Republic of North Macedonia, although traces of it can be found all around the Southeastern Europe, parts of Central Europe and in Asia Minor.

== Ancient period ==

=== Paeonians and other tribes ===
In antiquity, most of the territory that is now North Macedonia was included in the kingdom of Paeonia, which was populated by the Paeonians, a people of Thracian origins, but also parts of ancient Illyria, Ancient Macedonians populated the area in the south, living among many other tribes and Dardania, inhabited by various Illyrian peoples, and Lyncestis and Pelagonia populated by the ancient Greek Molossian tribes. None of these had fixed boundaries; they were sometimes subject to the Kings of Macedon, and sometimes broke away.

=== Persian rule ===
In the late 6th century BC, the Achaemenid Persians under Darius the Great conquered the Paeonians, incorporating what is today North Macedonia within their vast territories.

=== Macedon and Rome ===
In 336 BC Philip II of Macedon fully annexed Upper Macedonia, including its northern part and southern Paeonia, which both now lie within North Macedonia. Philip&#x27;s son Alexander the Great conquered most of the remainder of the region, incorporating it in his empire, with the exclusion of Dardania. The Romans included most of the Republic in their province of Macedonia, but the northernmost parts (Dardania) lay in Moesia; by the time of Diocletian, they had been subdivided, and the Republic was split between Macedonia Salutaris and Moesia prima. Little is known about the Slavs before the 5th century CE.

==Medieval period==
=== Migration Period ===

At this period the area divided from the Jireček Line was populated from people of Thraco-Roman or Illyro-Roman origins, as well from Hellenized citizens of the Byzantine Empire and Byzantine Greeks. The ancient languages of the local Thraco-Illyrian people had already gone extinct before the arrival of the Slavs, and their cultural influence was highly reduced due to the repeated barbaric invasions on the Balkans during the early Middle Ages, accompanied by persistent hellenization, romanisation and later slavicisation. South Slavic tribes settled in the territory of present-day North Macedonia in the 6th century. The Slavic settlements were referred to by Byzantine Greek historians as &quot;Sclavenes&quot;. The Sclavenes participated in several assaults against the Byzantine Empire – alone or aided by Bulgars or Avars. Around 680 AD a group, led by a Bulgar named Kuber (who according to some sources belonged to the same Dulo clan as the Danubian Bulgarian Khan Asparukh), settled in the Pelagonian plain, and launched a campaign to the region of Thessaloniki.

In the late 7th century Justinian II organized massive expeditions against the Sklaviniai of the Greek peninsula, in which he reportedly captured over 110,000 Slavs and transferred them to Cappadocia. By the time of Constans II (who also organized campaigns against the Slavs), the significant number of the Slavs of Macedonia were captured and transferred to central Asia Minor where they were forced to recognize the authority of the Byzantine emperor and serve in its ranks.

=== Contested between various realms ===
Use of the name &quot;Sklavines&quot; as a nation on its own was discontinued in Byzantine records after circa 836 as those Slavs in the Macedonia region became a population in the First Bulgarian Empire. Originally two distinct peoples, &quot;Sclavenes&quot; and &quot;Bulgars&quot;, the Bulgars assimilated the Slavic language/identity whilst maintaining the Bulgarian demonym and name of the empire. Slavic influence in the region strengthened along with the rise of this state, which incorporated the entire region to its domain in AD 837. Saints Cyril and Methodius, Byzantine Greeks born in Thessaloniki, were the creators of the first Slavic Glagolitic alphabet and Old Church Slavonic language. They were also apostles-Christianizators of the Slavic world. Their cultural heritage was acquired and developed in medieval Bulgaria, where after 885 the region of Ohrid became a significant ecclesiastical center. In conjunction with another disciple of Saints Cyril and Methodius, Saint Naum, he created a flourishing Bulgarian cultural center around Ohrid, where over 3,000 pupils were taught in the Glagolitic and Cyrillic script in what is now called Ohrid Literary School.
At the end of the 10th century, much of what is now North Macedonia became the political and cultural center of the First Bulgarian Empire under Tsar Samuel; while the Byzantine emperor Basil II came to rule the eastern part of the empire (what is now Bulgaria), including the then capital Preslav, in 972. A new capital was established at Ohrid, which also became the seat of the Bulgarian Patriarchate. From then on, the Bulgarian model became an integral part of wider Slavic culture as a whole. After several decades of almost incessant fighting, Bulgaria came under Byzantine rule in 1018. The whole of North Macedonia was incorporated into the Byzantine Empire as &quot;Theme of Bulgaria&quot; and the Bulgarian Patriarchate was reduced in rank to an archbishopric, the Archbishopric of Ohrid.

Dobromir Chrysos rebelled against the emperor and after an unsuccessful imperial campaign in autumn 1197, the emperor sued for peace and recognized Dobromir-Chrysus&#x27; rights to lands between the Strymon and Vardar, including Strumica and the fortress of Prosek.

In the 13th and 14th centuries, Byzantine control was punctuated by periods of Bulgarian and Serbian rule. For example, Konstantin Asen – a former nobleman from Skopje – ruled as tsar of Bulgaria from 1257 to 1277. Later, Skopje became a capital of the Serbian Empire under Stefan Dušan. After the dissolution of the empire, the area became a domain of independent local Serbian rulers from the Mrnjavčević and Dragaš houses. The domain of the Mrnjavčević house included western parts of present-day North Macedonia and domains of the Dragaš house included eastern parts. The capital of the state of Mrnjavčević house was Prilep. There are only two known rulers from the Mrnjavčević house – king Vukašin Mrnjavčević and his son, king Marko. King Marko became a vassal of the Ottoman Empire and later died in the Battle of Rovine.

During the period in the 12th, 13th and early 14th century, parts of modern western North Macedonia were under the rule of the Albanian Noble Gropa family, which ruled territories between Ohrid and Debar. The city of Debar and some other territories after the ending rule of Gropa Noble family, were ruled by the Albanian Royal House of Kastrioti which ruled the Principality of Kastrioti during the end of the 14th century and the first half of the 15th century. After the death of the Albanian Prince Gjon Kastrioti in 1437, many parts of his domains were conquered by the Ottoman Empire and shortly after this, during the 15th century were again restored into the Albanian rule of League of Lezhë led by Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg. During this period, western territories of modern North Macedonia became battleground between the Albanian and Ottoman armies. Some of the battles that took place in the territory of Macedonia were the Battle of Polog, Battle of Mokra, Battle of Ohrid, Battle of Otonetë, Battle of Oranik and many others. Skanderbeg&#x27;s Campaign into Macedonia also took place. With the death of Skanderbeg on 17 January 1468 the Albanian Resistance began to fall. After the death of Skanderbeg the Albanian League was led by Lekë Dukagjini, but it did not have the same success as before and the last Albanian strongholds were conquered in 1479 in the Siege of Shkodër.

== Ottoman period ==


Conquered by the Ottoman army at the end of the 14th century, the region remained a part of the Ottoman Empire for over 500 years, as part of the province or Eyalet of Rumelia. During this in the second half of the 15th century the Albanian Leader of the League of Lezhë, Skanderbeg was able to occupy places in modern western North Macedonia that were under Ottoman rule like the then well known city of Ohrid (Albanian Ohër) in the Battle of Ohrid. Tetovo (Battle of Polog) and many other places. The Albanian forces under Skanderbeg penetrated deep into modern North Macedonia in the Battle of Mokra. But this did not last long and the places were again occupied by the Ottomans. Rumelia (Turkish: &quot;Rumeli&quot;) means &quot;Land of the Romans&quot; in Turkish, referring to the lands conquered by the Ottoman Turks from the Byzantine Empire.). Over the centuries Rumelia Eyalet was reduced in size through administrative reforms, until by the nineteenth century it consisted of a region of central Albania and north-western part of the current state of North Macedonia with its capital at Manastir or present day Bitola. Rumelia Eyalet was abolished in 1867 and the territory of North Macedonia subsequently became part of the provinces of Manastir Vilayet, Kosovo Vilayet and Salonica Vilayet until the end of Ottoman rule in 1912.

During the period of Ottoman rule the region gained a substantial Turkish minority, especially in the religious sense of Muslim; some of those Muslims became so through conversions. During the Ottoman rule, Skopje and Monastir (Bitola) were capitals of separate Ottoman provinces (eyalets). The valley of the river Vardar, which was later to become the central area of North Macedonia, was ruled by the Ottoman Empire prior to the First Balkan War of 1912, with the exception of the brief period in 1878 when it was liberated from Ottoman rule after the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78), becoming part of Bulgaria. In 1903, a short-lived Kruševo Republic was proclaimed in the south-western part of present-day North Macedonia by the rebels of the Ilinden–Preobrazhenie Uprising. Most of the ethnographers and travellers during Ottoman rule classified Slavic speaking people in Macedonia as Bulgarians. Examples include the 17th century traveller Evliya Çelebi in his &quot;Seyahatname: Book of Travels&quot; to the Ottoman census of Hilmi Pasha in 1904 and later. However, they also remarked that the language spoken in Macedonia had somewhat of a distinctive character — often described as a &quot;Western Bulgarian dialect&quot; as other Bulgarian dialects in modern western Bulgaria. Evidence also exists that certain Macedonian Slavs, particularly those in the northern regions, considered themselves as Serbs, on the other hand the intention to join Greece predominated in southern Macedonia where it was supported by substantial part of the Slavic-speaking population too. Although references are made referring to Slavs in Macedonia being identified as Bulgarians, some scholars suggest that ethnicity in medieval times was more fluid than what we see it to be today, an understanding derived from nineteenth century nationalistic ideals of a homogeneous nation-state.

During the period of Bulgarian National Revival (1762–1878), many Bulgarians from Vardar Macedonia supported the struggle for creation of Bulgarian cultural educational and religious institutions, including the Bulgarian Exarchate. The subsequent Macedonian Struggle (1893–1908) remained inconclusive.

== Karađorđević period (1912–1944) ==
=== Balkan Wars and World War I ===

The region was captured by the Kingdom of Serbia during First Balkan War of 1912 and was subsequently annexed to Serbia under the Karađorđević dynasty in the post-war peace treaties except Strumica region was part of Bulgaria between 1912 and 1919. It had no administrative autonomy and was called South Serbia (&#x27;) or &quot;Old Serbia&quot; (&#x27;). It was occupied by the Kingdom of Bulgaria between 1915 and 1918. After the First World War, the Kingdom of Serbia joined the newly formed Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes.

=== Royal Yugoslav period ===
After World War I (1914–1918) the Slavs in Serbian Macedonia (&quot;Vardar Macedonia&quot;) were regarded as southern Serbs and the language they spoke a southern Serbian dialect. The Bulgarian, Greek and Romanian schools were closed, the Bulgarian priests and all non-Serbian teachers were expelled. The policy of Serbianization in the 1920s and 1930s clashed with pro-Bulgarian sentiment stirred by Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO) detachments infiltrating from Bulgaria, whereas local communists favoured the path of self-determination.

In 1925, D. J. Footman, the British vice consul at Skopje, addressed a lengthy report for the Foreign Office. He wrote that &quot;the majority of the inhabitants of &quot;Southern Serbia&quot; are Orthodox Christian Macedonians, ethnologically more akin to the Bulgarians than to the Serbs. He also pointed to the existence of the tendency to seek an independent Macedonia with Salonica as its capital.&quot;

On 6 January 1929, king Alexander I Karađorđević committed a coup d&#x27;état and installed the so-called 6 January Dictatorship, abolishing the Vidovdan Constitution and renaming the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. It was divided into provinces called banovinas. The territory of Vardar Banovina had Skopje as its capital and it included what eventually became modern North Macedonia (plus some lands north of it that are now part of Serbia and Kosovo). Alexander&#x27;s dictatorship effectively ruined parliamentary democracy, and after growing popular resentment against the king&#x27;s autocratic rule, he was assassinated in 1934 in France by the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO).

=== World War II ===

During World War II, the Vardar Banovina was occupied between 1941 and 1944 by Italian-ruled Albania, which annexed the Albanian-populated western regions, and pro-German Bulgaria, which occupied the remainder. The occupying powers persecuted those inhabitants of the province who opposed the regime; this prompted some of them to join the Communist resistance movement of Josip Broz Tito. However, the Bulgarian army was well received by most of the population when it entered Macedonia and it was able to recruit from the local population, which formed as much as 40% to 60% of the soldiers in certain battalions.

The resistance started to grow in the summer of 1943 with the capitulation of Italy and the Soviet victories over Nazi Germany. The date of the creation of its major unit, the Mirče Acev Battalion, on August 18, 1943 on Mount Slavej between Ohrid and Kičevo, then in the Italian occupation zone, is officially celebrated today in North Macedonia as the Day of the Army of the Republic of North Macedonia. On 11 November 1943, the 1st Macedonian Kosovo Shock Brigade was formed in western Macedonia by merging two Vardar Macedonian and one Kosovo battalion. The second — larger ethnic Macedonian military unit was the 2nd Macedonian Shock Brigade, formed on 22 December 1943 just across the border in Greek Macedonia. On 26 February 1944 in the village of Zegljane, near Kumanovo, the 3rd Macedonian Shock Brigade was formed. These three brigades were the nucleus of the National Liberation Army of Macedonia, which after constant battles became stronger in numbers. Meanwhile, the second session of AVNOJ recognized the Macedonians as a separate nation for the first time in November 1943. From 8,000 partisans in the summer of 1944, until the final military operations in the Yugoslav National Liberation War in April 1945, the National Liberation Army of Macedonia had increased to three corps, seven divisions and thirty brigades, all with a total of 100,000 regular soldiers.

== Socialist Yugoslav period ==
=== 1944–1991 ===
Following World War II, Yugoslavia was reconstituted as a federal state under the leadership of Tito&#x27;s Yugoslav Communist Party. When the former Vardar province was established in 1944, most of its territory was transferred into a separate republic while the northernmost parts of the province remained with Serbia. In 1946, the new republic was granted federal status as an autonomous &quot;People&#x27;s Republic of Macedonia&quot; within the new Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In the 1963 Constitution of Yugoslavia it was slightly renamed, to bring it in line with the other Yugoslav republics, as the Socialist Republic of Macedonia.
Greece was concerned by the initiatives of the Yugoslav government, as they were seen as a pretext for future territorial claims against the Greek region of Macedonia, which formed the bulk of historical Macedonia. The Yugoslav authorities also promoted the development of the Macedonians&#x27; ethnic identity and language. The Macedonian language was codified in 1944 (Keith 2003), from the Slavic dialect spoken around Veles. This further angered both Greece and Bulgaria, because of the possible territorial claims of the new states to the Greek and Bulgarian parts of the historic region of Macedonia received after the Balkan Wars.

During the Greek Civil War (1944–1949), many Macedonians (regardless of ethnicity) participated in the ELAS resistance movement organized by the Communist Party of Greece. ELAS and Yugoslavia were on good terms until 1949, when they split due to Tito&#x27;s lack of allegiance to Joseph Stalin (cf. Cominform). After the end of the war, the ELAS fighters who took refuge in southern Yugoslavia and Bulgaria were not all permitted by Greece to return: only those who considered themselves Greeks were allowed, whereas those who considered themselves Bulgarian or Macedonian Slavs were barred. These events also contributed to the bad state of Yugoslav-Greek relations in the Macedonia region.

On July 26, 1963 there was a 6.1 moment magnitude earthquake which occurred in Skopje, SR Macedonia (present-day North Macedonia), then part of the SFR Yugoslavia, on July 26, 1963, which killed over 1,070 people, injured between 3,000 and 4,000 and left more than 200,000 people homeless. About 80 percent of the city was destroyed. Following the earthquake, Josip Broz Tito, president of SFR Yugoslavia, sent a message of condolences to the Socialist Republic of Macedonia before visiting the city personally later on. Within a few days after the earthquake took place, 35 nations requested that the United Nations General Assembly place relief for Skopje on their list of agendas. The effort led to the implementation of a major urban and architectural reconstruction plan urban master-plan of Skopje 1963. Relief, in the form of money, medical, engineering and building teams and supplies was offered from 78 countries throughout the world. Several streets and objects in Skopje were named in honor of the countries which helped in their construction and/or donated housing. For example, the government of Romania donated the polyclinic medical center, which was named after its capital, Bucharest. In Karposh Municipality, there are Soviet-donated apartment buildings called in Macedonian: „руски згради“ (&quot;ruski zgradi&quot;, meaning &quot;Russian buildings&quot;) and Swedish and Finnish prefabs called „шведски / фински бараки“ (&quot;švedski&quot; / &quot;finski baraki&quot;).

=== 1950–1990 ===
== Independence ==
=== 1990s ===
In 1990, the form of government peacefully changed from socialist state to parliamentary democracy. The first multi-party elections were held on 11 and 25 November and 9 December 1990. After the collective presidency led by was dissolved, Kiro Gligorov became the first democratically elected president of the Republic of Macedonia on 31 January 1991. On 16 April 1991, the parliament adopted a constitutional amendment removing &quot;Socialist&quot; from the official name of the country, and on 7 June of the same year, the new name, &quot;Republic of Macedonia&quot;, was officially established.

On 8 September 1991, the country held an independence referendum where 95.26% voted for independence from Yugoslavia, under the name of the &quot;Republic of Macedonia&quot;. The question of the referendum was formulated as &quot;Would you support independent Macedonia with the right to enter future union of sovereign states of Yugoslavia?&quot; (Macedonian: Дали сте за самостојна Македонија со право да стапи во иден сојуз на суверени држави на Југославија?). On 25 September 1991 the Declaration of Independence was formally adopted by the Macedonian Parliament making the Republic of Macedonia an independent country – although in Macedonia independence day is still celebrated as the day of the referendum 8 September. A new Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia was adopted on 17 November 1991.

Following the breakup of Yugoslavia, the position of ethnic Albanians was uncertain in the early years of the new Macedonian republic. Various Albanian political parties emerged, of which the Party for Democratic Prosperity (PDP) was the largest and most prominent. The PDP called for the improvement of the status of Albanians in North Macedonia, such as extended education rights and Albanian language usage, constitutional changes, release of political prisoners, proportional voting system and an end to discrimination. Discontent with the lack of constitutional recognition of collective rights for Albanians resulted in PDP leader Nevzat Halili declaring his party would regard the constitution as invalid and move toward seeking autonomy, declaring a Republic of Ilirida in 1992 and again in 2014. The proposal has been declared unconstitutional by the Macedonian government.

Bulgaria was the first country to recognize the new Macedonian state under its constitutional name. However, international recognition of the new country was delayed by Greece&#x27;s objection to the use of what it considered a Hellenic name and national symbols, as well as controversial clauses in the Republic&#x27;s constitution, a controversy known as the Macedonia naming dispute. To compromise, the country was admitted to the United Nations under the provisional name of &quot;the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia&quot; on 8 April 1993.

Greece was still dissatisfied and it imposed a trade blockade in February 1994. The sanctions were lifted in September 1995 after Macedonia changed its flag and aspects of its constitution that were perceived as granting it the right to intervene in the affairs of other countries. The two neighbours immediately went ahead with normalizing their relations, but the state&#x27;s name remains a source of local and international controversy. The usage of each name remains controversial to supporters of the other.

After the state was admitted to the United Nations under the temporary reference &quot;the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia&quot;, other international organisations adopted the same convention. More than half of the UN&#x27;s member states have recognized the country as the Republic of Macedonia, including the United States of America while the rest use the temporary reference &quot;the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia&quot; or have not established any diplomatic relations with the country.

In 1999, the Kosovo War led to 340,000 Albanian refugees from Kosovo fleeing into the Republic of Macedonia, greatly disrupting normal life in the region and threatening to upset the balance between Macedonians and Albanians. Refugee camps were set up in the country. Athens did not interfere with the Republic&#x27;s affairs when NATO forces moved to and from the region ahead a possible invasion of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Thessaloniki was the main depot for humanitarian aid to the region. The Republic of Macedonia did not become involved in the conflict.

In end the war, Yugoslav president Slobodan Milošević reached an agreement with NATO which allowed refugees to return under UN protection. However, the war increased tensions, and relations between Macedonians and the Albanian minority became strained. On the positive side, Athens and Ankara presented a united front of &#x27;non-involvement&#x27;. In Greece, there was a strong reaction against NATO and the United States.

=== 2000s ===
In the spring of 2001, ethnic Albanian insurgents calling themselves the National Liberation Army (some of whom were former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army) took up arms in the north and northwest of the Republic of Macedonia. They demanded that the constitution be rewritten to enshrine certain Albanian minority interests such as language rights. The guerillas received support from Albanians in NATO-controlled Kosovo and Albanian guerrillas in the demilitarized zone between Kosovo and the rest of Serbia. The fighting was concentrated in and around Tetovo, the fifth largest city in the country, and in the wider regions of Skopje, the capital, and Kumanovo, the third largest city.

After a joint NATO-Serb crackdown on Albanian guerrillas in Kosovo, European Union (EU) officials were able to negotiate a cease-fire in June. The government would give to the citizens of Albanian descent greater civil rights, and the guerrilla groups would voluntarily relinquish their weapons to NATO monitors. This agreement was a success, and in August 2001 3,500 NATO soldiers conducted &quot;Operations Essential Harvest&quot; to retrieve the arms. Directly after the operation finished in September the NLA officially dissolved itself. Ethnic relations have since improved significantly, although hardliners on both sides have been a continued cause for concern and some low level violence continues particularly directed against police.

On 26 February 2004, President Boris Trajkovski died in a plane crash near Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina. The results of the official investigation revealed that the cause of the plane accident was procedural mistakes by the crew, committed during the approach to land at Mostar Airport.

In March 2004, the country submitted an application for membership of the European Union, and on 17 December 2005 was listed by the EU Presidency conclusions as an accession candidate (as &quot;the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia&quot;). However, accession proceedings were delayed due to opposition by Greece until the 2018 resolution of the Macedonia naming dispute, and later by Bulgaria due to unresolved differences between the two countries on the history of the region and what is perceived as &quot;anti-Bulgarian ideology&quot;.

=== 2010s–2020s ===
In June 2017, Zoran Zaev of Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) became new Prime Minister six months after early elections. The new center-left government ended 11 years of conservative VMRO-DPMNE rule led by former Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski.

On 9 May 2015 the 2015 Kumanovo clashes were series of shootouts which erupted during a raid between the Macedonian police and an armed group identifying itself as the National Liberation Army (NLA). They began on 9 May 2015 in the northern Macedonian town of Kumanovo. During the shootings, 8 Macedonian policemen and 10 of the militants were killed, while 37 officers were wounded and hospitalized. The shooting ended on 10 May 2015, in an operation by the Macedonian police, in which 30 militants were arrested and charged with terrorism-related charges by the Macedonian authorities.

In June 2018, the Prespa agreement was reached between the governments of Greece and the then-Republic of Macedonia to rename the latter the Republic of North Macedonia, or North Macedonia for short. This agreement, after it had been accepted by the respective legislatures of both countries, came into effect on 12 February 2019, thus ending the disputes.

Stevo Pendarovski (SDSM) was sworn in as North Macedonia&#x27;s new president in May 2019. The early parliamentary elections took place on 15 July 2020. Zoran Zaev has served as the Prime Minister of the Republic of North Macedonia again since August 2020. Prime Minister Zoran Zaev announced his resignation after his party, the Social Democratic Union, suffered losses in local elections in October 2021. After internal party leadership elections, Dimitar Kovačevski succeeded him as leader of the SDSM on 12 December 2021, and was sworn in as Prime Minister of North Macedonia on 16 January 2022, securing a 62–46 confidence vote in Parliament for his new SDSM-led coalition cabinet.

==See also==

* Breakup of Yugoslavia
* History of Albania
* History of the Balkans
* History of Bulgaria
* History of Europe
* History of Greece
* History of Kosovo
* History of Serbia
* History of Turkey
* History of Yugoslavia
* Macedonia (region)
* Macedonian nationalism
* United Macedonia
* Military history of North Macedonia
* Independent State of Macedonia
* League of Communists of Yugoslavia
* President of the Republic of North Macedonia
* List of prime ministers of North Macedonia
* List of presidents of Yugoslavia
* List of prime ministers of Yugoslavia
* Politics of North Macedonia

==References==
* 
* Dalibor Jovanovski, &quot;Greek Historiography and the Balkan Wars&quot;, &quot;On Macedonian Matters. From the partition and annexation of Macedonia in 1913 to the present&quot; (Verlag Otto Sagner: Munich, Berlin, 2015). [archive]
*

==Notes==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* The Mariovo in Macedonia, 1564: Mariovo People and Macedonia.
* New Power – Federated Yugoslavia
* History of Macedonia: Primary Documents
* Discover Macedonia – Discover North Macedonia on Facebook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q556450" start="4" end="30" title="History of North Macedonia" label="history of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="95" end="110" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831336" start="134" end="147" title="Vinča culture" label="Vinča culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34245" start="205" end="208" title="6th millennium BC" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="273" end="279" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="291" end="298" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="318" end="340" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="366" end="374" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="384" end="411" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="493" end="507" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="515" end="525" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="633" end="648" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="680" end="687" title="Paeonia (kingdom)" label="Paeonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="739" end="747" title="Thracians" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="783" end="790" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="792" end="809" title="Ancient Macedonia" label="Ancient Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="880" end="887" title="Dardani" label="Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35976" start="911" end="919" title="Illyrian languages" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247667" start="933" end="942" title="Lynkestis" label="Lyncestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138800" start="947" end="956" title="Pelagonia" label="Pelagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q827399" start="988" end="997" title="Molossians" label="Molossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1086" end="1093" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1175" end="1192" title="Achaemenid Persia" label="Achaemenid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="1201" end="1217" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="1232" end="1241" title="Paeonia (kingdom)" label="Paeonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="1354" end="1374" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779996" start="1389" end="1404" title="Upper Macedonia" label="Upper Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1517" end="1536" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="1638" end="1645" title="Dardani" label="Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1648" end="1658" title="Roman Empire" label="The Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="1710" end="1719" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="1766" end="1772" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="1789" end="1799" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="1862" end="1881" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia Salutaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="1886" end="1898" title="Moesia" label="Moesia prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q843264" start="2047" end="2059" title="Jireček Line" label="Jireček Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665516" start="2089" end="2101" title="Thraco-Roman" label="Thraco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000682" start="2105" end="2117" title="Illyro-Roman" label="Illyro-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="2140" end="2150" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenized"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2167" end="2183" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="2188" end="2204" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033020" start="2241" end="2256" title="Thraco-Illyrian" label="Thraco-Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2441" end="2452" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="2480" end="2493" title="hellenization" label="hellenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="2495" end="2507" title="romanisation" label="romanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467530" start="2518" end="2531" title="slavicisation" label="slavicisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="2533" end="2545" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2784" end="2800" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="2821" end="2828" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="2832" end="2837" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q123846478" start="2855" end="2860" title="Sermesianoi" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="2871" end="2877" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q552042" start="2884" end="2889" title="Kuber" label="Kuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q858431" start="2942" end="2946" title="Dulo" label="Dulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189450" start="2983" end="2991" title="Asparukh" label="Asparukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138800" start="3009" end="3025" title="Pelagonia" label="Pelagonian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="3068" end="3080" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q42021" start="3107" end="3119" title="Justinian II" label="Justinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q217265" start="3272" end="3282" title="Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41613" start="3299" end="3310" title="Constans II" label="Constans II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3451" end="3461" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="3784" end="3806" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="4147" end="4173" title="Saints Cyril and Methodius" label="Saints Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="4175" end="4191" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="4200" end="4212" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="4252" end="4271" title="Glagolitic alphabet" label="Glagolitic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="4276" end="4295" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="4471" end="4476" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q350061" start="4589" end="4599" title="Saint Naum" label="Saint Naum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="4724" end="4739" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q524741" start="4762" end="4783" title="Ohrid Literary School" label="Ohrid Literary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="4837" end="4852" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="4901" end="4923" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q270740" start="4935" end="4941" title="Samuel of Bulgaria" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41833" start="4971" end="4979" title="Basil II" label="Basil II"/>
<link wikidata="Q243616" start="5075" end="5082" title="Preslav" label="Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="5125" end="5130" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q242758" start="5166" end="5188" title="Bulgarian Patriarchate" label="Bulgarian Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003703" start="5461" end="5478" title="Theme of Bulgaria" label="Theme of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134168" start="5561" end="5583" title="Archbishopric of Ohrid" label="Archbishopric of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q198014" start="5586" end="5602" title="Dobromir Chrysos" label="Dobromir Chrysos"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="5932" end="5940" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="5946" end="5952" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462917" start="5973" end="5988" title="Konstantin Asen" label="Konstantin Asen"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="6075" end="6081" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="6106" end="6120" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="6127" end="6139" title="Stefan Dušan" label="Stefan Dušan"/>
<link wikidata="Q887399" start="6248" end="6259" title="Mrnjavčević" label="Mrnjavčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658415" start="6264" end="6270" title="Dejanović noble family" label="Dragaš"/>
<link wikidata="Q157032" start="6475" end="6481" title="Prilep" label="Prilep"/>
<link wikidata="Q380071" start="6549" end="6568" title="Vukašin Mrnjavčević" label="Vukašin Mrnjavčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q316462" start="6587" end="6592" title="Prince Marko" label="Marko"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6628" end="6642" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237751" start="6665" end="6681" title="Battle of Rovine" label="Battle of Rovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="6768" end="6783" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610390" start="6811" end="6838" title="Gropa family" label="Albanian Noble Gropa family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="6872" end="6877" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q689820" start="6882" end="6887" title="Debar" label="Debar"/>
<link wikidata="Q689820" start="6901" end="6906" title="Debar" label="Debar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610390" start="6959" end="6977" title="Gropa family" label="Gropa Noble family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290080" start="7006" end="7030" title="House of Kastrioti" label="Royal House of Kastrioti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353404" start="7047" end="7072" title="Principality of Kastrioti" label="Principality of Kastrioti"/>
<link wikidata="Q583238" start="7171" end="7186" title="List of Albanian monarchs" label="Albanian Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396923" start="7187" end="7201" title="Gjon Kastrioti" label="Gjon Kastrioti"/>
<link wikidata="Q669241" start="7368" end="7383" title="League of Lezhë" label="League of Lezhë"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="7391" end="7418" title="Skanderbeg" label="Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="7603" end="7612" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304647" start="7622" end="7637" title="Battle of Polog" label="Battle of Polog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300868" start="7639" end="7654" title="Battle of Mokra (1445)" label="Battle of Mokra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338499" start="7656" end="7671" title="Battle of Ohrid" label="Battle of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302743" start="7673" end="7690" title="Battle of Otonetë" label="Battle of Otonetë"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301210" start="7692" end="7708" title="Battle of Oranik (1448)" label="Battle of Oranik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533905" start="7726" end="7752" title="Skanderbeg&amp;#x27;s Macedonian campaign" label="Skanderbeg&amp;#x27;s Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="7758" end="7767" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="7803" end="7813" title="Skanderbeg" label="Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116375" start="7837" end="7856" title="Skanderbeg&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="Albanian Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="7891" end="7901" title="Skanderbeg" label="Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q669241" start="7906" end="7921" title="League of Lezhë" label="Albanian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q463876" start="7933" end="7947" title="Lekë Dukagjini" label="Lekë Dukagjini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510403" start="8060" end="8076" title="Siege of Shkodra" label="Siege of Shkodër"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8198" end="8212" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44565" start="8260" end="8266" title="Eyalet" label="Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811008" start="8270" end="8277" title="Rumelia Eyalet" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="8334" end="8342" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q669241" start="8357" end="8372" title="League of Lezhë" label="League of Lezhë"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="8374" end="8384" title="Skanderbeg" label="Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="8429" end="8444" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="8507" end="8512" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="8514" end="8522" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338499" start="8536" end="8551" title="Battle of Ohrid" label="Battle of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q157024" start="8553" end="8559" title="Tetovo" label="Tetovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304647" start="8561" end="8576" title="Battle of Polog" label="Battle of Polog"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="8627" end="8637" title="Skanderbeg" label="Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300868" start="8689" end="8704" title="Battle of Mokra (1445)" label="Battle of Mokra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="8775" end="8783" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="8785" end="8792" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="8794" end="8801" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="8863" end="8870" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8912" end="8925" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8935" end="8951" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="9224" end="9230" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121602" start="9351" end="9367" title="Manastir Vilayet" label="Manastir Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q168501" start="9369" end="9383" title="Kosovo Vilayet" label="Kosovo Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301221" start="9388" end="9404" title="Salonica Vilayet" label="Salonica Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="9511" end="9518" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="9652" end="9658" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="9673" end="9679" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q189596" start="9760" end="9766" title="Vardar" label="Vardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9848" end="9862" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="9876" end="9892" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="9999" end="10026" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="10045" end="10053" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771831" start="10078" end="10094" title="Kruševo Republic" label="Kruševo Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145682" start="10188" end="10218" title="Ilinden–Preobrazhenie Uprising" label="Ilinden–Preobrazhenie Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="10268" end="10275" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886313" start="10331" end="10341" title="Macedonians (Bulgarians)" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="10387" end="10400" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916302" start="10414" end="10425" title="Seyahatname" label="Seyahatname"/>
<link wikidata="Q660970" start="10474" end="10485" title="Hilmi Pasha" label="Hilmi Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="10849" end="10854" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="10891" end="10902" title="Megali Idea" label="join Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004004" start="11339" end="11365" title="Bulgarian National Revival" label="Bulgarian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042945" start="11529" end="11548" title="Bulgarian Exarchate" label="Bulgarian Exarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277369" start="11565" end="11584" title="Macedonian Struggle" label="Macedonian Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="11727" end="11744" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="11752" end="11768" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q220641" start="11826" end="11846" title="Karađorđević dynasty" label="Karađorđević dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814" start="11885" end="11893" title="Strumica" label="Strumica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946371" start="11994" end="12006" title="South Serbia (1919–1922)" label="South Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279034" start="12025" end="12035" title="Old Serbia" label="Old Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28493558" start="12059" end="12067" title="Bulgarian occupation of Serbia (World War I)" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="12075" end="12094" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Kingdom of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="12191" end="12228" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890609" start="12329" end="12345" title="Vardar Macedonia" label="Vardar Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289594" start="12576" end="12590" title="Serbianization" label="Serbianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="12627" end="12640" title="pro-Bulgarian" label="pro-Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="12662" end="12708" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12832" end="12845" title="D. J. Footman" label="D. J. Footman"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="12874" end="12880" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="12917" end="12931" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="13020" end="13038" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="13052" end="13066" title="Ethnology" label="ethnologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="13201" end="13209" title="Salonica" label="Salonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="13257" end="13281" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I Karađorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="13339" end="13361" title="6 January Dictatorship" label="6 January Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280950" start="13378" end="13399" title="Vidovdan Constitution" label="Vidovdan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="13462" end="13483" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998182" start="13522" end="13531" title="Subdivisions of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="banovinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q939101" start="13550" end="13565" title="Vardar Banovina" label="Vardar Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="13570" end="13576" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13883" end="13913" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia#Assassination" label="assassinated in 1934 in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="13921" end="13967" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448131" start="14078" end="14099" title="Italian protectorate of Albania (1939–1943)" label="Italian-ruled Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="14170" end="14178" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030382" start="14186" end="14208" title="Bulgarian rule of Macedonia, Morava Valley and Western Thrace (1941–1944)" label="occupied the remainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="14372" end="14387" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="14803" end="14812" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="14857" end="14862" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q158079" start="14867" end="14873" title="Kičevo" label="Kičevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="14946" end="14961" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q934286" start="14980" end="15019" title="Army of the Republic of North Macedonia" label="Army of the Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="15104" end="15113" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890609" start="15129" end="15145" title="Vardar Macedonia" label="Vardar Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="15155" end="15161" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="15316" end="15331" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54452" start="15386" end="15394" title="Kumanovo" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="15615" end="15620" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="15766" end="15785" title="military operations" label="military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="15793" end="15825" title="Yugoslav National Liberation War" label="Yugoslav National Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="16155" end="16179" title="Yugoslav Communist Party" label="Yugoslav Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="16501" end="16541" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240592" start="16669" end="16700" title="Socialist Republic of Macedonia" label="Socialist Republic of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="16859" end="16868" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="16895" end="16915" title="Macedonia (region)" label="historical Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="16979" end="16990" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="17031" end="17050" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q157050" start="17124" end="17129" title="Veles (city)" label="Veles"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="17327" end="17338" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="17352" end="17367" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="17486" end="17511" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="17513" end="17517" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="ELAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="17621" end="17634" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183533" start="17640" end="17649" title="Cominform" label="Cominform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991432" start="17890" end="17919" title="Slavic speakers of Greek Macedonia" label="Bulgarian or Macedonian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="18067" end="18083" title="moment magnitude" label="moment magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="18113" end="18119" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q240592" start="18121" end="18133" title="SR Macedonia" label="SR Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="18147" end="18162" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="18182" end="18196" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="18394" end="18409" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q240592" start="18477" end="18508" title="Socialist Republic of Macedonia" label="Socialist Republic of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="18636" end="18667" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q110811307" start="18810" end="18842" title="Urban master plan of Skopje 1963" label="urban master-plan of Skopje 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="19144" end="19151" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q56342399" start="19164" end="19174" title="polyclinic" label="polyclinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="19226" end="19235" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463246" start="19240" end="19260" title="Karposh Municipality" label="Karposh Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="19287" end="19305" title="apartment building" label="apartment building"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="19317" end="19327" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="19414" end="19421" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="19426" end="19433" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q951781" start="19434" end="19441" title="prefabricated building" label="prefabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="19599" end="19609" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="19634" end="19649" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="19653" end="19676" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153381" start="19817" end="19830" title="Kiro Gligorov" label="Kiro Gligorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q678492" start="19871" end="19880" title="President of North Macedonia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="19973" end="19997" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="20013" end="20022" title="Socialist Republic" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130232" start="20219" end="20242" title="1991 Macedonian independence referendum" label="independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258164" start="20723" end="20744" title="Assembly of North Macedonia" label="Macedonian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016010" start="20825" end="20841" title="Independence Day (North Macedonia)" label="independence day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995158" start="20910" end="20951" title="Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia" label="Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="21000" end="21021" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="21039" end="21055" title="Albanians in Macedonia" label="ethnic Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591223" start="21178" end="21209" title="Party for Democratic Prosperity" label="Party for Democratic Prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="21304" end="21332" title="Albanians in North Macedonia" label="Albanians in North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="21372" end="21389" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119377" start="21744" end="21763" title="Ilirida" label="Republic of Ilirida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154494" start="21846" end="21867" title="Politics of North Macedonia" label="Macedonian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996355" start="21870" end="21878" title="Bulgaria–North Macedonia relations" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="22231" end="22255" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="Macedonia naming dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="23456" end="23466" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="23642" end="23653" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="23658" end="23667" title="Albanians in North Macedonia" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="23774" end="23778" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="23848" end="23878" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="23880" end="23892" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="24051" end="24069" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296614" start="24529" end="24553" title="National Liberation Army (Macedonia)" label="National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q193366" start="24595" end="24617" title="Kosovo Liberation Army" label="Kosovo Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q817137" start="24619" end="24631" title="2001 insurgency in Macedonia" label="took up arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="24758" end="24775" title="Albanians in North Macedonia" label="Albanian minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="24896" end="24906" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q237782" start="25928" end="25944" title="Boris Trajkovski" label="Boris Trajkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="25972" end="25978" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="25980" end="26002" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432098" start="26170" end="26184" title="Mostar Airport" label="Mostar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785635" start="26227" end="26275" title="Accession of North Macedonia to the European Union" label="application for membership of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="26536" end="26560" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="Macedonia naming dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q220579" start="26766" end="26776" title="Zoran Zaev" label="Zoran Zaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q160188" start="26780" end="26816" title="Social Democratic Union of Macedonia" label="Social Democratic Union of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945717" start="26946" end="26956" title="VMRO-DPMNE" label="VMRO-DPMNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q57766" start="26991" end="27006" title="Nikola Gruevski" label="Nikola Gruevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q97368680" start="27097" end="27101" title="Police raid" label="raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503336" start="27114" end="27131" title="Police of North Macedonia" label="Macedonian police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296614" start="27177" end="27201" title="National Liberation Army (Macedonia)" label="National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="27250" end="27260" title="North Macedonia" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54452" start="27269" end="27277" title="Kumanovo" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="27540" end="27549" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153903" start="27616" end="27632" title="Prespa agreement" label="Prespa agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="27672" end="27678" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="27771" end="27786" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967423" start="27956" end="27973" title="Stevo Pendarovski" label="Stevo Pendarovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q110288715" start="28406" end="28424" title="Dimitar Kovačevski" label="Dimitar Kovačevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="28660" end="28681" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="Breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213833" start="28684" end="28702" title="History of Albania" label="History of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266338" start="28705" end="28727" title="History of the Balkans" label="History of the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800" start="28730" end="28749" title="History of Bulgaria" label="History of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="28752" end="28769" title="History of Europe" label="History of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794" start="28772" end="28789" title="History of Greece" label="History of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q752364" start="28792" end="28809" title="History of Kosovo" label="History of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223195" start="28812" end="28829" title="History of Serbia" label="History of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190876" start="28832" end="28849" title="History of Turkey" label="History of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="28852" end="28873" title="History of Yugoslavia" label="History of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="28876" end="28894" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia (region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407487" start="28897" end="28919" title="Macedonian nationalism" label="Macedonian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072108" start="28922" end="28938" title="United Macedonia" label="United Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857663" start="28941" end="28976" title="Military history of North Macedonia" label="Military history of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30609" start="28979" end="29009" title="Independent State of Macedonia" label="Independent State of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="29012" end="29046" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678492" start="29049" end="29093" title="President of the Republic of North Macedonia" label="President of the Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29096" end="29138" title="Prime Minister of North Macedonia#List of prime ministers" label="List of prime ministers of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256036" start="29141" end="29173" title="List of presidents of Yugoslavia" label="List of presidents of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="29176" end="29213" title="List of prime ministers of Yugoslavia" label="List of prime ministers of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154494" start="29216" end="29243" title="Politics of North Macedonia" label="Politics of North Macedonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19080" wikidata="Q1752189" url="?curid=19080" title="Geography of North Macedonia">
<text>North Macedonia is a country situated in southeastern Europe with geographic coordinates , bordering Kosovo and Serbia to the north, Bulgaria to the east, Greece to the south and Albania to the west. The country is part of the wider region of Macedonia and makes up most of Vardar Macedonia. The country is a major transportation corridor from Western and Central Europe to Southern Europe and the Aegean Sea. North Macedonia is a landlocked country but has three major natural lakes: Lake Ohrid, Lake Prespa and Lake Dojran. It has a water area of 857 km2, while its land area is 24,856 km2.

Phytogeographically, Macedonia belongs to the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF and Digital Map of European Ecological Regions by the European Environment Agency, North Macedonia&#x27;s territory can be subdivided into four ecoregions: the Pindus Mountains mixed forests, Balkan mixed forests, Rhodopes mixed forests and Aegean sclerophyllous and mixed forests.

== Climate ==
North Macedonia has a unique climate explained by its location and topography. The climate of the plains is a Mediterranean climate combined with the influence of the Black Sea. The country also holds continental characteristics, which are accentuated by the mountains in the south which prevent hot air from the south from moving to the north. Conversely, the Šar Mountains, which are located in the northwestern part, block cold northern winds. In whole, the northern and western parts of the country are relatively close to a Continental climate and the southern and eastern to a Mediterranean climate.

North Macedonia has four seasons, but the lengths of the seasons varies based on geography. The spring is often very short. Summers are subtropical and it is not uncommon to see temperatures of above during this season, especially in the plains along the valley of the Vardar river. Winters, although moderate, can be quite cold. Snowfalls during winter are common and occasionally heavy. The average annual temperature of the air is , but the plains experience higher temperatures, . The warmest month is July, which has an average temperature of and the coldest is January, with a temperature of . The maximum and minimum temperatures recorded in North Macedonia to date are and , respectively.

The rainfall is abundant in the western and eastern parts of the country, but the temperature decreases significantly in the Vardar region. This region sees warmer winters through the &quot;Vardarec&quot; wind. This wind comes up from the mouth of the Vardar river and brings warm air. Skopje, considered a low-lying city, has an average of 64 rainy days per year. The month of October is the wettest with 61 mm; the driest is August with 28 mm. Rains are most common in the spring and fall.


== Physical Geography ==

=== Boundaries ===
The country has some 766 km of boundaries, shared with Kosovo (159 km or 99 mi) to the northwest, Serbia (62 km or 39 mi) to the North, Bulgaria (148 km) to the east, Greece (246 km) to the south, and Albania (151 km) to the west.

The north border with Serbia and Kosovo is 221 kilometers in length. The border was made after World War II, between SR Macedonia and SR Serbia. But in 2008 when Kosovo declared independence the border with it was remarked again. Rather more than half of the boundary separates North Macedonia from Kosovo. From the tripoint with Albania, the boundary trends north-eastwards along the watershed of Šar Mountain. It describes a curve to the south across the River Lepenec and then turns to north-east to traverse Mount Crna before taking a course slightly to the north of east across the landscape features to the tripoint with Bulgaria.

The east border with Bulgaria has length of approximately 148 km. The settled boundary from Yugoslavia and the People&#x27;s Republic of Bulgaria was accepted after the independence in 1992. The boundary starts from the tripoint with Greece, the boundary runs north, crossing the River of Strumica and then rising to the watershed which it follows northwards and then north-westwards to the tripoint with Serbia.

The south border that splits North Macedonia from Greece is 228 km long and it is the longest border. It was marked with the Treaty of Bucharest on 10 August 1913. The border starts from the tripoint with Albania, in Lake Prespa, the boundary runs in a straight line eastwards across the lake and then continues in the north of east trend across the relief to the Voras Oros (Nidže), where it turns north-eastwards. It traverses the watershed of the Voras Oros and then continues eastwards along the watershed before dropping to the valley of Vardar river. The boundary continues eastwards and then turns north across the Dojran lake, before, on the latitude of Valandovo, turning east to the tripoint with Bulgaria on Mount Tumba.

The boundary with Albania was marked first in 1926 and then remarked with the Treaty of Paris in 1947. The boundary starts from the tripoint with Kosovo and follows a watershed before crossing, and for a short distance, following the Black Drin river and continuing along a crest line to Ohrid Lake. It crosses the lake, leaving approximately one-third in Albania, traverses a high ridge and meets the tripoint with Greece in Lake Prespa.

=== Topography ===

North Macedonia is a landlocked country that is geographically clearly defined by a central valley formed by the Vardar river and framed along its borders by mountain ranges. The terrain is mostly rugged, located between the Šar Mountains and Osogovo, which frame the valley of the Vardar river. Three large lakes — Lake Ohrid, Lake Prespa and Dojran Lake — lie on the southern borders, bisected by the frontiers with Albania and Greece. Ohrid is considered to be one of the oldest lakes and biotopes in the world. The region is seismically active and has been the site of destructive earthquakes in the past, most recently in 1963 when Skopje was heavily damaged by a major earthquake, killing over 1,000.

North Macedonia also has scenic mountains. They belong to two different mountain ranges: the first is the Šar Mountains that continues to the West Vardar/Pelagonia group of mountains (Baba Mountain, Nidže, Kozuf and Jakupica), also known as the Dinaric range. The second range is the Osogovo–Belasica mountain chain, also known as the Rhodope range. The mountains belonging to the Šar Mountains and the West Vardar/Pelagonia range are younger and higher than the older mountains that are part of the Osogovo-Belasica mountain group.


=== Hydrography ===

In North Macedonia there are 1,100 large sources of water. The rivers flow into three different basins: the Aegean, the Adriatic and that Black Sea basin.

The Aegean basin is the largest. It covers 87% of the country&#x27;s territory, which is 22,075 km2 . Vardar, the largest river in this basin, drains 80% of the territory or 20,459 km2. Its valley plays an important part in the economy and the communication system of the country. The project named The Vardar Valley is considered to be crucial for the strategic development of the country.

The river Black Drim forms the Adriatic basin, which covers an area of about 3,320 km2, i. e. 13% of the territory. It issues from Lakes Prespa and Ohrid.

The Black Sea basin is the smallest with only 37 km2 It covers the northern side of Mount Skopska Crna Gora. Here is the source of the river Binačka Morava which joins the South Morava and later the Danube, which eventually flows into the Black Sea.

Despite being a landlocked country, North Macedonia has three large lakes (Ohrid, Prespa, and Dojran), three artificial lakes and roughly 50 ponds.

There are nine spa resorts in North Macedonia: Banište, Banja Bansko, Istibanja, Katlanovo, Kežovica, Kosovrasti, Banja Kočani, Kumanovski Banji and Negorci.

==== River Vardar ====

The Vardar is the longest and most important river in North Macedonia. It is long, and drains an area of around . There are proposals to construct a Morava-Vardar Canal, connecting to the Morava river, and hence connecting the Adriatic to central Europe, although this would require extensive work.

The river rises at Vrutok, a few kilometers north of Gostivar in the Republic of North Macedonia. It passes through Gostivar, Skopje and into Veles, crosses the Greek border near Gevgelija, Polykastro and Axioupoli, before emptying into the Aegean Sea in Central Macedonia west of Thessaloniki in northern Greece.

The Vardar basin includes two-thirds of the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia. For that the area is called &quot;Vardar Macedonia&quot; after the river, to distinguish it from &quot;Aegean Macedonia&quot; (in Greece) and &quot;Pirin Macedonia&quot; (in Bulgaria). The valley comprises fertile lands in Polog, Gevgelija and other parts. The river is surrounded by mountains elsewhere. The M1 / E75, connecting with Greek National Road 1, runs through the valley along the river&#x27;s entire length to near Skopje.

The river is depicted on the coat of arms of Skopje, which in turn is incorporated in the city&#x27;s flag.

==== Lake Ohrid ====

Lake Ohrid (Macedonian: Охридско Езеро, Ohridsko Ezero) straddles the mountainous border between southwestern North Macedonia and eastern Albania. Lake Ohrid is the deepest lake of the Balkans, with a maximum depth of 288 m (940 ft) and a mean depth of 155 m (508 ft). It covers an area of , containing an estimated 55.4 km3 of water. It is 30.4 km long by 14.8 km wide at its maximum extent with a shoreline length of 87.53 km, shared between North Macedonia (56.02 km) and Albania (31.51 km). The lake drains an area of around 2600 km2 and is fed primarily by underground springs on the eastern shore (about 50% of total inflow), with roughly 25% shares from rivers and direct precipitation. Over 20% of the lake&#x27;s water comes from nearby Lake Prespa, about to the southeast and at 150 m higher altitude than Lake Ohrid. 
Similar to Lake Baikal and Lake Tanganyika, Lake Ohrid harbors endemic species covering the whole food-chain, from phytoplankton and sestile algae (20 species; e.g., Cyclotella fottii), over plant species (2 species; e.g., Chara ohridana), zooplankton (5 species; e.g., Cyclops ochridanus), cyprinid fish (8 species; e.g., Pachychilon pictus), to predatory fish (2 trout species; Ohrid trout Salmo letnica and &quot;Belvica&quot; Acantholingua ohridana) and finally its diverse endemic bottom fauna (176 species; e.g. Ochridagammarus solidus), with particularly large endemism among crustaceans, molluscs, sponges and planarians.

There are three cities on the lake&#x27;s shores: Ohrid and Struga in North Macedonia; Pogradec in Albania. There are also several fishing villages, although tourism is now a more significant part of their income. The catchment area of the lake has a population of around 170,000 people, with 131,000 people living directly at the lake shore (43,000 in Albania and 88,000 in North Macedonia).

==== Lake Prespa ====

The Great Prespa Lake (Macedonian: Преспанско Езеро, Prespansko Ezero) is divided between Albania, Greece and North Macedonia. The largest island in the Great Prespa Lake, called &quot;Golem Grad&quot; (&quot;Large Fortress&quot;), or Snake Island (Змиски Остров), lies within North Macedonia. 

Because Great Prespa Lake sits about 150m above Lake Ohrid, which lies only about to the west, its waters run through underground channels in the karst and emerge from springs which feed streams running into Lake Ohrid.

==== Dojran Lake ====
Dojran Lake, located in southeastern North Macedonia, is the smallest of the three major lakes with an area of 42.7 km2. The lake is shared between North Macedonia (27.1 km2) and Greece (15.6 km2). The town of Dojran is situated on the west coast of the lake, while the Greek village of Mouries lies to the east. To the north is the mountain Belasica and to the south is the Greek town of Doirani. The lake is round in shape, has a maximum depth of 10 metres, has a north-to-south length of 8.9 km, and is 7.1 km at its widest.

=== Flora and fauna ===
The flora of North Macedonia is represented with around 210 families, 920 genera, and around 3,700 plant species. The most abundant group are the flowering plants with around 3,200 species, which is followed by mosses (350 species) and ferns (42).

Phytogeographically, North Macedonia belongs to the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF and Digital Map of European Ecological Regions by the European Environment Agency, the territory of the Republic can be subdivided into four ecoregions: the Pindus Mountains mixed forests, Balkan mixed forests, Rhodopes mixed forests and Aegean sclerophyllous and mixed forests.

=== Minerals and ores ===

North Macedonia is rich in low-grade iron ore, copper, lead, zinc, chromite, manganese, nickel, tungsten, gold, silver, asbestos, and gypsum. Also it is one of possibly two places in the world where the lorandite mineral is found.

=== Land use ===
* 16.1% of the country&#x27;s territory is arable land.
* 1.36% of permanent crops
* 82.54% – other. (2011).

According to 2004 estimates, there are 1278 km2 of irrigated land, and 6.4 km3 of total renewable water resources.

=== Degradation and protection of the environment ===
In July 2007, fires were particularly visible in Greece, Albania and North Macedonia.

The environment is preserved in areas impractical and sparsely populated. In addition, the country has three major national parks, created under the Yugoslav regime of 1948–1958. The parks of Pelister, Mavrovo and Galičica cover an area of and allow for the protection of natural areas by their exceptional geological setting, their fauna and flora. The ornithological reserve of Ezerani, north of Lake Prespa, is 2,000 hectares big and is home to sixty animals protected by the Bern Convention.

However, if it is protected where man has little access, nature is threatened the outskirts of towns and villages. Indeed, in order to make North Macedonia, formerly rural and poor, a modern and prosperous country, the Yugoslav communist regime established many factories, often highly polluting. These factories, located mainly in the regions of Veles and Skopje are still functioning. The emissions of waste pollutants have decreased after 1991, after independence, because many companies have gone bankrupt or have reduced their activity after the transition to a market economy.

The other danger of degradation of nature lies in waste. Indeed, only the city of Skopje has a processing center for household waste in the rest of the country, so they are left in open dumps. The lack of resources and political will behind these fatal neglect for the environment.

North Macedonia is also experiencing serious problems in water management. The country, however should be able to secure its water through its dams and its sources. In summer, water restrictions are common. The summer period is also marked by the devastation of forests by wildfire. In 2008, six million trees were planted in North Macedonia to regenerate damaged forests.

The environmental degradation nevertheless mobilizes local groups and North Macedonia is a signatory to international treaties like the Kyoto Protocol.

== Human geography ==

=== Differences in population and urbanization ===

The Republic of North Macedonia consists primarily of rural country towns, with only 45% of the population concentrated in the larger towns and cities. Skopje, with more than 500,000 inhabitants, is by far the largest city in the country. The surrounding region, one of the few plains of the country, includes several other cities, like Tetovo and Gostivar. Bitola, Prilep and other significant cities, are located in the plain of Pelagonia in the south. The rest of the population is concentrated in the valley of the Vardar and the few other basins and plains of the country.

Urbanization, which is developing very fast since the communist era of Yugoslavia, has led to uncontrolled and illegal constructions. Other cities have not grown as fast as the capital, which has gained more than 300,000 inhabitants between 1948 and 1981. Bitola, Prilep and Kumanovo, the three other major cities, did not exceed 30,000 inhabitants in 1948 and have barely reached 100,000 people since. Kumanovo, which is the second largest city of North Macedonia, had only 105,000 inhabitants in 2002, which is substantial difference comparing it with the population of the capital Skopje – 506,000 inhabitants. This makes Skopje a primate city.

Population of the most populous municipalities
=== Ethnic distribution ===
The Macedonians are the largest ethnic group in the country, accounting for 58.4% of the total population, according to the 2021 census. They speak the Macedonian language and most are Eastern Orthodox Christians. Ethnic Albanians are the country&#x27;s largest minority, making up one-quarter of the total population. They live mainly in the west and northwest. The Turks, who comprise nearly 4% of the population, are mostly scattered, though they form a majority in two municipalities (Plasnica and Centar Župa). The Romani make up 2.5% of the population and are also concentrated throughout North Macedonia, while the Serbs, who form 1.3% of the total population, live mostly in the north of the country.

=== Administrative divisions ===

North Macedonia is divided into eight statistical regions: Skopje, Pelagonia, Polog, Vardar, Eastern, Southeastern, Northeastern and Southwestern.

The country is further divided into 84 municipalities. Until 1996, there were 123 municipalities, but several laws aimed at increasing the rights of minorities decreased the number of municipalities and modified their overall role. Skopje, the nation&#x27;s capital, is itself divided into ten municipalities.

== Economic geography ==
North Macedonia, like most countries in Eastern Europe, has a developing economy. Under Yugoslavia, North Macedonia saw the establishment of many factories and the significant modernisation of the country, especially after the devastating Skopje earthquake of 1963. Since independence in 1991, it has suffered the transition to market economy. Greece, which believed that the republic was monopolising the cultural and historical heritage of Macedonia, imposed a temporary embargo in 1993 and had prevented the country&#x27;s accession to organisations like the European Union and NATO, until the implementation of the Prespa agreement in 2019.

In 1995, the Greek embargo was lifted and Macedonia was able to access the IMF and World Bank. The country still suffers, however, from its isolation and lack of foreign investment, to which Greece is one of the largest contributors. In 2007, the unemployment rate was estimated at 32% and the black market provided about 20% of the Gross Domestic Product.

=== Characteristics and advantages ===
North Macedonia&#x27;s geographical positioning provides it with many advantages. One advantage is the geographical position of the country. It is the center of the Balkans, between Belgrade and Athens, Tirana and Sofia, between the Adriatic and Black Sea. The Vardar valley forms a natural corridor, which connects Greece to the rest of Europe. This corridor is crossed by the highway E75, which crosses in Europe and connects Scandinavia with Attica. This highway has also been renovated in North Macedonia with the European Agency for Reconstruction, and the communication channels that connect the Adriatic to the Black Sea, called the Corridor VIII, were also upgraded and maintained through international assistance including the Italian one.

North Macedonia is also rich with minerals. The country in fact has substantial deposits of chromium and other nonferrous metals like copper, zinc, manganese and nickel. The country also has gypsum mines, marble and granite, located in Pelagonia. Lignite, provides 80% of the electricity in North Macedonia. In addition to mines and quarries, the country has large cement plants and large complexes of metal, created by the communist regime.

Agriculture is encouraged by the significant water resources, managed by dams and canals. The presence of hot springs of volcanic origin can heat the greenhouses in winter, particularly in the Strumica region, whose products include tomatoes and cucumbers in the month of February. Different climates provide opportunities for various productions in the geographical area, so the vine and tobacco are operated in the south, the rice in the region of Kočani which is largely irrigated, and the wood industry is concentrated around Štip. Agriculture contributes a significant share of exports, especially with the wine and tobacco. The low cost of labor also helps the textile industry.
North Macedonia receives about 1,000,000 tourists annually and experiences a constant increase of visitors. The number of domestic tourists from January to March 2008 increased by 23.5% compared to the same period of the previous year. The number of foreign tourists in March 2008 compared to March 2007 increased by 44.7%. In 2007, Lake Ohrid received about 250,000 domestic and foreign tourists. In February 2009, the country was visited by nearly 28,000 tourists, namely, 3.2% more than the same month last year. There was also an 8% increase in the number of foreign visitors. The summer of 2009 was the best tourist season for the city of Dojran with 135,000 overnight visitors, an increase of 12.5% compared to the previous year.

The tourist capital of North Macedonia, Ohrid, has been listed as an UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1979.

== See also ==
*Economy of North Macedonia
*North Macedonia
*Tourism in North Macedonia

== References and notes ==
== External links ==

* ExploringMacedonia.com
* Macedonia.org 
* COLISEE – Tourism in North Macedonia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="0" end="15" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="41" end="53" title="Balkans" label="southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="66" end="88" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="101" end="107" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="112" end="118" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="133" end="141" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="155" end="161" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="179" end="186" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="233" end="252" title="Macedonia (region)" label="region of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890609" start="274" end="290" title="Vardar Macedonia" label="Vardar Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="344" end="351" title="Western Europe" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="356" end="370" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="374" end="389" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="398" end="408" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q156258" start="485" end="495" title="Lake Ohrid" label="Lake Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q204392" start="497" end="508" title="Lake Prespa" label="Lake Prespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q158077" start="513" end="524" title="Lake Dojran" label="Lake Dojran"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="594" end="613" title="Phytogeography" label="Phytogeographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="665" end="684" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="696" end="710" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="729" end="732" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q632988" start="787" end="814" title="European Environment Agency" label="European Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="877" end="886" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201582" start="893" end="909" title="Pindus" label="Pindus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="910" end="923" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="925" end="931" title="Balkans" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="932" end="945" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="947" end="955" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="956" end="969" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="974" end="980" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="981" end="992" title="sclerophyll" label="sclerophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="1000" end="1013" title="Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="1140" end="1161" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1197" end="1206" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q391195" start="1391" end="1404" title="Šar Mountains" label="Šar Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="1559" end="1578" title="Continental climate" label="Continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189596" start="1906" end="1912" title="Vardar" label="Vardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q240592" start="3223" end="3235" title="SR Macedonia" label="SR Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269864" start="3240" end="3249" title="SR Serbia" label="SR Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861510" start="3275" end="3296" title="2008 Kosovo declaration of independence" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q391195" start="3504" end="3516" title="Šar Mountain" label="Šar Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q674219" start="3569" end="3576" title="Lepenec" label="Lepenec"/>
<link wikidata="Q121932" start="3855" end="3889" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bulgaria" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q149214" start="4024" end="4041" title="Strumica River" label="River of Strumica"/>
<link wikidata="Q500067" start="4283" end="4302" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1913)" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q204392" start="4375" end="4386" title="Lake Prespa" label="Lake Prespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435173" start="4522" end="4532" title="Voras Mountains" label="Voras Oros"/>
<link wikidata="Q158077" start="4780" end="4791" title="Dojran lake" label="Dojran lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q756645" start="4820" end="4829" title="Valandovo" label="Valandovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="4969" end="4984" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q158924" start="5125" end="5135" title="Black Drin" label="Black Drin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156258" start="5179" end="5189" title="Ohrid Lake" label="Ohrid Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="5372" end="5390" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q391195" start="5576" end="5589" title="Šar Mountains" label="Šar Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010089" start="5594" end="5601" title="Osogovo" label="Osogovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189596" start="5633" end="5639" title="Vardar" label="Vardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="6131" end="6145" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q391195" start="6165" end="6178" title="Šar Mountains" label="Šar Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q797539" start="6243" end="6256" title="Baba (North Macedonia)" label="Baba Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435173" start="6258" end="6263" title="Nidže" label="Nidže"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733631" start="6265" end="6270" title="Kožuf" label="Kozuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826026" start="6275" end="6283" title="Jakupica" label="Jakupica"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="6304" end="6317" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010089" start="6343" end="6350" title="Osogovo" label="Osogovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q587149" start="6351" end="6359" title="Belasica" label="Belasica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="6394" end="6407" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodope range"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="6735" end="6743" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189596" start="6873" end="6879" title="Vardar" label="Vardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q158924" start="7173" end="7183" title="Black Drim" label="Black Drim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346964" start="7409" end="7426" title="Skopska Crna Gora" label="Skopska Crna Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043065" start="7460" end="7474" title="Binačka Morava" label="Binačka Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q591974" start="7491" end="7503" title="South Morava" label="South Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="7518" end="7524" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q204392" start="7652" end="7658" title="Lake Prespa" label="Prespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q158077" start="7664" end="7670" title="Lake Dojran" label="Dojran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396539" start="7811" end="7819" title="Kežovica" label="Kežovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752547" start="8051" end="8070" title="Morava-Vardar Canal" label="Morava-Vardar Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157058" start="8255" end="8263" title="Gostivar" label="Gostivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157061" start="8381" end="8390" title="Gevgelija" label="Gevgelija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747381" start="8392" end="8402" title="Polykastro" label="Polykastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416162" start="8407" end="8416" title="Axioupoli" label="Axioupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="8457" end="8474" title="Central Macedonia" label="Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="8483" end="8495" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275099" start="8755" end="8770" title="Pirin Macedonia" label="Pirin Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604025" start="8830" end="8835" title="Polog" label="Polog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566460" start="8942" end="8963" title="Greek National Road 1" label="Greek National Road 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="9359" end="9366" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="10014" end="10025" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511" start="10030" end="10045" title="Lake Tanganyika" label="Lake Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="10118" end="10131" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10136" end="10149" title="sestile algae" label="sestile algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35047" start="10294" end="10302" title="cyprinid" label="cyprinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q567918" start="10383" end="10394" title="Ohrid trout" label="Ohrid trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="10586" end="10596" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="10599" end="10606" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502673" start="10621" end="10630" title="planarian" label="planarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="10684" end="10689" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156858" start="10694" end="10700" title="Struga" label="Struga"/>
<link wikidata="Q73639" start="10721" end="10729" title="Pogradec" label="Pogradec"/>
<link wikidata="Q787032" start="11236" end="11246" title="Golem Grad" label="Golem Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="11493" end="11498" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q956963" start="11800" end="11806" title="Dojran" label="Dojran"/>
<link wikidata="Q21080220" start="11877" end="11884" title="Mouries" label="Mouries"/>
<link wikidata="Q587149" start="11932" end="11940" title="Belasica" label="Belasica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707703" start="11979" end="11986" title="Doirani" label="Doirani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="12203" end="12211" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="12217" end="12223" title="Genus (biology)" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="12248" end="12255" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="12289" end="12304" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="12379" end="12383" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="12392" end="12411" title="Phytogeography" label="Phytogeographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="12469" end="12488" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="12500" end="12514" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="12533" end="12536" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q632988" start="12591" end="12618" title="European Environment Agency" label="European Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="12678" end="12687" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201582" start="12694" end="12710" title="Pindus Mountains" label="Pindus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="12711" end="12724" title="mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="12726" end="12732" title="Balkan" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="12733" end="12746" title="mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="12748" end="12756" title="Rhodopes" label="Rhodopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="12757" end="12770" title="mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="12775" end="12781" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="12782" end="12796" title="sclerophyllous" label="sclerophyllous"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="12801" end="12814" title="mixed forests" label="mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="12881" end="12885" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="12891" end="12897" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="12899" end="12903" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="12905" end="12909" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q107172" start="12911" end="12919" title="chromite" label="chromite"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="12921" end="12930" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="12932" end="12938" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="12940" end="12948" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="12950" end="12954" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="12956" end="12962" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="12964" end="12972" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="12978" end="12984" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q424114" start="13047" end="13056" title="lorandite" label="lorandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="13136" end="13147" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="13170" end="13174" title="crop" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="13609" end="13617" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q204392" start="13858" end="13869" title="Lake Prespa" label="Lake Prespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="13939" end="13954" title="Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Bern Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q157050" start="14304" end="14309" title="Veles (city)" label="Veles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="15202" end="15227" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="15334" end="15348" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q157024" start="15763" end="15769" title="Tetovo" label="Tetovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157058" start="15774" end="15782" title="Gostivar" label="Gostivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="15784" end="15790" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q157032" start="15792" end="15798" title="Prilep" label="Prilep"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="16005" end="16017" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q54452" start="16280" end="16288" title="Kumanovo" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422929" start="16639" end="16651" title="primate city" label="primate city"/>
<link wikidata="Q646793" start="16686" end="16700" title="Municipalities of the Republic of North Macedonia" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="16733" end="16744" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="16881" end="16900" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406544" start="16914" end="16941" title="Religion in North Macedonia" label="Eastern Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="16943" end="16959" title="Albanians in the Republic of Macedonia" label="Ethnic Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593852" start="17096" end="17101" title="Turks in North Macedonia" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018921" start="17218" end="17226" title="Plasnica Municipality" label="Plasnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779085" start="17231" end="17242" title="Centar Župa Municipality" label="Centar Župa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="17249" end="17255" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262389" start="17351" end="17356" title="Serbs in the Republic of Macedonia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21115" start="17532" end="17538" title="Skopje statistical region" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461478" start="17540" end="17549" title="Pelagonia statistical region" label="Pelagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587956" start="17551" end="17556" title="Polog statistical region" label="Polog"/>
<link wikidata="Q743691" start="17558" end="17564" title="Vardar statistical region" label="Vardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465731" start="17566" end="17573" title="Eastern statistical region" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077037" start="17575" end="17587" title="Southeastern statistical region" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077026" start="17589" end="17601" title="Northeastern statistical region" label="Northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415305" start="17606" end="17618" title="Southwestern statistical region" label="Southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q578179" start="18196" end="18221" title="1963 Skopje earthquake" label="Skopje earthquake of 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="18519" end="18533" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="18538" end="18542" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153903" start="18576" end="18592" title="Prespa agreement" label="Prespa agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="18897" end="18909" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="19165" end="19172" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="19182" end="19190" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="19195" end="19201" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="19203" end="19209" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="19214" end="19219" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="19233" end="19241" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="19445" end="19451" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377179" start="19518" end="19552" title="European Agency for Reconstruction" label="European Agency for Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="19736" end="19742" title="Italia" label="Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="19842" end="19850" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="19884" end="19890" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="19892" end="19896" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="19898" end="19907" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="19912" end="19918" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="19955" end="19961" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="19966" end="19973" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="19997" end="20004" title="Lignite" label="Lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="20193" end="20204" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814" start="20386" end="20394" title="Strumica" label="Strumica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="20426" end="20432" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="20439" end="20447" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="20573" end="20577" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="20582" end="20589" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="20621" end="20625" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q214344" start="20643" end="20649" title="Kočani" label="Kočani"/>
<link wikidata="Q147243" start="20723" end="20727" title="Štip" label="Štip"/>
<link wikidata="Q956963" start="21522" end="21528" title="Dojran" label="Dojran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="21691" end="21710" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q974375" start="21740" end="21766" title="Economy of North Macedonia" label="Economy of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="21768" end="21783" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073391" start="21785" end="21811" title="Tourism in North Macedonia" label="Tourism in North Macedonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19081" wikidata="Q1751505" url="?curid=19081" title="Demographics of North Macedonia">
<text>Demographic features of the population of North Macedonia include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Total population==


==International statistics and estimates==
According to statistics from the European Union, the actual population has been reduced by at least 230,000 people who emigrated into European Union member states between 1998 and 2011. Further Albanian news sources estimated at October 2012 that the real population is closer to the sum of 1,744,237 people who are accounted within all of the health funds of the country. According to Bozhidar Dimitrov, the Bulgarian authorities have granted 87,000 to many of those emigrants a Bulgarian passport, as of 2012, which requires that they declare to be ethnic Bulgarians. Since Bulgaria&#x27;s entry into the European Union, and under pressure from fellow European Union members, Bulgaria imposed more stringent rules and measures for the acquisition of a Bulgarian citizenship and passport.

The provisions of the Ohrid agreement to elevate any minority language if the minority in question is above 20% of the population of any municipality into a co-official language for that municipality has created friction within the government, and between officials of different political and ethnic interests, resulting in the indefinite postponement of the census for almost twenty years until it was finally conducted in 2021.

==Vital statistics==
Source: State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia

Population Data for period 2003-2020 was revised by the Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia 

===Current vital statistics===


==Marriages and divorces==
==Ethnic groups==
The process of industrialization and urbanization after the Second World War that caused the population growth to decrease involved the ethnic Macedonians to a greater extent than Muslims. Rates of increase were very high among rural Muslims: Turks and Torbesh (Macedonian Muslims) had rates 2.5 times those of the Macedonian majority, while Roma had rates 3 times as high. In 1994, Macedonians had a TFR of 2.07, while the TFR of others were: Albanian (2.10), Turkish (3.55), Roma (4.01), Serb (2.07), Vlachs (1.88) and Others (3.05). The TFR by religions was: Christian (2.17, with 2.20 for Catholics and 2.06 for Orthodox), Islam (4.02) and others (2.16).

However, it is unlikely that this high minority TFR has continued since then in North Macedonia, as Balkan fertility elsewhere (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo) has dropped sharply toward the European average. A more recent survey pegs Muslim fertility in North Macedonia at 1.7, versus 1.5 for non-Muslims.

In 2017, 21,754 children were born in North Macedonia. The ethnic affiliation of these newborns was: 11,260 (51.76%) Macedonian; 7,404 (34.03%) Albanian; 940 (4.32%) Turkish; 1,276 (5.87%) Roma; 40 (0.18%) Vlach; 129 (0.59%) Serbian; 213 (0.98%) Bosniaks; 492 (2,26%) other ethnic affiliation and unknown. In the school year 2016/2017 there were 192 715 students in elementary schools from which 104,756 (55%) were Macedonian, and 60,971 (32%) were Albanian, and in High schools there were 72 482 students from which 43,658 (60.1%) were Macedonian and 22 419 (30.9%) were Albanians. Furthermore, in 1999 Albanians accounted for 34.6% of newborns and 26.1% of students who finished high school in 2016, which was regulated by the Ministry of Education.

==Languages==
Source:
==Religion==
Source:

== &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot; demographic statistics ==
The following demographic statistics are from the &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot;, unless otherwise indicated.

===Age structure===
* 0–14 years: 19.5% (male 210,078; female 203,106)
* 15–64 years: 67.8% (male 707,298; female 696,830)
* 65 years and over: 12.7% (male 97,437; female 124,661) (2004 est)

===Sex ratio===
* at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
* under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
* 15–64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
* 65 years and over: 0.78 male(s)/female
* total population: 1 male(s)/female (2004 est.)

===Infant mortality rate===
* total: 11.74 deaths/1,000 live births
* female: 10.73 deaths/1,000 live births (2004 est.)
* male: 12.67 deaths/1,000 live births

===Life expectancy at birth===
* total population: 74.73 years
* male: 72.45 years
* female: 77.2 years (2004 est.)

===Total fertility rate===
* 1.50 children born/woman (2015 est.)

===HIV/AIDS===
* adult prevalence rate: less than 0.1% (2001 est.)
* people living with HIV/AIDS: less than 100 (1999 est.)
* deaths: less than 100 (2001 est.)

===Nationality===
* noun: Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia
* adjective: Macedonian / of North Macedonia

==See also==

* Demographic history of North Macedonia
* Rumelia
** Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia
** Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
* Demographics of Albania
* Demographics of Bulgaria
* Demographics of Greece
* Demographics of Kosovo
* Demographics of Serbia

==References==
==Other sources==
* &quot;Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Macedonia 2004 (CD version)&quot;

==External links==

* Results of the 2002 census
* &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot; entry on North Macedonia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="demographics" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="42" end="57" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="66" end="84" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="86" end="95" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q894387" start="668" end="685" title="Bozhidar Dimitrov" label="Bozhidar Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273790" start="762" end="780" title="Bulgarian passport" label="Bulgarian passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="840" end="850" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656190" start="1036" end="1057" title="Bulgarian citizenship" label="Bulgarian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363801" start="1095" end="1110" title="Ohrid Agreement" label="Ohrid agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="1920" end="1938" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="ethnic Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593852" start="2027" end="2032" title="Turks in North Macedonia" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262476" start="2037" end="2044" title="Macedonian Muslims" label="Torbesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070998" start="2126" end="2130" title="Romani people in North Macedonia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q583150" start="2572" end="2579" title="Demographics of Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039345" start="2581" end="2603" title="Demographics of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298006" start="2605" end="2611" title="Demographics of Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="2878" end="2888" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="2905" end="2913" title="Albanians in North Macedonia" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593852" start="2927" end="2934" title="Turks in North Macedonia" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070998" start="2950" end="2954" title="Romani people in North Macedonia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409224" start="2967" end="2972" title="Aromanians in North Macedonia" label="Vlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262389" start="2986" end="2993" title="Serbs of North Macedonia" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420587" start="3007" end="3015" title="Bosniaks in North Macedonia" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="3176" end="3186" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="3210" end="3218" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="3298" end="3308" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="3333" end="3342" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="3365" end="3374" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="3674" end="3692" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829331" start="4781" end="4819" title="Demographic history of North Macedonia" label="Demographic history of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="4822" end="4829" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470996" start="4833" end="4874" title="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851965" start="4878" end="4938" title="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q583150" start="4941" end="4964" title="Demographics of Albania" label="Demographics of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145659" start="4967" end="4991" title="Demographics of Bulgaria" label="Demographics of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q958485" start="4994" end="5016" title="Demographics of Greece" label="Demographics of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298006" start="5019" end="5041" title="Demographics of Kosovo" label="Demographics of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987099" start="5044" end="5066" title="Demographics of Serbia" label="Demographics of Serbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19082" wikidata="Q1154494" url="?curid=19082" title="Politics of North Macedonia">
<text>Politics in North Macedonia occur within the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the Prime Minister is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. 

== Political system ==

The political system of North Macedonia consists of three branches: Legislative, Executive and Judicial. The Constitution is the highest law of the country. The political institutions are constituted by the will of its citizens by secret ballot at direct and general elections. Its political system of parliamentary democracy was established with the Constitution of 1991, which stipulates the basic principles of democracy and guarantees democratic civil freedom. The Elections for Representatives in the Assembly of North Macedonia is held in October. The Assembly is composed of 123 Representatives, who are elected for a period of four years. Out of this number, 120 are elected proportionally in 6 constituencies of 20 each, and 3 according to the majority principle, specifically for the diaspora (depending on turnout) (the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia representing one constituency). There are approximately 1.5 million voters registered in the General Electoral Roll for the election of Representatives in the Assembly of North Macedonia in 2.973 polling stations. The voting for the representatives is conducted according to the list system.

=== Presidents ===
* Kiro Gligorov (1991–1999)
* Boris Trajkovski (1999–2004)
* Branko Crvenkovski (2004–2009)
* Gjorge Ivanov (2009–2019)
* Stevo Pendarovski (2019–2024)
* Gordana Siljanovska-Davkova (2024–present)

== Executive branch ==

|President
|VMRO-DPMNE
|12 May 2024
|Prime Minister
|VMRO-DPMNE
|23 June 2024

=== President ===

* cannot hold any other public office or position in a political party
* is elected for a 5-year term and can serve a maximum of two terms
* is Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and President of the Security Council
* nominates a candidate from the majority party or parties in the Assembly who then proposes the Government who are elected by the Assembly
* makes diplomatic appointments and some judicial and Security Council appointments
* grants decorations, honours and pardons

=== Government ===
The power of the president is fairly limited with all other executive power being vested in what the Constitution describes as the government, i.e., the prime minister and ministers.

Ministers:
* cannot be Representatives in the Assembly
* cannot hold any other public office or follow a profession while in office
* are elected by a majority vote in the Assembly
* are granted legal immunity
* cannot be called for service in the Armed Forces
* propose laws, budget and regulations to be adopted by the Assembly
* control diplomatic policy
* make other state appointments

=== Current cabinet ===
The current cabinet is a coalition of VMRO-DPMNE, the VLEN, and ZNAM.
The members of the Cabinet of North Macedonia are chosen by the Prime Minister and approved by the Assembly, however certain cabinet level positions are chosen by both President and Prime Minister, and approved by the Assembly.

Current government as of 23 June 2024
== Legislative branch ==
The Assembly (&quot;Sobranie&quot;) has 120 members, elected for a four-year term, by proportional representation.
There are between 120 and 140 seats, currently there are 120; members are directly elected in multi-seat constituencies by closed list proportional representation vote. There is a possibility of three people being directly elected in diaspora constituencies by a simple majority vote provided there is sufficient voter turnout.

== 2020 election result ==
==2024 election result==

== Judicial branch ==
Judiciary power is exercised by courts, with the court system being headed by the Judicial Supreme Court, Constitutional Court and the Republican Judicial Council. The assembly appoints the judges, of which there are 22 in the Supreme Court, and 9 in the Constitutional Court. Supreme Court judges nominated by the Judicial Council, a 7-member body of legal professionals, and appointed by the Assembly; Constitutional Court judges appointed by the Assembly for nonrenewable, 9-year terms

== Administrative divisions ==
With the passage of a new law and elections held in 2005, local government functions are divided between 78 municipalities (, ; singular: , . The capital, Skopje, is governed as a group of ten municipalities collectively referred to as &quot;the City of Skopje&quot;. Municipalities in North Macedonia are units of local self-government. Neighbouring municipalities may establish cooperative arrangements.

== Ethnic diversity ==
The country&#x27;s main political divergence is between the largely ethnically based political parties representing the country&#x27;s Macedonian majority and Albanian minority. The issue of the power balance between the two communities led to a brief war in 2001, following which a power-sharing agreement was reached. In August 2004, the Republic&#x27;s parliament passed legislation redrawing local boundaries and giving greater local autonomy to ethnic Albanians in areas where they predominate.

== Foreign relations == 

North Macedonia is member of the ACCT,
BIS,
CE,
CEI,
EAPC,
EBRD,
ECE,
FAO,
IAEA,
IBRD,
ICAO,
ICCt,
ICRM,
IDA,
IFAD,
IFC,
IFRCS,
ILO,
IMF,
IMO,
Interpol,
IOC,
IOM,
ISO,
ITU,
NATO,
OPCW,
OSCE,
PCA,
PFP,
UN,
UNCTAD,
UNESCO,
UNIDO,
UPU,
WCL,
WCO,
WHO,
WIPO,
WMO,
WToO,
WTrO

Most notable relations with other countries include: Greece, China, the US, and Kosovo, amongst others.

=== Greece ===
North Macedonia and Greece have excellent economic, trade and business relations, with Greece being the largest investor in the country. Until the Prespa Agreement (2018), the indeterminate status of North Macedonia&#x27;s former name arose from a long-running dispute with Greece. The main points of the dispute were:
The flag: the use of Vergina Sun, a Greek state symbol, on the initial national flag used between 1992 and 1995
Constitutional issues: certain articles of the constitution that were seen as claims on Greek territory.
The naming issue was &quot;parked&quot; in a compromise agreed at the United Nations in 1993. However, Greece refused to grant diplomatic recognition to the Republic and imposed an economic blockade that lasted until the flag and constitutional issues were resolved in 1995 with the Interim Accord. The naming dispute was resolved with the Prespa Agreement, which was signed in 2018 and entered into force in February 2019.

=== United States ===
The United States and North Macedonia enjoy excellent bilateral relations. The United States formally recognised North Macedonia on 8 February 1994, and the two countries established full diplomatic relations on 13 September 1995. The U.S. Liaison Office was upgraded to an embassy in February 1996, and the first U.S. Ambassador to Skopje arrived in July 1996. The development of political relations between the United States and North Macedonia has ushered in a whole host of other contacts between the two states. In 2004, the United States recognised the country under its constitutional name of that time – Republic of Macedonia.

=== China ===
On 12 October 1993, the Government of the Republic of North Macedonia and the Government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) established diplomatic relations with North Macedonia expressly declaring that the Government of the PRC is the sole legal government of China, and Taiwan as an inalienable part of the Chinese territory. The Government of North Macedonia affirmed it would not establish any form of official relations with Taiwan.

== See also ==
* Electoral units of North Macedonia

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154494" start="0" end="27" title="Politics of North Macedonia" label="Politics in North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="60" end="73" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="74" end="99" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="100" end="108" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776220" start="122" end="136" title="Prime Minister of the Republic of Macedonia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="144" end="162" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="173" end="191" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="193" end="208" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="241" end="258" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="281" end="291" title="Forms of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="312" end="321" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="469" end="480" title="Legislative" label="Legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="482" end="491" title="Executive (government)" label="Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="496" end="504" title="Judicial" label="Judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="510" end="522" title="Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="752" end="764" title="Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q153381" start="1591" end="1604" title="Kiro Gligorov" label="Kiro Gligorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q237782" start="1619" end="1635" title="Boris Trajkovski" label="Boris Trajkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q157111" start="1650" end="1668" title="Branko Crvenkovski" label="Branko Crvenkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q57436" start="1683" end="1696" title="Gjorge Ivanov" label="Gjorge Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967423" start="1711" end="1728" title="Stevo Pendarovski" label="Stevo Pendarovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277168" start="1743" end="1770" title="Gordana Siljanovska-Davkova" label="Gordana Siljanovska-Davkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q678492" start="1812" end="1821" title="President of North Macedonia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q945717" start="1823" end="1833" title="VMRO-DPMNE" label="VMRO-DPMNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776220" start="1848" end="1862" title="Prime Minister of North Macedonia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q945717" start="1864" end="1874" title="VMRO-DPMNE" label="VMRO-DPMNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q945717" start="3053" end="3063" title="VMRO-DPMNE" label="VMRO-DPMNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q126192947" start="3069" end="3073" title="VLEN Coalition" label="VLEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q124415752" start="3079" end="3083" title="For Our Macedonia" label="ZNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258164" start="3184" end="3192" title="Assembly of North Macedonia" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="3463" end="3490" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="4545" end="4553" title="Grammatical number" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="4572" end="4578" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826590" start="5407" end="5411" title="Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique" label="ACCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="5413" end="5416" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="BIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="5418" end="5420" title="Council of Europe" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q392805" start="5422" end="5425" title="Central European Initiative" label="CEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="5427" end="5431" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="EAPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="5433" end="5437" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q659012" start="5439" end="5442" title="Economic Commission for Europe" label="ECE"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="5444" end="5447" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="5449" end="5453" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="5455" end="5459" title="World Bank" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="5461" end="5465" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="5467" end="5471" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="5473" end="5477" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="5479" end="5482" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="5484" end="5488" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="5490" end="5493" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="5495" end="5500" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="5502" end="5505" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="5507" end="5510" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="5512" end="5515" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="5517" end="5525" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="5527" end="5530" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="5532" end="5535" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="5537" end="5540" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="5542" end="5545" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="5547" end="5551" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="5553" end="5557" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="5559" end="5563" title="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="5565" end="5568" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="5570" end="5573" title="Partnership for Peace" label="PFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5575" end="5577" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="5579" end="5585" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="5587" end="5593" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="5595" end="5600" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="5602" end="5605" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="5607" end="5610" title="World Confederation of Labor" label="WCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="5612" end="5615" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="5617" end="5620" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="5622" end="5626" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="5628" end="5631" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="5633" end="5637" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="5639" end="5643" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153903" start="5912" end="5928" title="Prespa Agreement" label="Prespa Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="6013" end="6033" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="long-running dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q860490" start="6802" end="6821" title="bilateral relations" label="bilateral relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="7081" end="7087" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154494" start="7422" end="7467" title="Government of the Republic of North Macedonia" label="Government of the Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723159" start="7864" end="7898" title="Electoral units of North Macedonia" label="Electoral units of North Macedonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19083" wikidata="Q974375" url="?curid=19083" title="Economy of North Macedonia">
<text>The economy of North Macedonia has become more liberalized, with an improved business environment, since its independence from Yugoslavia in 1991, which deprived the country of its key protected markets and the large transfer payments from Belgrade. Prior to independence, North Macedonia was Yugoslavia&#x27;s poorest republic (only 5% of the total federal output of goods and services). An absence of infrastructure, United Nations sanctions on its largest market (the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), and a Greek economic embargo hindered economic growth until 1996.

Worker remittances and foreign aid have softened the subsequent volatile recovery period. The country&#x27;s GDP has increased each year except in 2001, rising by 5% in 2000. However, growth in 1999 was held down by the severe regional economic dislocations caused by the Kosovo War.

Successful privatization in 2000 boosted the country&#x27;s reserves to over $700 million. Also, the leadership demonstrated a continuing commitment to economic reform, free trade, and regional integration. The economy can meet its basic food needs, and its coal and hydroelectric power needs, but depends on outside sources for all of its petroleum, natural gas, and most of its modern machinery and parts. Inflation jumped to 11% in 2000 largely due to higher oil prices, but the currency has calmed since the exchange rate was normalised when the EU Stabilisation and Association Agreement entered into force in 2004.

==History==

North Macedonia&#x27;s economy has almost always been completely agricultural in nature from the beginning of the Ottoman Empire when it was part of the Sanjak of Üsküp and Salonica vilayet. It concentrated on pasture farming and vineyard growing. Opium poppy, introduced into the region in 1835, became an important crop as well by the late 19th century, and remained so until the 1930s.

The role of industry in the region&#x27;s economy increased during the industrial age. The geographical region of Macedonia was responsible for large outputs of textiles and several other goods in the Ottoman Empire. However, outdated techniques to produce the goods persisted. The stagnation of the regional economy began under the rule of the Kingdom of Serbia.

When World War II ended, the local economy began to experience revitalization by way of subsidies from Federal Belgrade. The subsidies assisted North Macedonia to redevelop its &quot;lost&quot; industry and shift its agricultural-centered economy to an industry-centered economy with new hearts of industry emerging all over the country in Veles, Bitola, Štip and Kumanovo. Previously, Skopje was the only industrial centre in North Macedonia, this expanded to several other cities during Socialist Yugoslavia.

After the fall of Socialist Yugoslavia, the economy experienced several shocks that damaged the local economy. Starting with the Western embargo on the Yugoslavian common market, and ending with the Greek embargo on Macedonia over the Macedonia naming dispute. The economy began to recover in 1995 and experienced a full recovery after the 2001 insurgency by ethnic Albanians. Macedonia&#x27;s GDP grew by an average of 6% annually until the 2007–2008 financial crisis, when its economy contracted. The crisis had little impact on the country. North Macedonia today maintains a low debt-to-GDP ratio and is experiencing a revitalized investment interest by companies from Turkey, Algeria, Albania, and others.

==Economic activity==

North Macedonia is vulnerable to economic developments in Europe - due to strong banking and trade ties - and dependent on regional integration and progress toward EU membership for continued economic growth. At independence in September 1991, North Macedonia was the least developed of the Yugoslav republics, producing a mere 5% of the total federal output of goods and services. The collapse of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ended transfer payments from the central government and eliminated advantages from inclusion in a de facto free trade area. An absence of infrastructure, UN sanctions on the downsized Yugoslavia, and a Greek economic embargo over a dispute about the country&#x27;s constitutional name and flag hindered economic growth until 1996. Since then, North Macedonia has maintained macroeconomic stability with low inflation, but it has so far lagged the region in attracting foreign investment and creating jobs, despite making extensive fiscal and business sector reforms. Official unemployment remains high at 24.6% (2015, Q4), but may be overstated based on the existence of an extensive gray market that is not captured by official statistics. In the wake of the global economic downturn, North Macedonia has experienced decreased foreign direct investment, lowered credit availability, and a large trade deficit. However, as a result of conservative fiscal policies and a sound financial system, in 2010 the country credit rating improved slightly to BB+ and was kept at that level in 2011. Macroeconomic stability has been maintained by a prudent monetary policy, which keeps the domestic currency pegged against the euro. As a result, GDP growth was modest, but positive, in 2010 and 2011, and inflation was under control. Latest data from North Macedonia&#x27;s State Statistical Office show that overall, output for 2012 dropped by 6.6 percent compared to 2011.

As of 2020, the country had signed free trade agreements with the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union, the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) with Switzerland, Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein, and bilateral agreements with Turkey and Ukraine.

===Free Economic Zones===
In a bid to attract more interest from domestic and foreign investors after 2000 the government has pursued a Free economic zone (FEZ) policy, in which more than a dozen geographically disparate FEZs have sprouted. One benefit is a tax holiday for 10 years. The social contribution rate hovered at approximately 30% for the five-year period to 2019.

===Agriculture===
North Macedonia produced in 2020:

* 318,000 tons of grape;
* 246,000 tons of wheat;
* 205,000 tons of bell pepper;
* 193,000 tons of potato;
* 168,000 tons of cabbage;
* 155,000 tons of tomato;
* 150,000 tons of maize;
* 148,000 tons of barley;
* 125,000 tons of watermelon;
* 106,000 tons of apple;
* 63,000 tons of onion;
* 49,000 tons of cucumber;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

===Energy===

In September 2019, it was said that &quot;thermal power plants account for 842 MW of North Macedonia’s total power generation capacity of 1.41 GW, with hydroelectricity and wind accounting for 553.6 MW and 36.8 MW, respectively.&quot; There are 20 economically-exploitable locations for coal in the country, whose total geological reserves are estimated at 2,5 billion tons. There exist four hydroelectric reservoirs, located at: Pelagonia, Kičevo, Mariovo and Tikveš. The first two produce energy, while the latter two are speculative.

===Mining and metallurgy===

The country has been home to mines since at least the Roman era. Gold, silver, lead, copper, iron, nickel, zinc, gypsum and sulfur have been or are now being economically exploited. Marble has since Ancient Greek days been quarried at Sivec.

===Trade===
North Macedonia remains committed to pursuing membership in the European Union (EU) and NATO. It became a full World Trade Organization (WTO) member in April 2003. Following a 1997 cooperation agreement with the EU, North Macedonia signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU in April 2001, giving North Macedonia duty-free access to European markets. In December 2005, it moved a step forward, obtaining candidate country status for EU accession. North Macedonia has had a foreign trade deficit since 1994, which reached a record high of $2.873 billion in 2008, or 30.2% of GDP. Total trade in 2010 (imports plus exports of goods and services) was $8.752 billion, and the trade deficit amounted to $2.149 billion, or 23.4% of GDP. In the first 8 months of 2011, total trade was $7.470 billion and the trade deficit was $1.778 billion. A significant 56.5% of North Macedonia&#x27;s total trade was with EU countries. North Macedonia&#x27;s major trading partners are Germany, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Russia, and Italy. In 2010, total trade between North Macedonia and the United States was $116.6 million, and in the first 8 months of 2011 it was $65 million. U.S. meat, mainly poultry, and electrical machinery and equipment have been particularly attractive to North Macedonia importers. Principal exports from North Macedonia to the United States are tobacco, apparel, iron, and steel.

North Macedonia has bilateral free trade agreements with Ukraine, Turkey, and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA—Switzerland, Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein). Bilateral agreements with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, and Moldova were replaced by membership in the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA). North Macedonia also has concluded an &quot;Agreement for Promotion and Protection of Foreign Direct Investments&quot; with Albania, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Belarus, Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Egypt, Iran, Italy, India, Spain, Serbia, Montenegro, People&#x27;s Republic of China, South Korea, Malaysia, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Turkey, Ukraine, Hungary, Finland, France, the Netherlands, Croatia, Czech Republic, Switzerland, and Sweden.

===Unemployment===

Unemployment is a continuing problem in the Republic&#x27;s economy where a large percentage of the Republic&#x27;s qualified labor force cannot find work. Many people lost their jobs with the collapse of Yugoslavia. As a result, national unemployment was above 35% (37.30% in 2005), but that number has since dropped to 16.6% (2019), with population below the poverty line also dropping from 30.4% (2011) to 21.5% (2015), it is reasonable to assume that based on the trend over the past few years, further declines are likely for both unemployment and poverty. Full-time employment has risen steadily over the last few years, with part-time employment trending slightly downward over the same period resulting in an overall increase to employment, wages increased sharply after 2008, with steady increases continuing into 2016

===Tourism===
Tourism is a significant part of the economy.

==Macroeconomics==
Real GDP in the first half of 2011 increased by 5.2%. This robust growth was mainly driven by 23.6% growth in the construction sector; 13.2% in mining, quarrying, and manufacturing; 12.4% in wholesale and retail trade; and 4.2% in transport and communication services. Industrial output in the first 8 months of 2011 was 7.5% higher than in the same period of 2010. Low public and external debt and a comfortable level of foreign exchange reserves allowed for further relaxation of monetary policy, with the reference interest rate of the Central Bank decreasing to 4%. Due to rising prices for energy, fuel, and food on international markets, inflation increased in the first half of 2011, but later decreased to an annualized rate of 3.4% at the end of September. The official unemployment rate dropped to 24.6% in the fourth quarter of 2015, but remained one of the highest in Europe. Many people work in the gray economy, and many experts estimate North Macedonia&#x27;s actual unemployment is lower.

The government budget has generally kept within projections. The budget deficit at the end of August 2011 reached about 2% of GDP, and fiscal authorities seemed committed to keeping it under the projected target of 2.5% of GDP by the end of the year. In addition to 220 million euros (approx. $298 million) drawn from an IMF Precautionary Credit Line (PCL) in March, financing mostly came from domestic borrowing. However, by the end of the year a financing gap remained of about 50 million to 60 million euros (approx. $67 million to $81 million), which the government plans to cover by borrowing from international capital markets, supported by a policy-based guarantee by the World Bank. The central government&#x27;s public debt remained low at 26% of GDP, but represents a gradual increase from previous years. Despite lowering the Central Bank bills rate, the Central Bank has not changed liquidity indicators for banks or the reserve requirement since 2009, curbing credit growth to 7.5% in the first three-quarters of 2011. Nikola Gruevski says the government will pay off its entire debt to the private sector by February 2013 in order to improve the economy&#x27;s overall liquidity.
North Macedonia&#x27;s external trade struggled in 2010 due to the slow recovery from the economic crisis of its main trading partners, particularly EU members. Starting from a very low base, export growth in the first 8 months of 2011 reached 41.7%, topping import growth of 36.8%. The trade deficit has widened to 18.3% of GDP, approaching the end-year target of 21.9% of GDP. At the same time, the current account balance deficit significantly improved and the end-year projection was revised upward to 5.5% of GDP. This was due primarily to a 4.4% higher inflow of current transfers, mostly during the summer, and came despite a poor level of foreign direct investment (FDI) of only $237.2 million by end-July 2011. Foreign currency reserves remained at about $2.6 billion, a level that comfortably covers 4 months of imports and about 110% of the country&#x27;s short-term debt.

In October 2010, the World Bank Board of Directors approved a new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) with North Macedonia for the period 2011–2014. This CPS will provide the country assistance of about $100 million in funding for the first 2 years to improve competitiveness, strengthen employability and social protection, and increase the use of sustainable energy. This assistance also includes a commitment of $30 million in direct budget support in the form of a policy-based guarantee by the World Bank to the government to facilitate its access to financing from international capital markets, a process that had been started as of November 2011.

North Macedonia became the first country eligible for the IMF&#x27;s Precautionary Credit Line in January 2011. This program gives North Macedonia a line of credit worth 475 million euros (about $675 million) over 2 years, intended to be accessed only in case of need brought about by external shocks. The credit line was approved after extensive consultations with the IMF in October and December 2010. The IMF expects that there will be no additional withdrawals from the PCL.

North Macedonia has the best economic freedom in the region, according to the 2012 Index of Economic Freedom, released in January, 2012 by the conservative U.S. think tank Heritage Foundation and the Wall Street Journal.

===Macroeconomic trends===
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Ministry of Economy of Republic of North Macedonia
*Invest North Macedonia 
*Directorate for Technological Industrial Development Zones</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974375" start="4" end="30" title="Economy of North Macedonia" label="economy of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="127" end="137" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="273" end="288" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="419" end="433" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="471" end="501" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="510" end="515" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="578" end="588" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="843" end="853" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1114" end="1118" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1123" end="1142" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="1196" end="1205" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="1207" end="1218" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="1264" end="1273" title="Inflation" label="Inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259507" start="1409" end="1448" title="Stabilisation and Association Process" label="Stabilisation and Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1605" end="1619" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912772" start="1644" end="1659" title="Sanjak of Üsküp" label="Sanjak of Üsküp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301221" start="1664" end="1680" title="Salonica vilayet" label="Salonica vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131584" start="1739" end="1750" title="Opium poppy" label="Opium poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027480" start="1952" end="1966" title="industrial age" label="industrial age"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="1972" end="2004" title="Macedonia (region)" label="geographical region of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2082" end="2096" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="2226" end="2243" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172068" start="2251" end="2263" title="World War II in Yugoslav Macedonia" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2735" end="2755" title="Socialist Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="2764" end="2796" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="the fall of Socialist Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="2993" end="3017" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="Macedonia naming dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q817137" start="3098" end="3133" title="2001 insurgency in Macedonia" label="2001 insurgency by ethnic Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="3200" end="3226" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559695" start="3340" end="3357" title="debt-to-GDP ratio" label="debt-to-GDP ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="3447" end="3454" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="3894" end="3934" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q319014" start="5466" end="5503" title="Central European Free Trade Agreement" label="Central European Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259507" start="5517" end="5556" title="Stabilisation and Association Process" label="Stabilisation and Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5566" end="5580" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="5586" end="5617" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="5630" end="5641" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5643" end="5649" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5651" end="5658" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="5664" end="5677" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5709" end="5715" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="5720" end="5727" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="5866" end="5884" title="Free economic zone" label="Free economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="6178" end="6183" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="6203" end="6208" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="6228" end="6239" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="6259" end="6265" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="6285" end="6292" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="6312" end="6318" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="6338" end="6343" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="6363" end="6369" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="6389" end="6399" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="6419" end="6424" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="6443" end="6448" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="6467" end="6475" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138800" start="6990" end="6999" title="Pelagonia" label="Pelagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158079" start="7001" end="7007" title="Kičevo" label="Kičevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041236" start="7009" end="7016" title="Mariovo" label="Mariovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376255" start="7021" end="7027" title="Tikveš" label="Tikveš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="7181" end="7190" title="Roman era" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532449" start="7362" end="7367" title="Sivec" label="Sivec"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7446" end="7460" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="14800" end="14816" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="14854" end="14879" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19084" wikidata="Q7696077" url="?curid=19084" title="Telecommunications in North Macedonia">
<text>Telecommunications in North Macedonia include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, telegraph and the Internet.

==Radio and television==
* Radio stations: the public radio broadcaster operates over multiple stations; 3 privately owned radio stations broadcast nationally; there are about 70 local commercial radio stations (2012).
* Radios: In the Radios market, volume is expected to amount to 103.00k pieces by 2028.
* Television stations: 
** the public TV broadcaster operates 3 national channels and a satellite network; 5 privately owned TV channels broadcast nationally using terrestrial transmitters and about 15 broadcast nationally via satellite; there are roughly 75 local commercial TV stations; and a large number of cable operators offering domestic and international programming (2012); 
** 136 stations (1997).
* Television sets: 1.9 million sets in use (2008).

Television is North Macedonia&#x27;s most popular news medium. Most private media are tied to political or business interests and state media tend to support the government. Public broadcast networks face stiff competition from commercial stations, which dominate the ratings. A European Union sponsored report says that with scores of TV and radio networks, the market is overcrowded and many local broadcasters are struggling to survive financially.

==Telephones==
* Calling code: +389
* International call prefix: 00
* Main lines:
** 407,900 lines in use, 103rd in the world (2012); 
** 550,000 lines in use (2005).
* Mobile cellular:
** 2.2 million lines, 142nd in the world;
** 2.1 million lines (2008).

The combined fixed-line and mobile-cellular telephone subscribership was about 130 per 100 persons in 2012. Competition from mobile-cellular phones has led to a drop in fixed-line telephone subscriptions.

==Internet==
* Top-level domains: .mk and .мкд .
* Internet users: 
** 1.3 million users, 109th in the world; 63.1% of the population, 58th in the world (2012);
** 1.1 million users, 97th in the world, 52% of the population (2009). 
* Fixed broadband: 304,547 subscriptions, 79th in the world; 14.6% of the population, 58th in the world (2012).
* Wireless broadband: 449,646 subscriptions, 93rd in the world; 21.6% of the population, 68th in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts: 62,826 hosts, 92nd in the world (2012).
* IPv4: 657,664 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 315.8 addresses per 1000 people (2012).
* Internet service providers: 20 ISPs (2005).
* Wi-Fi coverage: 95% of the population (2006).

The United States Agency for International Development sponsored a project called &quot;Macedonia Connects&quot; which in 2006 helped to make Macedonia the first all-broadband wireless country in the world, where Internet access is available to virtually anyone with a wireless-enabled computer. Wireless access is available to about 95% of the population, even those living in remote sheepherding mountain villages where people don&#x27;t have phones. The Ministry of Education and Sciences reported that all 461 primary and secondary schools were connected to the Internet. An Internet Service Provider (On.net), created a MESH Network to provide WIFI services in the 11 largest cities/towns in the country.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Individuals and groups engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail.

The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press; however, the government does not always respect these rights in practice. The law prohibits speech that incites national, religious, or ethnic hatred, and provides penalties for violations. In November 2012 the defamation, libel and slander laws were decriminalized. Editors and media owners expressed concerns that steep fines under the revised law would cause self-censorship. The law prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.

== See also ==
* Media in North Macedonia
* Macedonian Radio Television, the public broadcaster of North Macedonia
* Makedonski Telekom
* MRT Sat or MKTV Sat, Macedonian Radio Television&#x27;s satellite service

==References==
* 
==External links==
* IT and Internet usage in Macedonia , Republic of Macedonia State Statistical Office, 29 August 2008.
* Macedonian Academic Research Network (MARnet) .
*Makedonski Telekom
*National Radio-Television .
*Makedonski Radio – Radio Skopje .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696077" start="0" end="37" title="Telecommunications in North Macedonia" label="Telecommunications in North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="150" end="164" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="344" end="350" title="Receiver (radio)" label="Radios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144899" start="432" end="451" title="Broadcast television" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="840" end="854" title="Television set" label="Television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1169" end="1183" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="1360" end="1372" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="1381" end="1406" title="List of international call prefixes" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1822" end="1838" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41319" start="1841" end="1844" title=".mk" label=".mk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="1858" end="1872" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2042" end="2057" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2154" end="2172" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="2269" end="2283" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211867" start="2327" end="2331" title="List of countries by IPv4 address allocation" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2440" end="2465" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="2486" end="2491" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="2537" end="2587" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="3112" end="3137" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="3400" end="3406" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="3419" end="3429" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3594" end="3611" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="3616" end="3621" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308225" start="3735" end="3772" title="Ethnic hatred" label="national, religious, or ethnic hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="3834" end="3863" title="defamation" label="defamation, libel and slander"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="3985" end="4000" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026560" start="4178" end="4202" title="Media in North Macedonia" label="Media in North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039906" start="4205" end="4232" title="Macedonian Radio Television" label="Macedonian Radio Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280739" start="4278" end="4296" title="Makedonski Telekom" label="Makedonski Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397404" start="4299" end="4306" title="MRT Sat" label="MRT Sat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19085" wikidata="Q1283221" url="?curid=19085" title="Transport in North Macedonia">
<text>The following is a summary of the transport system of [[Republic of North Macedonia|the Republic of North Macedonia]].

==Railways==
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;

(699 km (437 miles) of open track and of station/industrial track)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;standard gauge:&quot;
 1.435-m gauge (312 km electrified, all 25 kV 50 Hz)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;note:&quot;
a new extension of the Kumanovo-Beljakovci line to the Bulgarian border is under construction.

Restructuring of national railway MZ into infrastructure and operating companies completed in July 2007.

===Railway links with adjacent countries===
* Serbia - yes
* Kosovo - yes
* Bulgaria - no
* Greece - yes
* Albania - no

===Maps===
* UN Map
* UNHCR Atlas Map

==Roads==

&lt;br&gt;
 &quot;total&quot; (2021)
335 km of motorways (2021)

===Motorways===
A-1
Tabanovce - Kumanovo - Miladinovci - Petrovec - Veles - Gradsko - Negotino - Demir Kapija - Gevgelija

A-2
Deve Bair - Kriva Palanka - Kumanovo - Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar - Kičevo - Struga - Qafë Thanë

A-3
Ohrid - Resen - Bitola - Prilep - Veles - Štip - Kočani - Delčevo
(M-5K1 Bitola - Medžitlija)

A-4
Blace - Skopje - Petrovec - Miladinovci - Sveti Nikole - Štip - Radoviš - Strumica - Novo Selo

The first motorway in the country was the Kumanovo-Petrovec section of the A-1, opened for traffic in 1979 as part of the Brotherhood and Unity Highway which linked Central Europe to Athens.

In 2025 the country had of motorways, with additional 167km under construction 

===E-roads===

The E-road network in North Macedonia consists of:
E65
E75
E852
E871

===Road rules===

The traffic signs adhere to the Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals.

Lights must be on all the time, seatbelts are mandatory for passengers in the front and drivers are forbidden to speak on a mobile phone while driving.

The general speed limits are:
* in inhabited areas 
* outside of inhabited areas 
* on expressways 
* on motorways 

==Waterways==
None.
Lake transport (tourist and recreational boats) only, on the Greek and Albanian borders.

==Pipelines==
Oil (2004) 
Gas (2004)

==Ports and harbours==
North Macedonia has no sea access.
There are marinas for mostly recreational traffic on Ohrid Lake and other natural and artificial lakes.

==Air transport==

Air transport in North Macedonia began after the end of the First World War, when airmail traffic route was created between Novi Sad–Belgrade–Niš–Skoplje. Later, the Yugoslav flag carrier Aeroput inaugurated in 1930 a regular scheduled flight between Belgrade and Thessaloniki with a stop in Skopje airfield. Later, in 1933, Aeroput extended the route to Athens, while in 1935 Skopje was linked to Niš, Bitola, and Podujevo in 1936.

After the end of Second World War, passenger and cargo air transport reestablished, Aeroput was rebranded as JAT Yugoslav Airlines, and routes linking Belgrade, through Skopje, to Athens and Istanbul, using a Douglas DC-3, were inaugurated. During SFRY period JAT linked Skopje with Belgrade and other domestic destinations, but through Belgrade passengers from Skopje were able to catch connecting flights to all five continents. In the 1980s the Skopje airport was majorly expanded, and by late 1980s and early 1990s several companies with hub in Skopje were created, such as Palair, Avioimpex, Air Vardar, and others. After independence of North Macedonia, most became flag carriers of the newly independent country.

Beside Skopje, in North Macedonia, during second half of the 20th century, Ohrid airport was also developed, starting with the opening of regular scheduled flights between Belgrade–Skopje–Ohrid during the 1960s. Until 1990 charted flights were also inaugurated linking Ohrid with international destinations.

As of 2024, the country has no active air transport companies; the international airports of Skopje and Ohrid are served by foreign airlines.

===Airports===
17 (2002 est.)

====Airports - with paved runways====
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
11
&lt;br&gt;8,000 to 9,999 ft:
2
&lt;br&gt;under 3,000 ft:
8 (2000 est.)

====Airports - with unpaved runways====
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
6
&lt;br&gt;3,000 to 4,999 ft:
3
&lt;br&gt;under 3,000 ft:
3 (2000 est.)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1283221" start="34" end="117" title="Transport in North Macedonia" label="transport system of [[Republic of North Macedonia|the Republic of North Macedonia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q54452" start="372" end="380" title="Kumanovo" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="381" end="391" title="Beljakovci" label="Beljakovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526623" start="597" end="603" title="Transport in Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997824" start="612" end="618" title="Transport in Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276487" start="627" end="635" title="Transport in Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266383" start="643" end="649" title="Transport in Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17355584" start="658" end="665" title="Transport in Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q606601" start="803" end="806" title="A1 motorway (North Macedonia)" label="A-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044259" start="807" end="816" title="Tabanovce" label="Tabanovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q54452" start="819" end="827" title="Kumanovo" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133887" start="830" end="841" title="Miladinovci" label="Miladinovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087537" start="844" end="852" title="Petrovec, North Macedonia" label="Petrovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q157050" start="855" end="860" title="Veles (city)" label="Veles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603922" start="863" end="870" title="Gradsko, Republic of North Macedonia" label="Gradsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q164954" start="873" end="881" title="Negotino" label="Negotino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014699" start="884" end="896" title="Demir Kapija" label="Demir Kapija"/>
<link wikidata="Q157061" start="899" end="908" title="Gevgelija" label="Gevgelija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296946" start="910" end="913" title="A2 motorway (North Macedonia)" label="A-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="914" end="923" title="Deve Bair" label="Deve Bair"/>
<link wikidata="Q578396" start="926" end="939" title="Kriva Palanka" label="Kriva Palanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q54452" start="942" end="950" title="Kumanovo" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="953" end="959" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q157024" start="962" end="968" title="Tetovo" label="Tetovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157058" start="971" end="979" title="Gostivar" label="Gostivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q158079" start="982" end="988" title="Kičevo" label="Kičevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q156858" start="991" end="997" title="Struga" label="Struga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425677" start="1000" end="1010" title="Qafë Thanë" label="Qafë Thanë"/>
<link wikidata="Q145108" start="1012" end="1015" title="A3 motorway (North Macedonia)" label="A-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="1016" end="1021" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161827" start="1024" end="1029" title="Resen (town)" label="Resen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="1032" end="1038" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q157032" start="1041" end="1047" title="Prilep" label="Prilep"/>
<link wikidata="Q157050" start="1050" end="1055" title="Veles (city)" label="Veles"/>
<link wikidata="Q147243" start="1058" end="1062" title="Štip" label="Štip"/>
<link wikidata="Q214344" start="1065" end="1071" title="Kočani" label="Kočani"/>
<link wikidata="Q157738" start="1074" end="1081" title="Delčevo" label="Delčevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="1089" end="1095" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040647" start="1098" end="1108" title="Medžitlija" label="Medžitlija"/>
<link wikidata="Q64697816" start="1111" end="1114" title="A4 motorway (North Macedonia)" label="A-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432124" start="1115" end="1120" title="Blace, Čučer-Sandevo" label="Blace"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="1123" end="1129" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087537" start="1132" end="1140" title="Petrovec, North Macedonia" label="Petrovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133887" start="1143" end="1154" title="Miladinovci" label="Miladinovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q366907" start="1157" end="1169" title="Sveti Nikole" label="Sveti Nikole"/>
<link wikidata="Q147243" start="1172" end="1176" title="Štip" label="Štip"/>
<link wikidata="Q991318" start="1179" end="1186" title="Radoviš" label="Radoviš"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814" start="1189" end="1197" title="Strumica" label="Strumica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027841" start="1200" end="1209" title="Novo Selo (Novo Selo)" label="Novo Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235407" start="1333" end="1362" title="Brotherhood and Unity Highway" label="Brotherhood and Unity Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="1430" end="1438" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="1503" end="1509" title="International E-road network" label="E-road"/>
<link wikidata="Q911135" start="1550" end="1553" title="European route E65" label="E65"/>
<link wikidata="Q638912" start="1554" end="1557" title="European route E75" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041537" start="1558" end="1562" title="European route E852" label="E852"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694282" start="1563" end="1567" title="European route E871" label="E871"/>
<link wikidata="Q170285" start="1591" end="1603" title="traffic sign" label="traffic sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q699366" start="1619" end="1662" title="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals" label="Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077350" start="1830" end="1841" title="speed limit" label="speed limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2059" end="2062" title="Petroleum" label="Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="2071" end="2074" title="Natural gas" label="Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156258" start="2194" end="2204" title="Ohrid Lake" label="Ohrid Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2325" end="2340" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="2347" end="2354" title="airmail" label="airmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="2389" end="2397" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="2398" end="2406" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="2407" end="2410" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="2411" end="2418" title="Skoplje" label="Skoplje"/>
<link wikidata="Q381684" start="2453" end="2460" title="Aeroput" label="Aeroput"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="2529" end="2541" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="2663" end="2666" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="2668" end="2674" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q994245" start="2680" end="2688" title="Podujevo" label="Podujevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12428657" start="2808" end="2829" title="JAT Airways" label="JAT Yugoslav Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2879" end="2885" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2890" end="2898" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="2908" end="2920" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046866" start="3277" end="3283" title="Palair" label="Palair"/>
<link wikidata="Q791089" start="3285" end="3294" title="Avioimpex" label="Avioimpex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142389" start="3822" end="3828" title="Skopje International Airport" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q127157" start="3833" end="3838" title="Ohrid Airport" label="Ohrid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19086" wikidata="Q934286" url="?curid=19086" title="Army of North Macedonia">
<text>The Army of the Republic of North Macedonia (, ARSM) is the military of North Macedonia. The army is organized, prepared and trained to conduct armed struggle and combat and other actions to achieve its constitutional function of defending the independence and territorial integrity of North Macedonia. The army consists of the ground forces and the air force, which are further divided into branches and services. The army has a permanent composition and reserve forces. Since 2005, it is a fully professional defense force compatible with NATO standards.
On 27 March 2020, North Macedonia joined NATO as the 30th member.

== History ==
The Republic of Macedonia became a sovereign and independent state in 1991, following the 8 September referendum. On 17 November, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia was promulgated, which established that the armed forces of the Republic are responsible for protecting its territorial integrity and independence. On 15 February 1992, the Defense Law entered into force. Until this law was adopted, the armed forces consisted of the units, commands and headquarters of the Territorial Defense of the Republic of Macedonia. These forces had a wartime strength of roughly 100,000 manpower, according to a March 1991 CIA estimate, and were inherited from the Yugoslav armed forces.

Macedonia remained at peace while other republics of Yugoslavia were at war. When the Defense Law entered into force, the JNA was still present in Macedonia. A week later, on 21 February 1992, an agreement was reached for the dislocation of the JNA, signed by President Kiro Gligorov and Blagoje Adžić, Acting Federal Secretary of People&#x27;s Defense of Yugoslavia. The JNA took all of its equipment with it, stripping the facilities bare, and mining them. In some cases, even army apartments were stripped of wire and plumbing. The Belgrade newspaper Vreme estimated at the time that the JNA had removed equipment worth between $14 billion and $20 billion. It wrote that the weapons taken from Macedonia could have armed up to 30,000 troops. Macedonian officials argued that the republic had been contributing to the federal army budget since 1945, therefore most of the equipment belonged to Macedonia. The JNA withdrawal formally ended on 27 March 1992, when President Gligorov and JNA General Nikola Uzelac signed an agreement, after the previous day, the last and largest military facility, the Marshal Tito barracks in Skopje, today named Ilinden, was taken over. The first recruit of the Army of the Republic of Macedonia reported to the barracks in Ohrid on 13 April 1992, two days before the appointed date.

In 1995, the government passed the military academy law and became the 27th member of the NATO &quot;Partnership and peace&quot; initiative.

In 1996, for the first time a Macedonian army unit participated in a multinational exercise called &quot;Peace Eagle 96&quot; in Albania.

In 1999, the first class of 64 sergeants were presented in the Goce Delčev barracks to had started and finished their schooling in the new military academy of Macedonia &quot;Mihailo Apostolski&quot;.

In 2001, Macedonia struggled with an ethnic insurgency. The insurgency was a short-lived civil conflict between ethnic Albanian militants of the NLA and special police and military forces of the Republic of Macedonia. The conflict, which ended with the disarmament of the Albanian militia.

In 2006, the Macedonian army became a fully professional force and the Second Mechanized Infantry Brigade was formed.

=== Participation in international operations ===

==== War in Afghanistan ====
The then-Republic of Macedonia began its participation in the NATO-led ISAF operation in August 2002, with the allocation of two officers to the Turkish contingent. On 8 September, independence day of the Republic of Macedonia, the Macedonian flag was flown for the first time in Kabul. In March 2003, the Army of the Republic of Macedonia increased its contribution in the ISAF mission by sending one section from the 2nd Infantry Brigade as part of the German contingent. As a result of the successful execution of the mission and the high marks received for participation in ISAF, from August 2004 until the end of 2006, it participated with one mechanized infantry platoon from the Leopard unit. At the same time, in August 2005 medical personnel was sent in ISAF as part of the Combined Medical Team in the A3 format (Macedonia, Albania, Croatia), which successfully carried out tasks at the Kabul airport, firstly in the composition of the Greek Field Hospital, and later in the composition of the Czech Field Hospital.

Based on the assessments of the Alliance in the part of the declared units from the Army of the Republic of Macedonia, which achieved the required strict standards in the field of training and operational procedures, and in line with the Operational Capabilities Concept (OCC), the Army in June 2006 sent also one mechanized infantry company, part of the first mechanized infantry brigade, in the composition of the British contingent in ISAF. The trust shown from the United Kingdom towards the ninety &quot;Scorpions&quot; from the first infantry brigade, was justified in full.

The high marks from the highest command structures for the work of the unit as well as the learned lessons are only an imperative for continuing the successful mission. In the second rotation of the company for securing the ISAF command, the Republic of Macedonia increased the participation from ninety to one hundred and twenty seven participants, and from January 2008 it sent three staff officers in the ISAF Command in Kabul.

As a support to the efforts for self-sustainability of the Afghanistan National Army (ANA), beginning from March 2008, the Republic of Macedonia sent two soldiers (one officer and one NCO) as part of the Combined Multinational Operational Mentoring and Liaison Team (OMLT) in Mazar-i-Sharif while, beginning from December 2008, in cooperation with the Kingdom of Norway, a Macedonian medical team is included through one Surgical team in the organizational structure of the surgical unit of the Norwegian Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Meymanah, Afghanistan.

==== EUFOR Althea ====
North Macedonia has reaffirmed its strategic commitment for attaining membership to the EU by its resolute political commitment to support the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CSFP) and by declaring a concrete contribution to the civilian and military operations in the framework of the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP).
The participation of the then-Republic of Macedonia in the EU crisis management military operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina marked the first in the series of concrete and substantial contributions that the country provided in the framework of the civilian and military CSDP operations aimed at enhancing the EU capacities.
The Agreement with the EU for its participation in Althea was signed on 3 July 2006, in Brussels. The contribution of the Republic of Macedonia to the EU operation Althea has confirmed its progress from a consumer of the first EU military operation (Concordia 2003) into an active contributor to the CSDP (Althea 2006).
The country&#x27;s first contribution to an EU-led operation began in July 2006, by declaring a helicopter detachment, consisting of two Mi-8/17 helicopters and 21crew.
In November 2006, the Republic of Macedonia enhanced its own contribution to the EU operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina by declaring a medical team composed of 10 personnel for providing Role 1 medical support in Camp Butmir.

==== Iraq War ====

With the political consensus of all political entities in the RM as well as the overall Macedonian public in terms of the support of the Coalition in the &quot;fight against terrorism&quot;, the Republic of Macedonia took active participation by sending its units in the Iraqi Freedom Mission. Based on all legal authorizations, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia adopted decisions for sending its units to the Iraqi Freedom Mission in the period between June 2003 and December 2008 for each mission separately every 6 months during the term of the mission. The Mission started by sending two officers in the US Central Command in Tampa, in March 2003. Upon the completion of the major combat operations, the toppling of Saddam Hussein&#x27;s regime, and the adoption of Resolution 1546 of the United Nations Security Council, in June 2003 on sending a special task platoon that executed the tasks as part of the 4th infantry division of the Multi-National Force Iraq. In 2008, participation in the Iraqi Freedom Mission was increased by an additional platoon. A total of 11 rotations were conducted between June 2003 and December 2008. The eleventh rotation was the last, which completed participation in the Iraqi Mission. The overall number of personnel that participated in this mission is 490.

==== Support for KFOR ====
Having in mind the priorities in the part of logistics not only in national terms, but even more in proportion with the requirements and requests of the Alliance, the Host Nation Support Coordination Centre began to work in April 2005 as part of the NATO HQ in Skopje, a project implemented for the first time with a member nation from the Partnership for Peace. The project at the beginning was implemented on proposal of General Blease, who at that time was the Commander of NATO forces in Skopje. At the beginning, the project included 11 officers from the Army, who successfully completed the training for the obligations related to giving support from the host nation. Promoting the personal professionalism and achievements, in 2006 these officers became the basis of the Coordination Centre, which gradually began the preparations for undertaking the tasks for support to KFOR.

In June 2007, having in mind the large meaning and the projected goals, the Coordination Centre was included in the formation of the Logistics Support Command in the General Staff of the Army. In this manner as an addition to the participation in the mission in Iraq, Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Lebanon, the Army participates also in the mission for support to Kosovo.

==== UNIFIL ====
Macedonia participated in the peacekeeping mission of the United Nations in Lebanon, UNIFIL.

The security and prosperity in global terms depend more and more on the effective multilateral system. The strategic partnership with the Organization of the United Nations, whose Treaty represents the fundamental framework of the international relations, are the priority of the European Union and NATO on the international security scene. Hence, the contribution of the Republic of Macedonia in the military part with respect to the missions led by the Organization of the United National is a confirmation of the effective membership of the Republic of Macedonia in the Organization and its strategic determinations.

=== 2020– ===
Over the next thirteen months, all of NATO&#x27;s 29 member states ratified the protocol. The accession protocol entered into force on 19 March 2020, allowing North Macedonia to deposit its instrument of accession and thereby become NATO&#x27;s 30th member state on 27 March 2020. On 27 March 2020, North Macedonia became the 30th member of NATO.

== Emblem ==
The emblem of the Army is a stylized depiction of a shield found in the St. George Church in Lazarovci.

== Defence structure ==

=== Basis of the National Defence Policy and Doctrine ===
The national defence policy and doctrine are determined and based upon the following basic security policy goals of North Macedonia:

*To protect the lives and the personal safety of the civilians;
*To guarantee the independence and the territorial integrity of the state;
*To guarantee the material well-being and the prosperity of the civilians.

Its security policy aims to accomplish the following goals:
*Political and economic integration in the EU;
*Political, that is military integration in the Collective Security and Defence Systems – UN, NATO, OSCE, WEU;
*Maintaining of good equal neighbourly relations with all of our neighbours;
*Organising of our own defence system.

Starting out from the security policy provisions and goals, the defence policy of North Macedonia is based upon the following principles:
*Organising of the defence as a system which enables fulfillment of the rights and the commitments of each citizen to defend the country which is guaranteed by the Constitution;
*Organising the defence in order to fulfill the right to an individual and collective self-defence by an armed combat in case of an armed attack, guaranteed by Article 51 of the UN Charter;
*Assuring the defensive character of the defence system;
*Organisation of the Armed Forces as a deterring factor for aggression and other threats to the security of the country and capable of armed resistance in case of an aggression;
*Organising of the defence for full protection of the air sovereignty;
*Uniformity in the use of the Armed Forces.

The political defence strategy of North Macedonia is based upon:

*Deterring aggression;
*Defending the country in case of an aggression;
*Uniformity and conformity in the international co-operation in the area of defence.
North Macedonia maintains a defensive potential and combat readiness of its Armed Forces which function as a deterring factor in case of a potential aggression in accordance with its capabilities and international arrangements.

In accordance with the Article 123 of the Constitution of North Macedonia, no one in the state has the right to declare capitulation. Therefore, the defence system of North Macedonia is based on the determination to give resistance by use of an armed force against any possible aggression and for a defensive combat on the whole territory. For that purpose, the defence system is responsible to provide conditions so that all of the state authorities and institutions function and conditions for joining the collective defence and security systems as a protection of the independence and sovereignty are provided.

North Macedonia could maintain all the guarantees for its security through the collective defence and security systems. That is why North Macedonia supports the reinforcement of these collective systems and determines itself to actively participate in these systems and to cooperate with regard to the construction of the new European security architecture based upon NATO, OSCE and WEU.

To fulfill these principles and strategic goals, the defence system of North Macedonia is complete with the peacetime and warfare organisation, the basic development goals, the preparations and the use of the Armed Forces as well as the full civilian control over the Armed Forces. The defence system comprises the whole defence potential of the country: civilians, state authorities, civil protection forces, local self-management, public institutions and services and enterprises of special significance for the defence.

The preparations for a successful defence are conducted during peacetime. These include preparations of the state authorities; preparations and training of the Armed Forces and their deployment on the territory of North Macedonia; preparation of the public institutions and the local self-management; preparations of the civil population and participation in joint exercises and other forms of co-operation with the PfP and NATO member countries.

National Command Management

The management and the procedures in the field of defence of North Macedonia are defined by the Constitution, the Defence Law and by the responsibilities of the executive and judicial authorities.

The commanding with the Armed Forces is based upon the uniformity in command when using the forces and the resources, and the responsibility to execute the decisions and the orders of the one that is superior in command.

*The President of the Republic is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

The President passes the defence plan and strategy, the decisions for readiness conducting, organisation and formation structure of the Army, passes documents on development, decision on mobilization etc.

The President at the same time is the Chairman of the Security Council of North Macedonia. The Security Council considers all the defence and security related issues of North Macedonia and makes recommendations to the Parliament and to the Government.

The Parliament of North Macedonia supervises the competence of the Government with regard to the defence, it passes decisions on the existing of a direct threat from a war, declares warfare situation and peace and passes the defence budget.

The Parliamentary Interior Policy and Defence Commission has similar responsibilities.

The Government of North Macedonia has the following responsibilities: proposes the defence plan, the defence budget etc.

The Ministry of Defence develops the defence strategy and works out the assessment of the possible threats and risks. The MOD is also responsible for the defence system, training, readiness of the Armed Forces, the equipment and the development and it proposes the defence budget, etc.

== Organization ==

The primary arm of the military in North Macedonia is the Army of the Republic of North Macedonia; it is commanded by the Minister of Defense through the Chief of the General Staff (CGS). Two Deputy CGS positions include the Deputy CGS for planning, operations and readiness, under whom operates the General Staff of the Army of the Republic of North Macedonia, and the Deputy CGS for civil-military cooperation.

=== Joint Operations Command ===
Controls and co-ordinates the Mechanized Infantry, Aviation and Logistics Support Brigades

=== Mechanized Infantry Brigade of North Macedonia ===
It plays the key role in securing the safety and unity of the territory of the country. The army is divided into the rapid reaction force and strategic reserve forces. The rapid reaction forces represent the main active combat capability of the military and consist of the 1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade. The strategic reserve forces provide reserve brigades that can be called up in times of emergency.

=== Aviation Brigade of North Macedonia ===
Air Warfare and Air Defence of North Macedonia has an important role as air support element of ground forces and in enhancing flight safety. One of the main goals of the Aviation Brigade is to build up an air surveillance system, which will be the cornerstone of the air traffic safety and airspace control. The air component is made up by the Aviation and the Air Defense Forces. It is located in Skopje International Airport (near Skopje)

* Air Brigade Headquarters
** Command Company
** Air Surveillance and Reporting Battalion
** Helicopter Squadron (Mi-17)
** Air Defence Battery (9K35 Strela-10)
** Training Flight (Zlin 242L, Zlin 143L, Bell 206B-3)
** Air Force Technical Maintenance Squadron

=== Special Operations Regiment ===
Special Operations Regiment, is the main command for Special Units of the Army of Republic of North Macedonia. Under the command of the Special Operations Regiment are, The Special Forces Battalion &quot;Wolves&quot; and The Rangers Battalion as well as a Regimental Headquarters Company and Logistical Support Company.

Special Forces Battalion &quot;Wolves&quot; was formed in 1994. It consists of a Headquarters and an undisclosed number of Special Forces detachments and specializes in covert actions, Foreign Internal Defence assistance, Special Reconnaissance, Counter Terrorist operations, and Drug interdiction tasks. Its members wear the Maroon Beret.

The Rangers Battalion was formed in 2004. It consists of a Headquarters and 3 Reconnaissance and Direct Action Companies, its members wear the Ranger Green Beret. The Rangers Battalion is well respected by its allies and is continually preparing for success in conducting its missions. Since 2004 the unit has gone through an intensive development period and has put maximum effort into improving its operative ability and its readiness to manage all challenges of modern time conflicts.

The Mission of Special Operations Regiment is to provide fully organized, trained and equipped units to perform special operations and conventional specific operations, independently or in cooperation with other units of the Army and other coalition forces, in all weather and land conditions during peace, crisis and war and to support peace and conflict prevention as part of overall efforts to support internal security and foreign policy of the Republic of North Macedonia.

==== Missions outside the Republic of North Macedonia ====
* Special Operations Regiment from June 2003 to June 2008 attended by 11 contingents of rotations in the &quot;Iraqi Freedom&quot;.
* Participation in Peacekeeping &quot;ISAF-Phoenix&quot; in Afghanistan from May to December 2010.
* Participation of individuals within the missions in Bosnia, Lebanon and Afghanistan.

==== Decorations awarded ====
* Order of Merit assigned to 14 August 2012, the President of the Republic of North Macedonia, Mr. Dr. Ivanov marking the 20th anniversary of the establishment of the Army of Republic of North Macedonia;
* Medal for bravery (6)
* Bronze Star (8)
* Achievement medal (43)
* ARCOM medal (68)
* NATO medal (46)
* Altea medal (2)

=== Logistics Support Brigade ===
Formed in 2001, the Logistics Command oversees all combat service support operations, and controls the Land Forces Logistic Base and the Military Hospital.
Mission:
Planning, organizing, coordinating and executing logistical support to commands and units of the Army of the Republic of North Macedonia, of level II and III.

Tasks:
1. Planning, organizing, coordinating and executing logistical support in the following functional areas:
* supply
* maintenance and repair
* movement and transport
* medical and veterinary support
* infrastructure
* services

2. Management with materials of all classes of supply for the commands and units of the Army

3. Storage and maintenance of material supplies for the Army according to specified criteria

4. Strengthening the logistics capacity of the Army in conducting training, work in field conditions, combat engagement and participation in missions

5. Coordinating support of allied forces in transit or maintain in the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia

6. Execution of logistical support for the administrative bodies and bodies of local self-governments, organizations, associations, etc. (in special circumstances and for special orders and instructions)

=== Other commands ===
Chief of General Staff include ELINT Center and the Honor Guard Unit.

=== Command for Training and Doctrines ===

Command for Training and Doctrines
Organization, coordination and dimensional task of training the individual soldiers, cadets, NCOs and officers of the active and reserve forces, support collective training commands and units of the Army of the Republic and the development of doctrine and lessons learned in the Army of Republic of North Macedonia.In particular for meeting NATO requirements.

In order to improve the quality of training of the Army in 1996, were established several centers for basic and specialized training of individual soldiers, and collective training was done in the units. Centers were established to train: infantry, artillery, logistics, border guards, military police and reconnaissance.

== Equipment ==
== See also ==
* The Rangers Battalion
* 1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade
* Ceremonial Guard Battalion
* Military Reserve Force (North Macedonia)
* Military Service for Security and Intelligence

== Gallery ==
== Citations ==
== References ==


== Further reading ==
* A description of the total equipment of the Army of North Macedonia, including Yugoslav-inherited M84 Tanks stored. Viewing version. (download)

== External links ==
* Official website of the Army of the Republic of North Macedonia
* Ministry of Defence official site in English
* VV i PVO ARM (Air Force and Air Defence of the Army of the Republic of North Macedonia)
* U.S. Embassy Skope assessment of progress towards NATO membership, February 2006, via United States diplomatic cables leak</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q934286" start="4" end="43" title="Army of North Macedonia" label="Army of the Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q934286" start="47" end="51" title="Army of North Macedonia" label="ARSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="60" end="68" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="72" end="87" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="541" end="545" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130232" start="728" end="750" title="1991 Macedonian independence referendum" label="8 September referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q671180" start="1121" end="1140" title="Territorial Defense (Yugoslavia)" label="Territorial Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="1262" end="1265" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="1400" end="1403" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q153381" start="1598" end="1611" title="Kiro Gligorov" label="Kiro Gligorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q617022" start="1616" end="1629" title="Blagoje Adžić" label="Blagoje Adžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866778" start="1638" end="1694" title="Federal Secretary of People&amp;#x27;s Defense of Yugoslavia" label="Federal Secretary of People&amp;#x27;s Defense of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="2455" end="2461" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223508" start="2587" end="2592" title="Ohrid" label="Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088154" start="3104" end="3122" title="Mihailo Apostolski" label="Mihailo Apostolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q817137" start="3168" end="3185" title="2001 insurgency in Macedonia" label="ethnic insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q545115" start="3243" end="3258" title="Albanians in the Republic of Macedonia" label="ethnic Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296614" start="3276" end="3279" title="National Liberation Army (Macedonia)" label="NLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3683" end="3687" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="3692" end="3696" title="ISAF" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513606" start="5889" end="5927" title="Operational Mentoring and Liaison Team" label="Operational Mentoring and Liaison Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q130469" start="5938" end="5952" title="Mazar-i-Sharif" label="Mazar-i-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755495" start="17396" end="17415" title="Minister of Defense (North Macedonia)" label="Minister of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="17441" end="17454" title="Staff (military)" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q149377" start="17514" end="17522" title="Military planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="17524" end="17534" title="military operations" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q206779" start="17659" end="17685" title="civil-military cooperation" label="civil-military cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567147" start="17985" end="18005" title="rapid reaction force" label="rapid reaction force"/>
<link wikidata="Q18706999" start="18141" end="18172" title="1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade (Macedonia)" label="1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642956" start="18318" end="18364" title="North Macedonia Air Force" label="Air Warfare and Air Defence of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142389" start="18716" end="18744" title="Skopje &amp;quot;Alexander the Great&amp;quot; Airport" label="Skopje International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="18751" end="18757" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645011" start="19057" end="19084" title="Wolves (military)" label="Special Operations Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645011" start="19255" end="19273" title="Wolves (military)" label="&amp;quot;Wolves&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393694" start="23566" end="23587" title="The Rangers Battalion" label="The Rangers Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18706999" start="23590" end="23621" title="1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade (Macedonia)" label="1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515361" start="23624" end="23650" title="Ceremonial Guard Battalion" label="Ceremonial Guard Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339849" start="23653" end="23693" title="Military Reserve Force (North Macedonia)" label="Military Reserve Force (North Macedonia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511898" start="23696" end="23742" title="Military Service for Security and Intelligence" label="Military Service for Security and Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q276441" start="24274" end="24310" title="United States diplomatic cables leak" label="United States diplomatic cables leak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19087" wikidata="Q2534041" url="?curid=19087" title="Foreign relations of North Macedonia">
<text>The foreign relations of North Macedonia since its independence in 1991 have been characterized by the country&#x27;s efforts to gain membership in international organizations such as NATO and the European Union and to gain international recognition under its previous constitutional name, overshadowed by a long-standing, dead-locked dispute with neighboring Greece. Greek objections to the country&#x27;s name had led to it being admitted to the United Nations and several other international fora only under the provisional designation &quot;Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia&quot; until its official and &quot;erga omnes&quot; renaming to &quot;North Macedonia&quot;, a name under which it is now universally recognised.

==Diplomatic relations==

North Macedonia became a member state of the United Nations on April 8, 1993, eighteen months after its independence from the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It was referred within the UN as &quot;the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia&quot;, pending a resolution, to the long-running dispute about the country&#x27;s name. Unusually, the country&#x27;s flag was not raised at UN Headquarters when the state joined the UN. It was not until after the country&#x27;s flag was changed that it was raised at the UN Headquarters. Other international bodies, such as the European Union, European Broadcasting Union, and the International Olympic Committee had adopted the same naming convention. NATO also used that name in official documents but added an explanation on which member countries recognise the constitutional name. A number of countries recognised the country by its former constitutional name – the Republic of Macedonia – rather than the UN reference, notably four of the five permanent UN Security Council members (the United Kingdom, the United States, China, and Russia). All UN member states currently recognise North Macedonia as a sovereign state. 

===List of countries===
List of countries which North Macedonia maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations== 
===Multilateral===

===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
===Oceania===
==Issues==
===Flag issue===

North Macedonia&#x27;s first post-independence flag caused a major controversy when it was unveiled. The use of the Vergina Sun on the flag was seen by Greece as territorial claim to the northern Greek region of Macedonia, where the golden larnax containing the symbol was unearthed in 1977 during excavations in Vergina by Greek archaeologist Manolis Andronikos. 

The Vergina Sun, claimed by Greece as an exclusive state symbol, was removed from the flag under an agreement reached between the Republic of North Macedonia and Greece in September 1995. The Republic agreed to meet a number of Greek demands for changes to its national symbols and constitution, while Greece agreed to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic and end its economic blockade.

Under the Prespa Agreement, North Macedonia recognised (among other Ancient Macedonian elements) the Vergina Sun as a Hellenic symbol and agreed to remove the Vergina Sun from public display in all State-owned organisations, products, logos, etc. The implementation of this clause started on August 12, 2019. Within six months following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Second Party [i.e. North Macedonia] shall review the status of monuments, public buildings and infrastructures on its territory, and insofar as they refer in any way to ancient Hellenic history and civilization constituting an integral component of the historic or cultural patrimony of the First Party, shall take appropriate corrective action to effectively address the issue and ensure respect for the said patrimony.—Article 8, paragraph 2 of the Prespa agreement

The Second Party [i.e. North Macedonia] shall not use again in any way and in all its forms the symbol formerly displayed on its former national flag [i.e. the Vergina Sun]. Within six months of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Second Party shall proceed to the removal of the symbol displayed on its former national flag from all public sites and public usages on its territory. Archaeological artefacts do not fall within the scope of this provision.—Article 8, paragraph 3 of the Prespa agreement

===Constitutional issue===
North Macedonia&#x27;s first post-independence constitution, adopted on November 17, 1991 included a number of clauses that Greece interpreted as promoting secessionist sentiment among the Slavophone population of northern Greece, and making irredentist claims on Greek territory. Article 49 of the constitution caused particular concern. It read:

:&quot;(1) The Republic cares for the status and rights of those persons belonging to the Macedonian people in neighboring countries, as well as Macedonian expatriates, assists their cultural development and promotes links with them. In the exercise of this concern the Republic will not interfere in the sovereign rights of other states or in their internal affairs.&quot;
:&quot;(2) The Republic cares for the cultural, economic and social rights of the citizens of the Republic abroad.&quot;

The Greek government interpreted this as a licence for North Macedonia to interfere in Greek internal affairs. Given long-standing Greek sensitivities over the position of the country&#x27;s minority groups, the government saw this as being the most serious of the three main issues affecting relations between the two countries; the issue of the republic&#x27;s symbols, by contrast, was seen as being of much less substantive importance, even though it aroused the loudest political controversy. The Greek prime minister at the time, Constantine Mitsotakis, later commented that

:&quot;What concerned me from the very first moment was not the name of the state. The problem for me was that [we should not allow] the creation of a second minority problem in the area of western [Greek] Macedonia [the first minority being the Turkish-speaking Greeks of western Thrace]. My main aim was to convince the Republic to declare that there is no Slavomacedonian minority in Greece. This was the real key of our difference with Skopje.&quot;

The offending articles were removed under the 1995 agreement between the two sides.

==See also==

* List of diplomatic missions in North Macedonia
* List of diplomatic missions of North Macedonia
* List of state visits made by Gjorge Ivanov
* North Macedonian passport
* Foreign relations of Yugoslavia

==References==

==External links==

* Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of North Macedonia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2534041" start="4" end="40" title="Foreign relations of North Macedonia" label="foreign relations of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="51" end="63" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="184" end="188" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="197" end="211" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="335" end="342" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="448" end="462" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q332624" start="618" end="628" title="erga omnes" label="erga omnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="889" end="929" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1341" end="1355" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="1357" end="1384" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="1394" end="1425" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1466" end="1470" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="1773" end="1792" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q160016" start="1865" end="1881" title="United Nations member states" label="UN member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q866007" start="2299" end="2310" title="Vergina Sun" label="Vergina Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="2395" end="2404" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354398" start="2423" end="2429" title="Larnax (Archaeology)" label="larnax"/>
<link wikidata="Q213916" start="2496" end="2503" title="Vergina" label="Vergina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362287" start="2527" end="2545" title="Manolis Andronikos" label="Manolis Andronikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153903" start="2959" end="2975" title="Prespa Agreement" label="Prespa Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="3017" end="3035" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Ancient Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55153903" start="3781" end="3797" title="Prespa agreement" label="Prespa agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="4580" end="4591" title="irredentism" label="irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q312013" start="5719" end="5741" title="Constantine Mitsotakis" label="Constantine Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12910518" start="6321" end="6367" title="List of diplomatic missions in North Macedonia" label="List of diplomatic missions in North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635941" start="6370" end="6416" title="List of diplomatic missions of North Macedonia" label="List of diplomatic missions of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349507" start="6419" end="6461" title="List of state visits made by Gjorge Ivanov" label="List of state visits made by Gjorge Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q284469" start="6464" end="6489" title="North Macedonian passport" label="North Macedonian passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q98834063" start="6492" end="6523" title="Foreign relations of Yugoslavia" label="Foreign relations of Yugoslavia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19088" wikidata="Q1020" url="?curid=19088" title="Malawi">
<text>Malawi (; in Chichewa and Chitumbuka), officially the Republic of Malawi and formerly known as [[Nyasaland]], is a landlocked country in Southeastern Africa. It is bordered by Zambia to the west, Tanzania to the north and northeast, and Mozambique to the east, south, and southwest. Malawi spans over and has an estimated population of 21,240,689 (as of 2024). Malawi&#x27;s capital and largest city is Lilongwe. Its second largest is Blantyre, its third largest is Mzuzu, and its fourth largest is Zomba, the former capital.

The part of Africa now known as Malawi was settled around the 10th century by the Akafula, also known as the Abathwa. Later, the Bantu groups came and drove out the Akafula and formed various kingdoms such as Maravi kingdom and Nkhamanga Kingdom, among others that flourished from the 16th century. In 1891, the area was colonised by the British as the British Central African Protectorate, and it was renamed &quot;Nyasaland&quot; in 1907. In 1964, Nyasaland became an independent country as a Commonwealth realm under Prime Minister Hastings Banda, and was renamed &quot;Malawi&quot;. Two years later, Banda became president by converting the country into a one-party presidential republic. Banda was declared President for life in 1971. Independence was characterized by Banda&#x27;s highly repressive dictatorship. After the introduction of a multiparty system in 1993, Banda lost the 1994 general election. Today, Malawi has a democratic, multi-party republic headed by an elected president. According to the 2024 V-Dem Democracy indices, Malawi is ranked 74th electoral democracy worldwide and 11th electoral democracy in Africa. The country maintains positive diplomatic relations with most countries, and participates in several international organisations, including the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Southern African Development Community (SADC), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), and the African Union (AU).

Malawi is one of the world&#x27;s least-developed countries. The economy is heavily based on agriculture, and it has a largely rural and growing population. Key indicators of progress in the economy, education, and healthcare were seen in 2007 and 2008.

Malawi has a low life expectancy and high infant mortality. HIV/AIDS is highly prevalent, which both reduces the labour force and requires increased government expenditures. The country has a diverse population that includes native peoples, Asians, and Europeans. Several languages are spoken, and there is an array of religious beliefs. Although in the past there was a periodic regional conflict fuelled in part by ethnic divisions, by 2008 this internal conflict had considerably diminished, and the idea of identifying with one&#x27;s Malawian nationality had reemerged.

== Etymology ==
The first name given to what is known now as &quot;Malawi&quot; was Nyasaland, a combination of the Yao word &quot;nyasa&quot; &quot;lake&quot; and the English word &quot;land&quot;. The combined name was formed by David Livingstone, a Scottish explorer and missionary who led the Zambezi Expedition through the area in the mid-1800s. The current name &quot;Malawi&quot;, meaning &quot;flames&quot; in Chichewa and Chitumbuka, was chosen by the first president of Malawi, Kamuzu Banda, after the country achieved its independence from Great Britain in 1964.

==History==
===Pre-colonial history===

The part of Africa now known as Malawi had a very small population of hunter-gatherers before waves of Bantu peoples began emigrating from the north around the 10th century CE. Although most of the Bantu peoples continued south, some remained and founded ethnic groups based on common ancestry. By 1500, the tribes had established several kingdoms such as the Maravi that reached from north of what is now Nkhotakota to the Zambezi River and from Lake Malawi to the Luangwa River in what is now Zambia and the Nkhamanga.

Soon after 1600, with the area mostly united under one native ruler, native tribesmen began encountering, trading with and making alliances with Portuguese traders and members of the military. By 1700, however, the empire had broken up into areas controlled by many individual ethnic groups. The Indian Ocean slave trade reached its height in the mid-1800s, when approximately 20,000 people per year were believed to have been enslaved and transported from Nkhotakota to Kilwa where they were sold.

===Colonialisation (1859–1960)===

Missionary and explorer David Livingstone reached Lake Malawi (then Lake Nyasa) in 1859 and identified the Shire Highlands south of the lake as an area suitable for European settlement. As the result of Livingstone&#x27;s visit, several Anglican and Presbyterian missions were established in the area in the 1860s and 1870s; the African Lakes Company Limited was established in 1878 to set up a trade and transport concern, a small mission and trading settlement were established at Blantyre in 1876, and a British Consul took up residence there in 1883. The Portuguese government was also interested in the area, so, to prevent Portuguese occupation, the British government sent Harry Johnston as British consul with instructions to make treaties with local rulers beyond Portuguese jurisdiction.
In 1889, a British protectorate was proclaimed over the Shire Highlands, which was extended in 1891 to include the whole of present-day Malawi as the British Central Africa Protectorate. In 1907, the protectorate was renamed Nyasaland, a name it retained for the remainder of its time under British rule. In an example of what is sometimes called the &quot;Thin White Line&quot; of colonial authority in Africa, the colonial government of Nyasaland was formed in 1891. The administrators were given a budget of £10,000 (1891 nominal value) per year, which was enough to employ ten European civilians, two military officers, seventy Punjabi Sikhs and eighty-five Zanzibar porters. These few employees were then expected to administer and police a territory of around 94,000 square kilometres with between one and two million people. The same year, slavery came to its complete cessation.

In 1944, the Nyasaland African Congress (NAC) was formed by the Africans of Nyasaland to promote local interests to the British government. In 1953, Britain linked Nyasaland with Northern and Southern Rhodesia in what was the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, often called the Central African Federation (CAF), for mainly political reasons. Even though the Federation was semi-independent, the linking provoked opposition from African nationalists, and the NAC gained popular support. An influential opponent of the CAF was Hastings Banda, a European-trained doctor working in Ghana who was persuaded to return to Nyasaland in 1958 to assist the nationalist cause. Banda was elected president of the NAC and worked to mobilize nationalist sentiment before being jailed by colonial authorities in 1959. He was released in 1960 and asked to help draft a new constitution for Nyasaland, with a clause granting Africans the majority in the colony&#x27;s Legislative Council.

=== Hastings Kamuzu Banda era (1961–1993) ===

In 1961, Banda&#x27;s Malawi Congress Party (MCP) gained a majority in the Legislative Council elections, and Banda became Prime Minister in 1963. The Federation was dissolved in 1963, and on 6 July 1964, Nyasaland became independent from British rule and renamed itself Malawi, and that is commemorated as the nation&#x27;s Independence Day, a public holiday. Under a new constitution, Malawi became a republic with Banda as its first president. The new document also formally made Malawi a one-party state with the MCP as the only legal party.

In 1971, Banda was declared president-for-life. For almost 30 years, Banda presided over a rigidly totalitarian regime, which ensured that Malawi did not suffer armed conflict. Opposition parties, including the Malawi Freedom Movement of Orton Chirwa and the Socialist League of Malawi, were founded in exile. Malawi&#x27;s economy, while Banda was president, was often cited as an example of how a poor, landlocked, and heavily populated country deficient in mineral resources could achieve progress in both agriculture and industrial development.

=== Multi-party democracy (1993–present) ===
Under pressure for increased political freedom, Banda agreed to a referendum in 1993, where the populace voted for a multi-party democracy. In late 1993, a presidential council was formed, the life presidency was abolished and a new constitution was put into place, effectively ending the MCP&#x27;s rule. In 1994 the first multi-party elections were held in Malawi, and Banda was defeated by Bakili Muluzi (a former Secretary General of the MCP and former Banda Cabinet Minister). Re-elected in 1999, Muluzi remained president until 2004, when Bingu wa Mutharika was elected. Although the political environment was described as &quot;challenging&quot;, it was stated in 2009 that a multi-party system still existed in Malawi. Multiparty parliamentary and presidential elections were held for the fourth time in Malawi in May 2009, and President Mutharika was successfully re-elected, despite charges of election fraud from his rival.

President Mutharika was seen by some as increasingly autocratic and dismissive of human rights, and in July 2011 protests over high costs of living, devolving foreign relations, poor governance and a lack of foreign exchange reserves erupted. The protests left 18 people dead and at least 44 others suffering from gunshot wounds.

The Malawian flag was modified in 2010, altering three colored stripes with the white sun. It existed for a short while until 2012 when the colors of black-red-green of the old flag were restored.

In April 2012, Mutharika died of a heart attack. Over a period of 48 hours, his death was kept secret, including an elaborate flight with the body to South Africa, where the ambulance drivers refused to move the body, saying they were not licensed to move a corpse. After the South African government threatened to reveal the information, the presidential title was taken over by Vice-President Joyce Banda (no relation to Hastings Banda).

In the 2014 Malawian general election, Joyce Banda lost the elections (coming third) and was replaced by Peter Mutharika, the brother of ex-President Mutharika. In the 2019 Malawian general election president Peter Mutharika was narrowly re-elected. In February 2020 Malawi Constitutional Court overturned the result because of irregularities and widespread fraud. In May 2020 Malawi Supreme Court upheld the decision and announced a new election was held on July 2. This was the first time an election in the country was legally challenged. Opposition leader Lazarus Chakwera won the 2020 Malawian presidential election and he was sworn in as the new president of Malawi.

==Government and politics==
Malawi is a unitary presidential republic under the leadership of President Lazarus Chakwera. The current constitution was put into place on 18 May 1995. The branches of the government consist of executive, legislative, and judicial. The executive includes a President who is both Head of State and Head of Government, first and second Vice Presidents, and the Cabinet of Malawi. The President and Vice President are elected together every five years. A second Vice President may be appointed by the President if so chosen, although they must be from a different party. The members of the Cabinet of Malawi are appointed by the President and can be from either inside or outside of the legislature.
The legislative branch consists of a unicameral National Assembly of 193 members who are elected every five years, and although the Malawian constitution provides for a Senate of 80 seats, one does not exist in practice. If created, the Senate would provide representation for traditional leaders and a variety of geographic districts, as well as special interest groups, including the disabled, youth, and women. The Malawi Congress Party is the ruling party together with several other parties in the Tonse Alliance led by Lazarus Chakwera while the Democratic Progressive Party is the main opposition party. Suffrage is universal at 18 years of age, and the central government budget for 2021/2022 is $2.4 billion from $2.8 billion for the 2020/2021 financial year.

The independent judicial branch is based upon the English model and consists of a Supreme Court of Appeal, a High Court divided into three sections (general, constitutional, and commercial), an Industrial Relations Court and Magistrates Courts, the last of which is divided into five grades and includes Child Justice Courts. The judicial system has been changed several times since Malawi gained independence in 1964. Conventional courts and traditional courts have been used in varying combinations, with varying degrees of success and corruption.

Malawi is composed of three regions (the Northern, Central, and Southern regions), which are divided into 28 districts, and further into approximately 250 traditional authorities and 110 administrative wards. Local government is administered by central government-appointed regional administrators and district commissioners. For the first time in the multi-party era, local elections took place on 21 November 2000, with the UDF party winning 70% of the available seats. There was scheduled to be a second round of constitutionally mandated local elections in May 2005, but these were cancelled by the government.

In February 2005, President Mutharika split with the United Democratic Front and began his own party, the Democratic Progressive Party, which had attracted reform-minded officials from other parties and won by-elections across the country in 2006. In 2008, President Mutharika had implemented reforms to address the country&#x27;s major corruption problem, with at least five senior UDF party members facing criminal charges.

In 2012, Malawi was ranked 7th of all countries in sub-Saharan Africa in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, an index that measures several variables. Although the country&#x27;s governance score was higher than the continental average, it was lower than the regional average for southern Africa. Its highest scores were for safety and rule of law, and its lowest scores were for sustainable economic opportunity, with a ranking of 47th on the continent for educational opportunities. Malawi&#x27;s governance score had improved between 2000 and 2011. Malawi held elections in May 2019, with President Peter Mutharika winning re-election over challengers Lazarus Chakwera, Atupele Muluzi, and Saulos Chilima. In 2020 Malawi Constitutional Court annulled President Peter Mutharika&#x27;s narrow election victory last year because of widespread fraud and irregularities. Opposition leader Lazarus Chakwera won the 2020 Malawian presidential election and he became the new president.

===Administrative divisions===
Malawi is divided into 28 districts within three regions:

===Foreign relations===

Former President Hastings Banda established a pro-Western foreign policy that continued into early 2011. It included good diplomatic relationships with many Western countries. The transition from a one-party state to a multi-party democracy strengthened Malawian ties with the United States. Significant numbers of students from Malawi travel to the US for schooling, and the US has active branches of the Peace Corps, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Agency for International Development in Malawi.

Malawi maintained close relations with South Africa throughout the Apartheid era, which strained Malawi&#x27;s relationships with other African countries. Following the collapse of apartheid in 1994, diplomatic relationships were made and maintained into 2011 between Malawi and all other African countries. In 2010, however, Malawi&#x27;s relationship with Mozambique became strained, partially due to disputes over the use of the Zambezi River and an inter-country electrical grid. In 2007, Malawi established diplomatic ties with China, and Chinese investment in the country has continued to increase since then, despite concerns regarding the treatment of workers by Chinese companies and competition of Chinese business with local companies. In 2011, a document was released in which the British ambassador to Malawi criticised President Mutharika. Mutharika expelled the ambassador from Malawi, and in July 2011, the UK announced that it was suspending all budgetary aid because of Mutharika&#x27;s lack of response to criticisms of his government and economic mismanagement. On 26 July 2011, the United States followed suit, freezing a US$350 million grant, citing concerns regarding the government&#x27;s suppression and intimidation of demonstrators and civic groups, as well as restriction of the press and police violence.
Malawi has been seen as a haven for refugees from other African countries, including Mozambique and Rwanda, since 1985. These influxes of refugees have placed a strain on the Malawian economy but have also drawn significant inflows of aid from other countries. Donors to Malawi include the United States, Canada, and Germany, as well as international institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the European Union, the African Development Bank, and UN organizations. Malawi is a member of several international organizations, including the Commonwealth, the UN and some of its child agencies, the IMF, the World Bank, the African Union, and the World Health Organization. The country was the first in southern Africa to receive peacekeeping training under the African Crisis Response Initiative.

Malawi is the 79th most peaceful country in the world (of 163), according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

===Human rights===

, international observers noted issues in several human rights areas. Excessive force was seen to be used by police forces and security forces with impunity, mob violence was occasionally seen, and prison conditions continued to be harsh and sometimes life-threatening. However, the government was seen to make some effort to prosecute security forces who used excessive force. Other legal issues included limits on free speech and freedom of the press, lengthy pretrial detentions, and arbitrary arrests and detentions. Corruption within the government is seen as a major issue, despite the Malawi Anti-Corruption Bureau&#x27;s (ACB) attempts to reduce it. Corruption within security forces is also an issue. Malawi had one of the highest rates of child marriage in the world. In 2015, Malawi raised the legal age for marriage from 15 to 18.

Societal issues found included violence against women, human trafficking, and child labour. Other issues that have been raised are lack of adequate legal protection of women from sexual abuse and harassment, very high maternal mortality rate, and abuse related to accusations of witchcraft. , homosexuality has been illegal in Malawi. In one 2010 case, a couple perceived as homosexual (a man and a trans woman) faced extensive jail time when convicted. The convicted pair, sentenced to the maximum of 14 years of hard labour each, were pardoned two weeks later following the intervention of United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. In May 2012, then-President Joyce Banda pledged to repeal laws criminalising homosexuality. It was her successor, Peter Mutharika, who imposed a moratorium in 2015 that suspended the country&#x27;s anti-gay laws pending further review of the same laws. On 26 June 2021, the country&#x27;s LGBT community held the first Pride parade in Lilongwe.

==Geography==
Malawi is a landlocked country in southeastern Africa, bordered by Zambia to the northwest, Tanzania to the northeast, and Mozambique to the south, southwest, and general east. It lies between latitudes 9° and 18°S, and longitudes 32° and 36°E. The Great Rift Valley runs through the country from north to south, and to the east of the valley lies Lake Malawi (also called Lake Nyasa), making up over three-quarters of Malawi&#x27;s eastern boundary. Lake Malawi is sometimes called the Calendar Lake as it is about long and wide. The Shire River flows from the south end of the lake and joins the Zambezi River farther south in Mozambique. The surface of Lake Malawi is at above sea level, with a maximum depth of , which means the lake bottom is over below sea level at some points.
In the mountainous sections of Malawi surrounding the Rift Valley, plateaus rise generally above sea level, although some rise as high as in the north. To the south of Lake Malawi lies the Shire Highlands, gently rolling land at approximately above sea level. In this area, the Zomba and Mulanje mountain peaks rise to respective heights of .

Malawi&#x27;s capital is Lilongwe, and its commercial centre is Blantyre, with a population of over 500,000 people. Malawi has two sites listed on the UNESCO World Heritage List. Lake Malawi National Park was first listed in 1984, and the Chongoni Rock Art Area was listed in 2006.

Malawi&#x27;s climate is hot in the low-lying areas in the south of the country and temperate in the northern highlands. The altitude moderates what would otherwise be an equatorial climate. Between November and April, the temperature is warm with equatorial rains and thunderstorms, with the storms reaching their peak severity in late March. After March, the rainfall rapidly diminishes, and from May to September, wet mists float from the highlands into the plateaus, with almost no rainfall during these months.

===Flora and fauna===
Animal life indigenous to Malawi includes mammals such as elephants, hippos, antelopes, buffaloes, big cats, monkeys, rhinos, and bats; a great variety of birds, including birds of prey, parrots, and falcons; waterfowl and large waders; and owls and songbirds. Lake Malawi has been described as having &quot;one of the richest lake fish faunas in the world&quot;, being the home for some 200 mammals, 650 birds, 30+ mollusks, and 5,500+ plant species.

Seven terrestrial ecoregions lie within Malawi&#x27;s borders: Central Zambezian miombo woodlands, Eastern miombo woodlands, Southern miombo woodlands, Zambezian and mopane woodlands, Zambezian flooded grasslands, South Malawi montane forest-grassland mosaic, and Southern Rift montane forest-grassland mosaic. There are five national parks, four wildlife and game reserves and two other protected areas in Malawi. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.74/10, ranking it 96th globally out of 172 countries.

==Economy==

Malawi is among the world&#x27;s least developed countries. Around 85% of the population lives in rural areas. The economy is based on agriculture, and more than one-third of GDP and 90% of export revenues come from this. In the past, the economy has been dependent on substantial economic aid from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and other countries. Malawi was ranked the 119th safest investment destination in the world in the March 2011 Euromoney Country Risk rankings. The Malawian government faces challenges in developing a market economy, improving environmental protection, dealing with the rapidly growing HIV/AIDS problem, improving the education system, and satisfying its foreign donors to become financially independent.

In December 2000, the IMF stopped aid disbursements due to corruption concerns, and many individual donors followed, resulting in an almost 80% drop in Malawi&#x27;s development budget. However, in 2005, Malawi was the recipient of over US$575 million in aid. Many analysts believe that economic progress for Malawi depends on its ability to control population growth. A 2009 purchase of a private presidential jet followed almost immediately by a nationwide fuel shortage, which was officially blamed on logistical problems, was more likely due to the hard currency shortage caused by the jet purchase.

In addition, some setbacks have been experienced, and Malawi has lost some of its ability to pay for imports due to a general shortage of foreign exchange, as investment fell 23% in 2009. There are many investment barriers in Malawi, which the government has failed to address, including high service costs and poor infrastructure for power, water, and telecommunications. , it was estimated that Malawi had a purchasing power parity (PPP) of $22.42 billion, with a per capita GDP of $1200, and inflation estimated at 12.2% in 2017.

Agriculture accounts for 35% of GDP, industry for 19%, and services for the remaining 46%. Malawi has one of the lowest per capita incomes in the world, although economic growth was estimated at 9.7% in 2008 and strong growth is predicted by the International Monetary Fund for 2009. The poverty rate in Malawi is decreasing through the work of the government and supporting organisations, with people living under the poverty line decreasing from 54% in 1990 to 40% in 2006, and the percentage of &quot;ultra-poor&quot; decreasing from 24% in 1990 to 15% in 2007. In January 2015, southern Malawi was hit by floods. These floods affected more than a million people across the country, including 336,000 who were displaced, according to UNICEF. Over 100 people were killed, and an estimated 64,000 hectares of cropland were washed away.

===Agriculture and industry===

The economy of Malawi is predominantly agricultural. Over 80% of the population is engaged in subsistence farming, even though agriculture only contributed to 27% of GDP in 2013. The services sector accounts for more than half of GDP (54%), compared to 11% for manufacturing and 8% for other industries, including natural uranium mining. Malawi invests more in agriculture (as a share of GDP) than any other African country: 28% of GDP.

Beginning in 2006, the country began mixing unleaded petrol with 10% ethanol, produced in-country at two plants, to reduce dependence on imported fuel. In 2006, in response to low agricultural harvests, Malawi began a programme of fertilizer subsidies, the Fertiliser Input Subsidy Programme (FISP). It has been reported that this programme, championed by the country&#x27;s president, is causing Malawi to become a net exporter of food to nearby countries. The FISP ended with President Mutharika&#x27;s death. In 2020, the programme was replaced with the Affordable Inputs Program (AIP), which extends the subsidy on maize seed and fertiliser to sorghum and rice seed.

The main agricultural products of Malawi include tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, tea, corn, potatoes, sorghum, cattle, and goats. The main industries are tobacco, tea, and sugar processing, sawmill products, cement, and consumer goods. The industrial production growth rate is estimated at 10% (2009). The country makes no significant use of natural gas. , Malawi does not import or export any electricity but does import all its petroleum, with no production in the country. In 2008, Malawi began testing cars that ran solely on ethanol, and the country is continuing to increase its use of ethanol.
As of 2009, Malawi exports an estimated US$945 million in goods per year. Tobacco&#x27;s world prices declined, and the international community increases pressure to limit tobacco production. Malawi&#x27;s dependence on tobacco is growing, with the product jumping from 53% to 70% of export revenues between 2007 and 2008. The country also relies heavily on tea, tobacco, sugar, and coffee making up more than 90% of Malawi&#x27;s export revenue. Due to a rise in costs and a decline in sales prices, Malawi is encouraging farmers away from tobacco towards more profitable crops, including spices such as paprika. The move away from tobacco is further fueled by likely World Health Organisation moves against the particular type of tobacco that Malawi produces, burley leaf. It is seen to be more harmful to human health than other tobacco products. India hemp is another possible alternative, but arguments have been made that it will bring more crime to the country through its resemblance to varieties of cannabis used as a recreational drug and the difficulty in distinguishing between the two types. The cultivation of Malawian cannabis, known as Malawi Gold, as a drug has increased significantly. Malawi is known for growing &quot;the best and finest&quot; cannabis in the world for recreational drug use, according to a recent World Bank report, and cultivation and sales of the crop may contribute to corruption within the police force.
Other exported goods are cotton, peanuts, wood products, and apparel. The main destination locations for the country&#x27;s exports are South Africa, Germany, Egypt, Zimbabwe, the United States, Russia, and the Netherlands. Malawi currently imports an estimated US$1.625 billion in goods per year, with the main commodities being food, petroleum products, consumer goods, and transportation equipment. The main countries that Malawi imports from are South Africa, India, Zambia, Tanzania, the US, and China.

In 2016, Malawi was hit by a drought, and in January 2017, the country reported an outbreak of armyworms around Zomba. The moth is capable of wiping out entire fields of corn, the staple grain of residents. On 14 January 2017, the agriculture minister George Chaponda reported that 2,000 hectares of crop had been destroyed, having spread to nine of twenty-eight districts.

===Infrastructure===
, Malawi has 31 airports, seven with paved runways (two international airports) and 24 with unpaved runways. , the country has of railways, all narrow-gauge, and, as of 2003, of roadways in various conditions, paved and unpaved. Malawi also has of waterways on Lake Malawi and along the Shire River.

, there were 10.23 million mobile phone connections in Malawi. There were 4.03 million Internet users in 2022. Also, , there was one government-run radio station (Malawi Broadcasting Corporation) and approximately a dozen more owned by private enterprises. Radio, television and postal services in Malawi are regulated by the Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (MACRA). The country boasts 20 television stations by 2016 on the country&#x27;s digital network MDBNL. In the past, Malawi&#x27;s telecommunications system has been named as some of the poorest in Africa, but conditions are improving, with 130,000 land line telephones being connected between 2000 and 2007. Telephones are much more accessible in urban areas, with less than a quarter of land lines being in rural areas.

=== Science and technology ===
=== Research trends ===

Malawi devoted 1.06% of GDP to research and development in 2010, according to a survey by the Department of Science and Technology, one of the highest ratios in Africa. This corresponds to $7.8 per researcher (in current purchasing parity dollars).

In 2014, Malawian scientists had the third-largest output in Southern Africa, in terms of articles cataloged in international journals. They published 322 articles in Thomson Reuters&#x27; Web of Science that year, almost triple the number in 2005 (116). Only South Africa (9,309) and Tanzania (770) published more in Southern Africa. Malawian scientists publish more in mainstream journals – relative to GDP – than any other country of similar population size, with just 19 publications per million inhabitants cataloged in international journals in 2014. The average for sub-Saharan Africa is 20 publications per million inhabitants. Malawi was ranked 107th in the Global Innovation Index in 2021, up from 118th in 2019.

=== Policy framework ===
Malawi&#x27;s first science and technology policy dates from 1991 and was revised in 2002. The &quot;National Science and Technology Policy&quot; of 2002 envisaged the establishment of a National Commission for Science and Technology to advise the government and other stakeholders on science and technology-led development. Although the Science and Technology Act of 2003 made provision for the creation of this commission, it only became operational in 2011, with a secretariat resulting from the merger of the Department of Science and Technology and the National Research Council. The Science and Technology Act of 2003 also established a Science and Technology Fund to finance research and studies through government grants and loans but, , this was not yet operational. The Secretariat of the National Commission for Science and Technology has reviewed the &quot;Strategic Plan for Science, Technology, and Innovation&quot; (2011–2015) but, as of early 2015, the revised policy had not yet met with Cabinet approval.

In 2012, most foreign investments flowed to infrastructure (62%) and the energy sector (33%). The government has introduced a series of fiscal incentives, including tax breaks, to attract more foreign investors. In 2013, the Malawi Investment and Trade Centre put together an investment portfolio spanning 20 companies. In 2013, the government adopted a &quot;National Export Strategy&quot; to diversify the country&#x27;s exports. Production facilities are to be established for a wide range of products within the three selected clusters: oilseed products, sugar cane products, and manufacturing.

==Demographics==
===Population===
Malawi has a population of over million, with a growth rate of 3.32%, according to estimates. The population is forecast to grow to over 47 million people by 2050, nearly tripling the estimated 16 million in 2010. Malawi&#x27;s estimated 2016 population is, based on most recent estimates, 18,091,575.

===Cities===

===Ethnic groups===

Malawi&#x27;s population is made up of the Chewa, Tumbuka, Yao, Lomwe, Sena, Tonga, Ngoni, and Ngonde native ethnic groups, as well as populations of Chinese and Europeans.
===Languages===

The official language is English.

Major languages include Chichewa (42.5%), Chitumbuka (31.2%), and Chiyao (13.7%). Other native languages are Malawian Lomwe, spoken by around 250,000 in the southeast of the country; Kokola, spoken by around 200,000 people also in the southeast; Lambya, spoken by around 45,000 in the northwestern tip; Ndali, spoken by around 70,000; Nyakyusa-Ngonde, spoken by around 300,000 in northern Malawi; Malawian Sena, spoken by around 270,000 in southern Malawi; and Tonga, spoken by around 170,000 in Nkhata-Bay District in the north.

All students in public elementary school receive instruction in Chichewa, which is described as the unofficial national language of Malawi. Students in private elementary schools, however, receive instruction in English if they follow the American or British curriculum.
===Religion===

Malawi is a majority Christian country, with a significant Muslim minority. Government surveys indicate that 87% of the country is Christian, with a minority 11.6% Muslim population. The largest Christian groups in Malawi are the Roman Catholic Church, of which 19% of Malawians are adherents, and the Church of Central Africa Presbyterian (CCAP) to which 18% belong. The CCAP is the largest Protestant denomination in Malawi with 1.3 million members. There are smaller Presbyterian denominations like the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Malawi and the Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Malawi. There are also smaller numbers of Anglicans, Baptists, evangelicals, Seventh-day Adventists, and Lutherans.

Most of the Muslim population is Sunni, of either the Qadriya or Sukkutu groups. Other religious groups within the country include Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses (over 100,000), The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with just over 2,000 members in the country at the end of 2015, Rastafari, Hindus, and Baháʼís (0.2%). Atheists make up around 4% of the population, although this number may include people who practice traditional African religions that do not have any gods.

===Health===

Malawi has central hospitals, regional and private facilities. The public sector offers free health services and medicines, while non-government organizations offers services and medicines for fees. Private doctors offer fee-based services and medicines. Health insurance schemes have been established since 2000. The country has a pharmaceutical manufacturing industry consisting of four privately owned pharmaceutical companies. Some of the major health facilities in the country are Blantyre Adventist Hospital, Mwaiwathu Private Hospital, and Kamuzu Central Hospitals.

Infant mortality rates are high, and life expectancy at birth is 50.03 years. Abortion is illegal in Malawi, except to save the mother&#x27;s life. The Penal Code punishes women who seek illegal or clinical abortion with 7 years in prison, and 14 years for those perform the abortion. There is a high adult prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS, with an estimated 980,000 adults (or 9.1% of the population) living with the disease in 2015. There are approximately 27,000 deaths each year from HIV/AIDS, and over half a million children orphaned because of the disease (2015). Approximately 250 new people are infected each day, and at least 70% of Malawi&#x27;s hospital beds are occupied by HIV/AIDS patients. The high rate of infection has resulted in an estimated 5.8% of the farm labour force dying of the disease. The government spends over $120,000 each year on funerals for civil servants who die of the disease.

There is a very high degree of risk for infectious diseases, including bacterial and protozoal diarrhoea, hepatitis A, typhoid fever, malaria, plague, schistosomiasis, and rabies. Over the years, Malawi has decreased child mortality and the incidences of HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases; however, the country has been &quot;performing dismally&quot; on reducing maternal mortality and promoting gender equality. Female genital mutilation (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced in some local communities.

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Malawi&#x27;s score is &lt;mark&gt;21.9&lt;/mark&gt;, which indicates a serious level of hunger. Malawi is ranked 93rd out of 127 countries.

===Education===
In 1994, free primary education for all Malawian children was established by the government, and primary education has been compulsory since the passage of the Revised Education Act in 2012. As a result, enrollment rates for primary schools went up from 58% in 1992 to 75% in 2007. The percentage of students who begin standard one and complete standard five has increased from 64% in 1992 to 86% in 2006. According to the World Bank, youth literacy had also increased from 68% in 2000 to 75% in 2015. This increase is primarily attributed to improved learning materials in schools, better infrastructure and feeding programs that have been implemented throughout the school system. However, attendance in the secondary school falls to approximately 25%, with attendance rates being slightly higher for males. Dropout rates are higher for girls than boys.

Education in Malawi comprises eight years of primary education, four years of secondary school and four years of university. There are four public universities in Malawi: Mzuzu University (MZUNI), Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR), the University of Malawi (UNIMA) and Malawi University of Science and Technology (MUST). There are also private universities, such as Livingstonia, Malawi Lakeview, and Catholic University of Malawi. The entry requirement is six credits on the Malawi School Certificate of Education, which is equivalent to O levels.

== Women in Malawi ==

The ratio of male to female students shows women&#x27;s access to schooling starts on a par with men&#x27;s. Female students in Malawi see consistent declines as age increases. The life expectancy of women was approximately 58 in 2010, and 66 in 2017. The maternal mortality rate in Malawi is particularly low compared with countries at similar levels of development.

The inheritance rights in Malawi are equal by gender for children and for surviving spouses. A higher percentage of the male population is employed, and the female population has a higher total employed population and a very similar unemployment rate. This gap continues with wages in Malawi. The highest-ranked sub-Saharan state, Rwanda, scored a 0.791 on a 0–1 scale and Malawi scored 0.664.

Women&#x27;s participation in national politics has been shown to be weaker than men&#x27;s due to stereotypes. Female participation in politics is further restricted by gatekeepers, who provide access to the resources needed to win elections and maintain seats in parliament. This limited participation is directly correlated to the limited number of women in politics. The national parliament has appointed female members to seats in the body, and over 20% of the seats in parliament are held by women.

==Military==
Malawi maintains a small standing military of approximately 25,000, the Malawian Defence Force. It consists of army, navy and air force elements. The Malawi army originated from British colonial units formed before independence, and is now made up of two rifle regiments and one parachute regiment. The Malawi Air Force was established with German help in 1976, and operates a small number of transport aircraft and multi-purpose helicopters. The Malawian Navy was established in the early 1970s with Portuguese support, presently having three vessels operating on Lake Malawi, based in Monkey Bay. In 2017, Malawi signed the UN Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

==Culture==
The name &quot;Malawi&quot; comes from the Maravi, a Bantu ethnic group who emigrated from the southern Congo around 1400 AD. Over the past century, ethnic distinctions have diminished to the point where there is no significant inter-ethnic friction, although regional divisions still occur. The concept of a Malawian nationality has begun to form around predominantly rural people who are generally conservative and traditionally nonviolent. The &quot;Warm Heart of Africa&quot; nickname was given to the country due to the perceived loving nature of the Malawian people.

From 1964 to 2010, and again since 2012, the flag of Malawi is made up of three equal horizontal stripes of black, red, and green with a red rising sun superimposed in the center of the black stripe. The black stripe represented the African people, the red represented the blood of martyrs for African freedom, green represented Malawi&#x27;s ever-green nature and the rising sun represented the dawn of freedom and hope for Africa. In 2010, the flag was changed, removing the red rising sun and adding a full white sun in the centre as a symbol of Malawi&#x27;s economic progress. The change was reverted in 2012.

The National Dance Troupe (formerly the Kwacha Cultural Troupe) was formed in November 1987 by the government. Traditional music and dances can be seen at initiation rites, rituals, marriage ceremonies and celebrations. The indigenous ethnic groups of Malawi have a tradition of basketry and mask carving. Wood carving and oil painting are also popular in more urban centres, with many of the items produced being sold to tourists. There are several internationally recognised literary figures from Malawi, including poet Jack Mapanje, history and fiction writer Paul Zeleza and authors Legson Kayira.

===Media===
Television Malawi, run by the Malawi Broadcasting Corporation (MBC), is the national public broadcaster of Malawi. Established under an Act of Parliament in 1964, MBC operates both radio and television services.

===Sports===
Football is the most common sport in Malawi, introduced during British colonial rule. Its national team has failed to qualify for a World Cup so far but has made three appearances in the Africa Cup of Nations. Football teams include the Mighty Wanderers, Big Bullets, Silver Strikers, Blue Eagles, Civo Sporting, Moyale Barracks, and Mighty Tigers. Basketball is also growing in popularity, but its national team is yet to participate in any international competition. More success has been found in netball, with the Malawi national netball team ranked 6th in the world (as of March 2021).

===Cuisine===

Malawian cuisine is diverse, with tea and fish being popular features of the country&#x27;s cuisine. Sugar, coffee, corn, potatoes, sorghum, cattle, and goats are also important components of the cuisine and economy. Lake Malawi is a source of fish, including chambo (similar to bream), usipa (similar to sardines), and mpasa (similar to salmon and kampango). Nsima is a food staple made from ground corn and typically served with side dishes of meat and vegetables. It is commonly eaten for lunch and dinner.

==See also==

* Outline of Malawi
* Telephone numbers in Malawi

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
*Willie Molesi, &quot;Black Africa versus Arab North Africa: The Great Divide&quot;, 
*Willie Molesi, &quot;Relations Between Africans and Arabs: Harsh Realities&quot;,
* Willie Molesi, &quot;Africans and Indians: The Gulf Between&quot;, 
==External links==

* Government of the Republic of Malawi Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="0" end="6" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="13" end="21" title="Chichewa" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34138" start="26" end="36" title="Tumbuka language" label="Chitumbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="54" end="72" title="Malawi" label="Republic of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="95" end="108" title="Malawi" label="[[Nyasaland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="115" end="133" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="150" end="156" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="176" end="182" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="196" end="204" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="237" end="247" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876" start="403" end="411" title="Lilongwe" label="Lilongwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188693" start="435" end="443" title="Blantyre" label="Blantyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q502216" start="466" end="471" title="Mzuzu" label="Mzuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q219117" start="499" end="504" title="Zomba, Malawi" label="Zomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292987" start="736" end="750" title="Maravi" label="Maravi kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127797403" start="755" end="772" title="Nkhamanga Kingdom" label="Nkhamanga Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642989" start="880" end="916" title="British Central African Protectorate" label="British Central African Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="1022" end="1040" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q184945" start="1062" end="1076" title="Hastings Banda" label="Hastings Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="1187" end="1196" title="One-party state" label="one-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="1239" end="1257" title="President for life" label="President for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741498" start="1416" end="1437" title="1994 Malawian general election" label="1994 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1459" end="1469" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="1471" end="1482" title="Multi-party system" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="1546" end="1569" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072193" start="1632" end="1661" title="democracy in Africa" label="electoral democracy in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="1764" end="1790" title="international organisation" label="international organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1807" end="1821" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1827" end="1850" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="1856" end="1894" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165797" start="1907" end="1952" title="Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa" label="Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="1971" end="1984" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="2026" end="2051" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="least-developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354603" start="2057" end="2064" title="Economy of Malawi" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694053" start="2085" end="2096" title="Agriculture in Malawi" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="2264" end="2279" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="2289" end="2305" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2307" end="2315" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="2472" end="2486" title="Indigenous peoples" label="native peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="2488" end="2494" title="Asian people" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="2500" end="2509" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649306" start="2907" end="2916" title="Nyasaland" label="Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="3054" end="3071" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="3241" end="3249" title="Chichewa" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34138" start="3254" end="3264" title="Chitumbuka" label="Chitumbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921529" start="3290" end="3309" title="president of Malawi" label="president of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184945" start="3311" end="3323" title="Kamuzu Banda" label="Kamuzu Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3508" end="3523" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="3541" end="3554" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="3693" end="3705" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022510" start="3844" end="3854" title="Nkhotakota" label="Nkhotakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="3862" end="3875" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="3885" end="3896" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321671" start="3904" end="3917" title="Luangwa River" label="Luangwa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="3933" end="3939" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="4105" end="4115" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q105322255" start="4256" end="4280" title="Indian Ocean slave trade" label="Indian Ocean slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022510" start="4417" end="4427" title="Nkhotakota" label="Nkhotakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741475" start="4431" end="4436" title="Kilwa Kisiwani" label="Kilwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="4563" end="4573" title="Lake Nyasa" label="Lake Nyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279328" start="4602" end="4617" title="Shire Highlands" label="Shire Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4732" end="4740" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="4745" end="4757" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q386577" start="4824" end="4837" title="African Lakes" label="African Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188693" start="4978" end="4986" title="Blantyre" label="Blantyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="5010" end="5016" title="Consul (representative)" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q772064" start="5175" end="5189" title="Harry Johnston" label="Harry Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="5312" end="5324" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642989" start="5443" end="5478" title="British Central Africa Protectorate" label="British Central Africa Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649306" start="5518" end="5527" title="Nyasaland" label="Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="5925" end="5932" title="Punjab region" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="5933" end="5938" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="5955" end="5963" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509714" start="5964" end="5971" title="porter (carrier)" label="porters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070923" start="6194" end="6220" title="Nyasaland African Congress" label="Nyasaland African Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="6382" end="6390" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654342" start="6407" end="6443" title="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184945" start="6709" end="6723" title="Hastings Banda" label="Hastings Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6762" end="6767" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037389" start="7226" end="7247" title="Malawi Congress Party" label="Malawi Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070926" start="7279" end="7308" title="Nyasaland general election, 1961" label="Legislative Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381726" start="7327" end="7341" title="Prime Minister of Malawi" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257805" start="7549" end="7563" title="Public holidays in Malawi" label="public holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="7696" end="7711" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="7779" end="7797" title="president-for-life" label="president-for-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="7850" end="7862" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105088" start="7989" end="8001" title="Orton Chirwa" label="Orton Chirwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111012" start="8010" end="8036" title="Socialist League of Malawi" label="Socialist League of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="8375" end="8392" title="political freedom" label="political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741489" start="8412" end="8422" title="Malawian democracy referendum, 1993" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="8463" end="8484" title="multi-party democracy" label="multi-party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741498" start="8664" end="8691" title="Malawian general election, 1994" label="first multi-party elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q317107" start="8739" end="8752" title="Bakili Muluzi" label="Bakili Muluzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181586" start="8891" end="8909" title="Bingu wa Mutharika" label="Bingu wa Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978227" start="8914" end="8921" title="Malawian general election, 2004" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965140" start="9115" end="9124" title="Malawian general election, 2009" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q414713" start="9395" end="9403" title="2011 Malawian protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q103001" start="9617" end="9630" title="Flag of Malawi" label="Malawian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q57388" start="10206" end="10217" title="Joyce Banda" label="Joyce Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206416" start="10259" end="10289" title="2014 Malawian general election" label="2014 Malawian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176020" start="10357" end="10372" title="Peter Mutharika" label="Peter Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788222" start="10420" end="10450" title="2019 Malawian general election" label="2019 Malawian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202782" start="10812" end="10828" title="Lazarus Chakwera" label="Lazarus Chakwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q84358626" start="10837" end="10872" title="2020 Malawian presidential election" label="2020 Malawian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="10966" end="10973" title="unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="10974" end="10986" title="presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202782" start="11030" end="11046" title="Lazarus Chakwera" label="Lazarus Chakwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="11112" end="11120" title="Separation of powers" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="11150" end="11159" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="11161" end="11172" title="Legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="11178" end="11186" title="Judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="11235" end="11248" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="11253" end="11271" title="Head of Government" label="Head of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015531" start="11315" end="11332" title="Cabinet of Malawi" label="Cabinet of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015531" start="11543" end="11560" title="Cabinet of Malawi" label="Cabinet of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="11690" end="11700" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577811" start="11701" end="11718" title="National Assembly (Malawi)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="11822" end="11828" title="Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037389" start="12071" end="12092" title="Malawi Congress Party" label="Malawi Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="12264" end="12272" title="Suffrage" label="Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="12473" end="12480" title="English law" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832286" start="12866" end="12884" title="Traditional Courts in Malawi" label="traditional courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058387" start="13083" end="13092" title="Districts of Malawi" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185876" start="13696" end="13724" title="Democratic Progressive Party (Malawi)" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="14068" end="14086" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200721" start="14094" end="14129" title="Ibrahim Index of African Governance" label="Ibrahim Index of African Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788222" start="14586" end="14595" title="2019 Malawian general election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q84358626" start="14934" end="14969" title="2020 Malawian presidential election" label="2020 Malawian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q184945" start="15136" end="15150" title="Hastings Banda" label="Hastings Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="15165" end="15176" title="pro-Western" label="pro-Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="15177" end="15191" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="15525" end="15536" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="15542" end="15584" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="15590" end="15629" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="15639" end="15675" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741515" start="15712" end="15739" title="Malawi–South Africa relations" label="relations with South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="15755" end="15764" title="Apartheid in South Africa" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="17122" end="17128" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="17398" end="17408" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="17414" end="17441" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17447" end="17461" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="17467" end="17491" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="17588" end="17600" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="17670" end="17683" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="17693" end="17718" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="17776" end="17788" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689738" start="17808" end="17842" title="African Contingency Operations Training and Assistance" label="African Crisis Response Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="17931" end="17949" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="18388" end="18399" title="Freedom of speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="18404" end="18424" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080864" start="18459" end="18475" title="arbitrary arrest" label="arbitrary arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916005" start="18564" end="18593" title="Anti-Corruption Bureau (Malawi)" label="Malawi Anti-Corruption Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="18721" end="18735" title="child marriage" label="child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="18847" end="18869" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="18871" end="18888" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="18894" end="18906" title="child labour" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="19034" end="19052" title="maternal mortality" label="maternal mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="19095" end="19105" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q509202" start="19109" end="19122" title="LGBT rights in Malawi" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8441" start="19205" end="19208" title="man" label="man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="19215" end="19226" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="19408" end="19440" title="United Nations Secretary General" label="United Nations Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="19441" end="19452" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57388" start="19482" end="19493" title="Joyce Banda" label="Joyce Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176020" start="19568" end="19583" title="Peter Mutharika" label="Peter Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="19743" end="19747" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="19773" end="19785" title="Pride parade" label="Pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="19826" end="19844" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390485" start="20017" end="20019" title="9th parallel south" label="9°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391395" start="20024" end="20028" title="18th parallel south" label="18°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186530" start="20045" end="20048" title="32nd meridian east" label="32°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186499" start="20053" end="20057" title="36th meridian east" label="36°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="20063" end="20080" title="East African Rift" label="Great Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="20162" end="20173" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="20192" end="20197" title="Nyasa (lake)" label="Nyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279579" start="20349" end="20360" title="Shire River" label="Shire River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="20412" end="20425" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="20443" end="20453" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279328" start="20788" end="20803" title="Shire Highlands" label="Shire Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510436" start="20887" end="20894" title="Mulanje Massif" label="Mulanje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876" start="20968" end="20976" title="Lilongwe" label="Lilongwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188693" start="21007" end="21015" title="Blantyre" label="Blantyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="21094" end="21120" title="UNESCO World Heritage List" label="UNESCO World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077596" start="21122" end="21147" title="Lake Malawi National Park" label="Lake Malawi National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q832262" start="21182" end="21204" title="Chongoni Rock Art Area" label="Chongoni Rock Art Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990296" start="21226" end="21247" title="Climate of Malawi" label="Malawi&amp;#x27;s climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627006" start="21807" end="21814" title="List of mammals of Malawi" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607717" start="21920" end="21925" title="List of birds of Malawi" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q544954" start="22281" end="22315" title="Central Zambezian miombo woodlands" label="Central Zambezian miombo woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330316" start="22317" end="22341" title="Eastern miombo woodlands" label="Eastern miombo woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116459" start="22343" end="22368" title="Southern miombo woodlands" label="Southern miombo woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116464" start="22370" end="22400" title="Zambezian and mopane woodlands" label="Zambezian and mopane woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401284" start="22402" end="22430" title="Zambezian flooded grasslands" label="Zambezian flooded grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567902" start="22432" end="22476" title="South Malawi montane forest-grassland mosaic" label="South Malawi montane forest-grassland mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024562" start="22482" end="22527" title="Southern Rift montane forest-grassland mosaic" label="Southern Rift montane forest-grassland mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22544" end="22558" title=":Category:National parks of Malawi" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22565" end="22591" title=":Category:Protected areas of Malawi" label="wildlife and game reserves"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22606" end="22621" title=":Category:Protected areas of Malawi" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="22656" end="22688" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="23076" end="23086" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="23092" end="23119" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="23412" end="23420" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="24547" end="24570" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="24730" end="24738" title="Service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="24917" end="24944" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="24959" end="24971" title="poverty rate" label="poverty rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="25408" end="25414" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354603" start="25545" end="25562" title="economy of Malawi" label="economy of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="25724" end="25739" title="services sector" label="services sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="26048" end="26055" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="26210" end="26220" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="26627" end="26634" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="26700" end="26707" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="26709" end="26718" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q719312" start="26720" end="26726" title="Gossypium" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="26728" end="26731" title="Camellia sinensis" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="26733" end="26737" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="26837" end="26844" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q868404" start="26867" end="26881" title="Final good" label="consumer goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="27853" end="27860" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="27917" end="27942" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999148" start="28010" end="28021" title="Burley (tobacco)" label="burley leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="28104" end="28108" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="28256" end="28264" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="28275" end="28292" title="recreational drug" label="recreational drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741462" start="28400" end="28411" title="Malawi Gold" label="Malawi Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="28538" end="28559" title="recreational drug use" label="recreational drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="28755" end="28762" title="Clothing" label="apparel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310010" start="29298" end="29307" title="African armyworm" label="armyworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537823" start="29455" end="29470" title="George Chaponda" label="George Chaponda"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="29655" end="29676" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="29743" end="29755" title="narrow-gauge" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645474" start="29777" end="29784" title="roadway" label="roadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="29847" end="29855" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741453" start="30226" end="30268" title="Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority" label="Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="31165" end="31180" title="Thomson Reuters" label="Thomson Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="31665" end="31688" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="33453" end="33464" title="Population growth" label="growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071390" start="33786" end="33791" title="Chewa people" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q534134" start="33793" end="33800" title="Tumbuka people" label="Tumbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255780" start="33802" end="33805" title="Yao (ethnic group in Africa)" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868817" start="33807" end="33812" title="Lomwe people" label="Lomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478487" start="33814" end="33818" title="Sena people" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993042" start="33820" end="33825" title="Tonga people of Malawi" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109664" start="33827" end="33832" title="Ngoni people" label="Ngoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140817" start="33838" end="33844" title="Ngonde" label="Ngonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="33852" end="33864" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164451" start="33893" end="33900" title="Chinese people in Malawi" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704511" start="33905" end="33914" title="White Africans of European ancestry" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="33992" end="34000" title="Chewa language" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34138" start="34010" end="34020" title="Tumbuka language" label="Chitumbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36902" start="34034" end="34040" title="Yao language" label="Chiyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="34056" end="34071" title="native language" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975286" start="34077" end="34091" title="Malawi Lomwe language" label="Malawian Lomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33882" start="34151" end="34157" title="Kokola" label="Kokola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847561" start="34214" end="34220" title="Lambya people" label="Lambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983678" start="34271" end="34276" title="Ndali language" label="Ndali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272620" start="34303" end="34318" title="Nyakyusa language" label="Nyakyusa-Ngonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="34374" end="34378" title="Sena language" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847648" start="34429" end="34434" title="Tonga (Nyasa) language" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116828" start="35088" end="35125" title="Church of Central Africa Presbyterian" label="Church of Central Africa Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="35256" end="35268" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585767" start="35292" end="35330" title="Reformed Presbyterian Church of Malawi" label="Reformed Presbyterian Church of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415739" start="35339" end="35380" title="Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Malawi" label="Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="35416" end="35425" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="35427" end="35435" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="35451" end="35473" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705679" start="35479" end="35488" title="Lutheran Church of Central Africa" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="35524" end="35529" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q137108" start="35545" end="35552" title="Qadriya" label="Qadriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="35622" end="35646" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="35663" end="35710" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="35776" end="35785" title="Rastafari movement" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="35787" end="35792" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="35799" end="35806" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="35815" end="35823" title="Atheism" label="Atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="36116" end="36144" title="non-government organizations" label="non-government organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180757" start="36318" end="36346" title="pharmaceutical manufacturing" label="pharmaceutical manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="36560" end="36576" title="Infant mortality" label="Infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="36597" end="36612" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128217081" start="36638" end="36667" title="Abortion in Malawi" label="Abortion is illegal in Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="36886" end="36894" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="37566" end="37575" title="diarrhoea" label="diarrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="37577" end="37588" title="hepatitis A" label="hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="37590" end="37603" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="37605" end="37612" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="37614" end="37620" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="37622" end="37637" title="schistosomiasis" label="schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="37643" end="37649" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="37871" end="37886" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="37888" end="37913" title="Female genital mutilation" label="Female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q477625" start="39209" end="39225" title="Mzuzu University" label="Mzuzu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q30260552" start="39235" end="39291" title="Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources" label="Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q671642" start="39306" end="39326" title="University of Malawi" label="University of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104234" start="39339" end="39382" title="Malawi University of Science and Technology" label="Malawi University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q717987" start="40998" end="41020" title="Malawian Defence Force" label="Malawian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="41104" end="41126" title="British Army" label="British colonial units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944901" start="41513" end="41523" title="Monkey Bay" label="Monkey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="41555" end="41599" title="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292987" start="41657" end="41663" title="Maravi" label="Maravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="41667" end="41672" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="41718" end="41723" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q103001" start="42233" end="42247" title="flag of Malawi" label="flag of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354603" start="42751" end="42768" title="economy of Malawi" label="economic progress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42808" end="42829" title="National Dance Troupe" label="National Dance Troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="42959" end="42975" title="Initiation" label="initiation rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="42977" end="42983" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q373017" start="43083" end="43091" title="Basket weaving" label="basketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161524" start="43096" end="43100" title="mask" label="mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="43101" end="43108" title="wood carving" label="carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="43110" end="43122" title="Wood carving" label="Wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="43127" end="43139" title="oil painting" label="oil painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805618" start="43326" end="43338" title="Jack Mapanje" label="Jack Mapanje"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154030" start="43367" end="43378" title="Paul Tiyambe Zeleza" label="Paul Zeleza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518694" start="43391" end="43404" title="Legson Kayira" label="Legson Kayira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696963" start="43419" end="43436" title="Television Malawi" label="Television Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="43645" end="43653" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q365548" start="43735" end="43748" title="Malawi national football team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="43777" end="43786" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="43832" end="43853" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273240" start="43882" end="43898" title="Mighty Wanderers" label="Mighty Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434616" start="43900" end="43911" title="Nyasa Big Bullets FC" label="Big Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484007" start="43913" end="43928" title="Silver Strikers FC" label="Silver Strikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25422997" start="43930" end="43941" title="Blue Eagles FC" label="Blue Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931558" start="43943" end="43956" title="Civil Service United FC" label="Civo Sporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844885" start="43958" end="43973" title="Moyale Barracks" label="Moyale Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819098" start="43979" end="43992" title="Mighty Tigers FC" label="Mighty Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873721" start="44044" end="44057" title="Malawi national basketball team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="44145" end="44152" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006155" start="44163" end="44191" title="Malawi national netball team" label="Malawi national netball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="44469" end="44480" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956228" start="44512" end="44518" title="Oreochromis lidole" label="chambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17767599" start="44531" end="44536" title="bream" label="bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q28197217" start="44539" end="44544" title="usipa" label="usipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="44557" end="44564" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44572" end="44577" title="mpasa" label="mpasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="44590" end="44596" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757658" start="44601" end="44609" title="kampango" label="kampango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="44612" end="44617" title="Nsima" label="Nsima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112347" start="44779" end="44796" title="Outline of Malawi" label="Outline of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696609" start="44799" end="44826" title="Telephone numbers in Malawi" label="Telephone numbers in Malawi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19097" wikidata="Q5468511" url="?curid=19097" title="Foreign relations of Madagascar">
<text>Madagascar has diplomatic relations with many countries, both individual bilateral relations and by virtue of its membership of African and other regional blocs. International aid has been received from the IMF and the World Bank, and a national environmental plan supported by the World Bank and USAID began in 1990.

==Regional relations==
Madagascar historically has remained outside the mainstream of African affairs, although it is a member of the Indian Ocean Commission, the Organization of African Unity (now renamed the AU), the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa (PMAESA), and the Non-Aligned Movement. Madagascar was admitted to the Southern African Development Community in 2004.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Madagascar maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
International agencies being present in the country allows to react quickly to emergencies such as a food crisis.

===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Madagascar
* List of diplomatic missions of Madagascar
* Visa policy of Madagascar

==References==
==External links==
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Madagascar (French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="0" end="10" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="15" end="35" title="diplomatic relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q860490" start="73" end="92" title="bilateral relations" label="bilateral relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="207" end="210" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="219" end="229" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="297" end="302" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115631" start="453" end="476" title="Indian Ocean Commission" label="Indian Ocean Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="482" end="511" title="Organization of African Unity" label="Organization of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230780" start="538" end="596" title="Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa" label="Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="615" end="635" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="668" end="706" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616448" start="1020" end="1061" title="List of diplomatic missions in Madagascar" label="List of diplomatic missions in Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602153" start="1064" end="1105" title="List of diplomatic missions of Madagascar" label="List of diplomatic missions of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920514" start="1108" end="1133" title="Visa policy of Madagascar" label="Visa policy of Madagascar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19098" wikidata="Q1430684" url="?curid=19098" title="History of Malawi">
<text>The history of Malawi covers the area of present-day Malawi. The region was once part of the Maravi Empire (Maravi was a kingdom which straddled the current borders of Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia, in the 16th century). In colonial times, the territory was ruled by the British, under whose control it was known first as British Central Africa and later Nyasaland. It becomes part of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The country achieved full independence, as Malawi, in 1964. After independence, Malawi was ruled as a one-party state under Hastings Banda until 1994.

==Prehistory==

In 1991, a hominid jawbone was discovered near Uraha village that was between 2.3 and 2.5 million years old. Early humans inhabited the vicinity of Lake Malawi 50,000 to 60,000 years ago. Human remains at a site dated about 8000 BCE showed physical characteristics similar to peoples living today in the Horn of Africa. At another site, dated 1500 BCE, the remains possess features resembling San people. They might be responsible for the rock paintings found south of Lilongwe in Chencherere and Mphunzi. According to Chewa myth, the first people in the area were a race of dwarf archers which they called Akafula or Akaombwe. Bantu-speaking people entered the region during the four first centuries of the &quot;Common Era&quot;, bringing use of iron and slash-and-burn agriculture. Later waves of Bantu settlement, between the 13th and 15th centuries, displaced or assimilated the earlier Bantu and pre-Bantu populations.

==Maravi Empire==

The name Malawi is thought to derive from the word &quot;Maravi&quot;. The people of the Maravi Empire were iron workers. Maravi is thought to mean &quot;Flames&quot; and may have come from the sight of many kilns lighting up the night sky. A dynasty known as the Maravi Empire was founded by the Amaravi people in the late 15th century. The Amaravi, who eventually became known as the Chewa (a word possibly derived from a term meaning &quot;foreigner&quot;), migrated to Malawi from the region of the modern-day Republic of Congo to escape unrest and disease. The Chewa attacked the Akafula, whom no longer exist.

Eventually encompassing most of modern Malawi, as well as parts of modern-day Mozambique and Zambia, the Maravi Empire began on the southwestern shores of Lake Malawi. The head of the empire during its expansion was the Kalonga (also spelt Karonga). The Kalonga ruled from his headquarters in Mankhamba. Under the leadership of the Kalonga, sub-chiefs were appointed to occupy and subdue new areas. The empire began to decline during the early 18th century when fighting among the sub-chiefs and the burgeoning slave trade weakened the authority of the Maravi Empire.

==Trade and invasions==
===Portuguese influence===
Initially, the Maravi Empire&#x27;s economy was largely dependent on agriculture, especially the production of millet and sorghum. It was during the Maravi Empire, sometime during the 16th century, that Europeans first came into contact with the people of Malawi. Under the Maravi Empire, the Chewa had access to the coast of modern-day Mozambique. Through this coastal area, the Chewa traded ivory, iron, and slaves with the Portuguese and Arabs. Trade was enhanced by the common language of Chewa (Nyanja) which was spoken throughout the Maravi Empire.

In 1616, the Portuguese trader Gaspar Bocarro journeyed through what is now Malawi, producing the first European account of the country and its people. The Portuguese were also responsible for the introduction of maize to the region. Maize would eventually replace sorghum as the staple of the Malawian diet. Malawian tribes traded slaves with the Portuguese. These slaves were sent mainly to work on Portuguese plantations in Mozambique or to Brazil.

===Ngoni===
The decline of the Maravi Empire was due to the entry of two powerful groups into the Malawi region. In the 19th century, the Angoni or Ngoni people and their chief Zwangendaba arrived from the Natal region of modern-day South Africa. The Angoni were part of a great migration, known as the mfecane, of people fleeing from the head of the Zulu Empire, Shaka Zulu. The Ngoni people settled mostly in what is modern-day central Malawi; particularly Ntcheu and parts of Dedza district. However, some groups proceeded north; entering Tanzania and settling around Lake Victoria. But splinter groups broke off and headed back south; settling in modern-day northern Malawi, particularly Mzimba district, where they mixed with another migrant group coming from across Lake Malawi called the Bawoloka. Clearly, the mfecane had a significant impact on Southern Africa. The Angoni adopted Shaka&#x27;s military tactics to subdue the lesser tribes, including the Maravi, they found along their way. Staging from rocky areas, the Ngoni impis would raid the Chewa (also called Achewa) and plunder food, oxen and women. Young men were drawn in as new fighting forces while older men were reduced to domestic slaves and/or sold off to Arab slave traders operating from the Lake Malawi region.

=== Yao ===
The second group to take power around this time was the Yao. The Yao were richer and more independent than the Makuwa. They came to Malawi from northern Mozambique either to escape from conflict with the Makuwa, who had become their enemies, or to profit from the slave and ivory trades with the Arabs from Zanzibar, the Portuguese, and the French. In any case, upon migrating to Malawi in the 1800s, they soon began buying slaves from the Chewa and Ngoni. The Yao are recorded to have also attacked them in order to capture prisoners whom they later sold as slaves.

By the time, David Livingstone encountered them on his travels, recording their practice of slavery, they traded with the Rwozi of Zimbabwe, with the Bisa on the Luangwa river in modern-day Zambia, and even the Congo and the eastern coast. Their extensive expeditions required educated merchants and tradespeople, who were naturally proficient in using the Arabic alphabet. Craftsmen built dhows for lake travel, farmers set out irrigation for the growing of rice, and prominent members of society founded madrassahs and boarding schools. The Yao were the first, and for a long while, the only group to use firearms, which they bought from Europeans and Arabs, in conflicts with other tribes, including the Makololo who had migrated from Southern Africa after being displaced by the Zulu people.

By the 1860s, the Yao had converted to Islam. The conversion is normally attributed to connections made during their trading expeditions, especially those to the Kilwa Sultanate and Zanzibar. The conversion had begun before the 1840s, as can be told from the accounts of Salim bin Abdallah, who is better known as the Jumbe of Nkhotakota. Although the Yao were not animist before Islam, they believed in a God accessible through the intercedence of ancestral spirits. As a benefit of their conversion, the Yao employed Swahili and Arab sheikhs from the coast who promoted literacy and founded mosques; Chief Mponda in Mangochi had founded almost twelve madrassas before the Christian missionaries arrived in 1875. Their writings were in Kiswahili which became a lingua franca of Malawi from 1870 to the 1960s.

===Arabs and their Swahili allies===
Using their strong partnership with the Yao, the Arab traders set up several trading posts along the shore of Lake Malawi. The Yao expeditions to the east attracted the attention of the Swahili-Arabs. It was from the Yao, the Swahili and Arabs knew the existence and the geography of Lake Malawi. Jumbe (Salim Abdallah) followed the Yao trade route from the eastern side of Lake Malawi up to Nkhotakota. When Jumbe arrived in Nkhotakota in 1840, he found a number of Yao and Bisa well established. Some of those Yao he found in Nkhotakota were already Islamised and he opted to employ them rather than employing non-Muslim Chewa. During the height of his power, Jumbe transported between 5,000 and 20,000 slaves through Nkhotakota annually. From Nkhotakota, the slaves were transported in caravans of no less than 500 slaves to the small island of Kilwa Kisiwani off the coast of modern-day Tanzania. The founding of these various posts effectively shifted the slave trade in Malawi from the Portuguese in Mozambique to the Arabs of Zanzibar.

Although the Yao and the Angoni continually clashed with each other, neither was able to win a decisive victory. However, the Ngoni of Dedza opted to work the Yao of Mpondas. The remaining members of the Maravi Empire, however, were nearly wiped out in attacks from both sides. Some Achewa chiefs saved themselves by creating alliances with the Swahili people who were allied with the Arab slave traders.

===Lomwe of Malawi===
The Lomwe of Malawi are a recent introduction having arrived as late as the 1890s. The Lomwe came from a hill in Mozambique called uLomwe, north of the Zambezi River and south east of Lake Chilwa in Malawi. Theirs was also a story of hunger largely instigated by the Portuguese settlers moving into the neighbourhoods of uLomwe. To escape from ill-treatment, the Lomwe headed north and entered Nyasaland by way of the southern tip of lake Chilwa, settling in the Phalombe and Mulanje areas.

In Mulanje they found the Yao and Mang&#x27;anja already settled. The Yao chiefs such as Chikumbu, Mtilamanja, Matipwili, Juma, Chiuta welcomed the Lomwe as their cousins from Mozambique. A large number of Lomwe were given land by the Yao and Mang&#x27;anja. Later on the Lomwe got employment on tea estates that various British companies were establishing on the foothills of Mount Mulanje. They gradually spread into Thyolo and Chiradzulu. The Lomwe readily mixed with the local Mang&#x27;anja tribes, and there are no reported cases of tribal conflict.

===Early European contact===
The Portuguese were reportedly the first to discover Malawi; in 1859, acting off a tip received from a Portuguese source, David Livingstone discovered Lake Malawi. The Yao allegedly told him that the mass of water he saw was called &quot;Nyasa&quot;. Livingstone, who did not know Chiyao, possibly thought that Nyasa was the proper name of the lake. However, the term Nyasa in Chiyao meant the &quot;lake&quot; in English. His next journey, with Bishop Charles Mackenzie from the UMCA in 1861, saw hostility erupt between the Muslim Yao and the non-Muslim Mang&#x27;anja, whom the bishop preferred to preach to; those of the Yao who practised Islam and slavery were naturally hostile to the Christian missionaries. The skirmishes eventually subsided after Mackenzie&#x27;s death from malaria.

More group of missionaries arrived in 1875-6 from the Free Church of Scotland, and established a base at Cape Maclear at the southern end of Lake Malawi. This time, attempts were also made to convert those of the Yao who were Muslims. Although some of the Amangochi Yao were prepared to convert, slow progress was made. After some initial debate, Bishop Robert Laws was selected as leader. Laws, who quickly gained fame for his medical expertise, decided to establish missions further north, at Bandawe among the Tonga and at Kaningina among the Ngoni people. There, the missionaries found fertile ground in a turbulent political climate: the missions became buffer zones for the Tonga, who were near-constantly under attack by Ngoni raiders. Some of the teachers of the Tonga were the Nyanja who had embraced Christianity at Cape Maclear in Mangochi. In 1878, a number of traders, mostly from Glasgow, formed the African Lakes Company to supply goods and services to the missionaries. Others soon followed: traders, hunters, planters came, and even missionaries from different denominations; from 1889, the Catholic White Fathers attempted to convert the Yao.

In 1894, the mission extended to the Tumbuka, who were also being attacked by the powerful Ngoni; Laws opened a mission station near Rumphi that year. The Tumbuka, like the Tonga sought refuge among the missionaries and embraced Christianity. By contrast, the Yao were still completely distanced from Christianity, and were still writing and reading in Arabic, which would soon not be recognized in Malawi; this would prove to disadvantage the Yao. The failure to convert the Yao Muslims to Christianity contributed to the negative appearance of the Yao people in traditional Euro-centric history. The Yao socio-economic contribution to Malawi was not recognised, rather history judged them as great slave traders. Under H. H. Johnson, the British fought Yao chiefs such as Makanjila and Mponda Jalasi for five years before they were subdued. Today, fewer Yao are found in jobs requiring literacy, which has forced a large number of them to migrate to South Africa as a source of labour. The Yao believe that they have been deliberately marginalized by the authorities because of their faith; in Malawi, they are predominantly farmers, tailors, guards, fishermen or working in other unskilled manual jobs. At one time, a number of Yao concealed their names in order to progress in education: Mariam was known as Mary; Yusufu was called Joseph; Che Sigele became Jeanet.

==British rule==

In 1883, a consul of the British government was accredited to the &quot;Kings and Chiefs of Central Africa&quot; and in 1891, the British established the British Central Africa Protectorate.

In 1907, the name was changed to &quot;Nyasaland&quot; or the &quot;Nyasaland Protectorate&quot; (Nyasa is the Chiyao word for &quot;lake&quot;). In the 1950s, Nyasaland was joined with Northern and Southern Rhodesia in 1953 to form the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The Federation was dissolved on 31 December 1963.

In January 1915, John Chilembwe, a Baptist pastor in south-eastern Nyasaland, led an unsuccessful revolt against British colonial rule known as the Chilembwe uprising. Chilembwe opposed both the recruitment of Nyasas as porters in the East African campaign of World War I, as well as the system of colonial rule. Chilembwe&#x27;s followers attacked local plantations, but a rapid counteroffensive by government forces defeated the rebels. Chilembwe was killed, and many of his followers were executed.

In 1944, the Nyasaland African Congress (NAC), inspired by the African National Congress&#x27; Peace Charter of 1914, emerged. NAC soon spread across Southern African with powerful branches emerging among migrant Malawian workers in Salisbury (now Harare) in Southern Rhodesia and Lusaka, in Northern Rhodesia.

Thousands of Nyasalanders fought in the Second World War.
In July 1958, Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda returned to the country after a long absence in the United States, the United Kingdom and Ghana. He assumed leadership of the NAC, which later became the Malawi Congress Party (MCP). In 1959, Banda was sent to Gwelo Prison for his political activities but was released in 1960 to participate in a constitutional conference in London.

In August 1961, the MCP won an overwhelming victory in an election for a new Legislative Council. It also gained an important role in the new Executive Council and ruled Nyasaland in all but name a year later. In a second constitutional conference in London in November 1962, the British Government agreed to give Nyasaland self-governing status the following year.

Hastings Banda became Prime Minister on 1 February 1963, although the British still controlled the country&#x27;s financial, security, and judicial systems. 
A new constitution took effect in May 1963, providing for virtually complete internal self-government.

==Independence==
Malawi became a fully independent member of the Commonwealth (formerly the British Commonwealth) on 6 July 1964.

Shortly after, in August and September 1964, Banda faced dissent from most of his cabinet ministers in the Cabinet Crisis of 1964. The Cabinet Crisis began with a confrontation between Banda, the prime minister, and all the cabinet ministers present on 26 August 1964. Their grievances were not dealt with, but three cabinet ministers were dismissed on 7 September. These dismissals were followed, on the same day and on 9 September, by the resignations of three more cabinet ministers in sympathy with those dismissed, although one of those who had resigned rescinded his resignation within a few hours. The reasons that the ex-ministers put forward for the confrontation and their subsequent resignations were the autocratic attitude of Banda, who failed to consult other ministers and kept power in his own hands, his insistence on maintaining diplomatic relations with South Africa and Portugal and a number of domestic austerity measures. After continuing unrest and some clashes between their supporters and those of Banda, most of the ex-ministers left Malawi in October. One ex-minister, Henry Chipembere led a small, unsuccessful armed uprising in February 1965. After its failure, he arranged for his transfer to the USA. Another ex-minister, Yatuta Chisiza, organised an even smaller incursion from Mozambique in 1967, in which he was killed. Several of the former ministers died in exile or, in the case of Orton Chirwa in a Malawian jail, but some survived to return to Malawi after Banda was deposed in 1993, and resumed public life.

Two years later, Malawi adopted a republican constitution and became a one-party state with Hastings Banda as its first president.

==One-party rule==
In 1970, Hastings Banda was declared President for life of the MCP, and in 1971 Banda consolidated his power and was named president for life of Malawi itself. The paramilitary wing of the Malawi Congress Party, the Young Pioneers, helped keep Malawi under totalitarian control until the 1990s.

Banda, who was always referred to as &quot;His Excellency the Life President Ngwazi Dr. H. Kamuzu Banda&quot;, was a dictator. Allegiance to him was enforced at every level. Every business building was required to have an official picture of Banda hanging on the wall. No other poster, clock, or picture could be placed higher on the wall than the president&#x27;s picture. The national anthem was played before most events – including movies, plays, and school assemblies. At the cinemas, a video of His Excellency waving to his subjects was shown while the anthem played. When Banda visited a city, a contingent of women was expected to greet him at the airport and dance for him. A special cloth, bearing the President&#x27;s picture, was the required attire for these performances. The one radio station in the country aired the President&#x27;s speeches and government propaganda. People were ordered from their homes by police, and told to lock all windows and doors, at least an hour prior to President Banda passing by. Everyone was expected to wave.

Among the laws enforced by Banda, it was illegal for women to wear see-through clothes, pants of any kind or skirts which showed any part of the knee. There were two exceptions to this: if they were at a Country Club (a place where various sports were played) and if they were at a holiday resort/hotel, which meant that with the exception of the resort/hotel staff they were not seen by the general populace. Men were not allowed to have hair below the collar; when men whose hair was too long arrived in the country from overseas, they were given a haircut before they could leave the airport. Churches had to be government sanctioned. Members of certain religious groups, such as Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, were persecuted and forced to leave the country at one time. All Malawian citizens of Indian heritage were forced to leave their homes and businesses and move into designated Indian areas in the larger cities. At one time, they were all told to leave the country, then hand-picked ones were allowed to return. It was illegal to transfer or take privately earned funds out of the country unless approved through proper channels; proof had to be supplied to show that one had already brought in the equivalent or more in foreign currency in the past. When some left, they gave up goods and earnings.

All movies shown in theatres were first viewed by the Malawi Censorship Board. Content considered unsuitable – particularly nudity or political content – was edited. Mail was also monitored by the Censorship Board. Some overseas mail was opened, read, and sometimes edited. Videotapes had to be sent to the Censorship Board to be viewed by censors. Once edited, the movie was given a sticker stating that it was now suitable for viewing, and sent back to the owner. Telephone calls were monitored and disconnected if the conversation was politically critical. Items to be sold in bookstores were also edited. Pages, or parts of pages, were cut out or blacked out of magazines such as &quot;Newsweek&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;.

Dr Banda was a wealthy man, like most if not all world leaders. He owned houses (and lived in a palace), businesses, private helicopters, cars and other such luxuries. Speaking out against the President was strictly prohibited. Those who did so were often deported or imprisoned. Banda and his government were criticised for human rights violations by Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International. After he was deposed, Banda was put on trial for murder and attempts to destroy evidence.

During his rule, Banda was one of the very few post-colonial African leaders to maintain diplomatic relations with Apartheid-era South Africa.

==Multi-party democracy==
Increasing domestic unrest and pressure from Malawian churches and from the international community led to a referendum in which the Malawian people were asked to vote for either a multi-party democracy or the continuation of a one-party state. On 14 June 1993, the people of Malawi voted overwhelmingly in favour of multi-party democracy. Free and fair national elections were held on 17 May 1994 under a provisional constitution, which took full effect the following year.

Bakili Muluzi, leader of the United Democratic Front (UDF), was elected president in those elections. The UDF won 82 of the 177 seats in the National Assembly and formed a coalition government with the Alliance for Democracy (AFORD). That coalition disbanded in June 1996, but some of its members remained in the government. The President was referred to as Dr Muluzi, having received an honorary degree at Lincoln University in Missouri in 1995. Malawi&#x27;s newly written constitution (1995) eliminated special powers previously reserved for the Malawi Congress Party. Accelerated economic liberalisation and structural reform accompanied the political transition.

On 15 June 1999, Malawi held its second democratic elections. Bakili Muluzi was re-elected to serve a second five-year term as president, despite an MCP-AFORD Alliance that ran a joint slate against the UDF.

The aftermath of elections brought the country to the brink of civil strife. Disgruntled Tumbuka, Ngoni and Nkhonde Christian tribes dominant in the north were irritated by the election of Bakili Muluzi, a Muslim from the south. Conflict arose between Christians and Muslims of the Yao tribe (Muluzi&#x27;s tribe). Property valued at over millions of dollars was either vandalised or stolen and 200 mosques were torched down.

==Malawi in the 21st century==
In 2001, the UDF held 96 seats in the National Assembly, while the AFORD held 30, and the MCP 61. Six seats were held by independents who represent the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) opposition group. The NDA was not recognised as an official political party at that time. The National Assembly had 193 members, of whom 17 were women, including one of the Deputy Speakers.

Malawi saw its very first transition between democratically elected presidents in May 2004, when the UDF&#x27;s presidential candidate Bingu wa Mutharika defeated MCP candidate John Tembo and Gwanda Chakuamba, who was backed by a grouping of opposition parties. The UDF, however, did not win a majority of seats in Parliament, as it had done in 1994 and 1999 elections. It successfully secured a majority by forming a &quot;government of national unity&quot; with several opposition parties. Bingu wa Mutharika left the UDF party on 5 February 2005 citing differences with the UDF, particularly over his anti-corruption campaign. He won a second term outright in the 2009 election as the head of a newly founded party, the Democratic Progressive Party. In April 2012, Mutharika died of a heart attack; the presidential title was taken over by Vice-President Joyce Banda (not related to the former president Banda). In 2014 Malawian general election Joyce Banda lost (coming third) and was replaced by Peter Mutharika, the brother of ex-President Mutharika. In 2019 Malawian general election president Peter Mutharika got narrow election victory and he was re-elected. In February 2020 Malawi Constitutional Court overturned the result because of irregularities and widespread fraud. In May 2020 Malawi Supreme Court upheld the decision and announced a new election will be held on 2 July. This was the first time election was legally challenged. Opposition leader Lazarus Chakwera won 2020 Malawian presidential election and he was sworn in as the new president of Malawi.

In August 2021, the Constitutional Court examines an appeal lodged by the Democratic Progress Party of Peter Mutharika. He calls for the cancellation of the 2020 presidential election because four of his representatives had been banned from sitting on the Electoral Commission. However, the challenge to Malawi&#x27;s 2020 presidential elections, made by the opposition Democratic Progress Party, was dismissed by the country&#x27;s constitutional court in November 2021.

==See also==
*Heads of Government of Malawi
*History of Africa
*History of Southern Africa
*List of heads of state of Malawi
*Politics of Malawi
* Lilongwe history and timeline

==References==
==Bibliography==
*S.S. Murray, &quot;A Handbook of Nyasaland&quot;
*Valiant Mussa, &quot;History of Islam in Malawi before and after Christianity&quot; 
*Leroy Vail and Landeg White (eds). &quot;Tribalism in the Political History of Malawi&quot;

==External links==
*Background Note: Malawi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1430684" start="4" end="21" title="History of Malawi" label="history of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="53" end="59" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292987" start="93" end="106" title="Maravi Empire" label="Maravi Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642989" start="323" end="345" title="British Central Africa" label="British Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649306" start="356" end="365" title="Nyasaland" label="Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q654342" start="390" end="426" title="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184945" start="552" end="566" title="Hastings Banda" label="Hastings Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="744" end="755" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="900" end="914" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="989" end="999" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876" start="1065" end="1073" title="Lilongwe" label="Lilongwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1077" end="1088" title="Chencherere" label="Chencherere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071390" start="1115" end="1120" title="Chewa people" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="1337" end="1348" title="iron-working" label="use of iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="1353" end="1367" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="1649" end="1661" title="Iron working" label="iron workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740204" start="1838" end="1845" title="Amaravi" label="Amaravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071390" start="1927" end="1932" title="Chewa people" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="2055" end="2072" title="Republic of Congo" label="Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2126" end="2133" title="Akafula" label="Akafula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="2236" end="2246" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="2251" end="2257" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022512" start="2398" end="2405" title="Karonga" label="Karonga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2451" end="2460" title="Mankhamba" label="Mankhamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="2669" end="2680" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="2889" end="2895" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="2900" end="2907" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="2981" end="2989" title="European ethnic groups" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="3171" end="3176" title="ivory trade" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3188" end="3194" title="slaves" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="3204" end="3214" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3219" end="3224" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="3271" end="3285" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa (Nyanja)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3365" end="3379" title="Gaspar Bocarro" label="Gaspar Bocarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109664" start="3925" end="3947" title="Ngoni people" label="Angoni or Ngoni people"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="3993" end="3998" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q865081" start="4090" end="4097" title="mfecane" label="mfecane"/>
<link wikidata="Q729768" start="4138" end="4149" title="Zulu Kingdom" label="Zulu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27695" start="4151" end="4156" title="Shaka" label="Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022517" start="4246" end="4252" title="Ntcheu" label="Ntcheu"/>
<link wikidata="Q667153" start="4266" end="4280" title="Dedza District" label="Dedza district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="4358" end="4371" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045435" start="4479" end="4494" title="Mzimba District" label="Mzimba district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="4559" end="4570" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4582" end="4590" title="Bawoloka" label="Bawoloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q865081" start="4605" end="4612" title="mfecane" label="mfecane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531549" start="4822" end="4827" title="impis" label="impis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105322255" start="5018" end="5036" title="Indian Ocean slave trade" label="Arab slave traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255780" start="5145" end="5148" title="Yao people (East Africa)" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261884" start="5200" end="5206" title="Makua people" label="Makuwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="5353" end="5358" title="Slavery in Africa" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="5363" end="5374" title="ivory trade" label="ivory trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="5396" end="5404" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071390" start="5529" end="5534" title="Chewa people" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109664" start="5539" end="5544" title="Ngoni people" label="Ngoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="5670" end="5687" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5788" end="5796" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5819" end="5832" title="Luangwa river" label="Luangwa river"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="5847" end="5853" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779570" start="6364" end="6372" title="Makololo" label="Makololo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="6395" end="6410" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="6440" end="6451" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107156" start="6616" end="6631" title="Kilwa Sultanate" label="Kilwa Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065586" start="6772" end="6791" title="Jumbes of Nkhotakota" label="Jumbe of Nkhotakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="6819" end="6826" title="animist" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="6973" end="6980" title="Swahili people" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="7191" end="7200" title="Swahili language" label="Kiswahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="7216" end="7229" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065586" start="7599" end="7604" title="Jumbes of Nkhotakota" label="Jumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221197" start="8150" end="8155" title="Kilwa (district)" label="Kilwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="8193" end="8201" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="8335" end="8343" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="8691" end="8705" title="Swahili people" label="Swahili people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868817" start="8778" end="8783" title="Lomwe people" label="Lomwe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8905" end="8911" title="uLomwe" label="uLomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="8926" end="8939" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q746975" start="8958" end="8969" title="Lake Chilwa" label="Lake Chilwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868817" start="9137" end="9142" title="Lomwe people" label="Lomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975329" start="9237" end="9245" title="Phalombe" label="Phalombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865092" start="9250" end="9257" title="Mulanje" label="Mulanje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510436" start="9643" end="9656" title="Mount Mulanje" label="Mount Mulanje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144010" start="9685" end="9691" title="Thyolo" label="Thyolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022529" start="9696" end="9706" title="Chiradzulu" label="Chiradzulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748566" start="9747" end="9761" title="Mang&amp;#x27;anja" label="Mang&amp;#x27;anja"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="9856" end="9866" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="9974" end="9991" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="10003" end="10014" title="Lake Malawi" label="Lake Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080553" start="10305" end="10322" title="Charles Mackenzie (bishop)" label="Charles Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894440" start="10332" end="10336" title="Universities&amp;#x27; Mission to Central Africa" label="UMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748566" start="10408" end="10422" title="Mang&amp;#x27;anja" label="Mang&amp;#x27;anja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046878" start="10700" end="10723" title="Free Church of Scotland (1843–1900)" label="Free Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937250" start="10751" end="10763" title="Cape Maclear" label="Cape Maclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346761" start="11000" end="11011" title="Robert Laws" label="Robert Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854464" start="11141" end="11148" title="Bandawe" label="Bandawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993042" start="11159" end="11164" title="Tonga people (Malawi)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q502216" start="11172" end="11181" title="Kaningina" label="Kaningina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109664" start="11192" end="11204" title="Ngoni people" label="Ngoni people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="11540" end="11547" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q386577" start="11560" end="11581" title="African Lakes Company" label="African Lakes Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="11618" end="11630" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q278165" start="11763" end="11776" title="White Fathers" label="White Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="13222" end="13240" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642989" start="13351" end="13386" title="British Central Africa" label="British Central Africa Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532" start="13487" end="13492" title="Nyasa (lake)" label="Nyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36902" start="13500" end="13506" title="Chiyao" label="Chiyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q953903" start="13575" end="13583" title="Northern Rhodesia" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="13588" end="13605" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654342" start="13626" end="13662" title="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland" label="Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q644659" start="13732" end="13746" title="John Chilembwe" label="John Chilembwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="13750" end="13757" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056284" start="13863" end="13881" title="Chilembwe uprising" label="Chilembwe uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q705571" start="13950" end="13971" title="East African campaign (World War I)" label="East African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13975" end="13986" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070923" start="14231" end="14257" title="Nyasaland African Congress" label="Nyasaland African Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="14281" end="14306" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="14466" end="14472" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="14477" end="14494" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881" start="14499" end="14505" title="Lusaka" label="Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q953903" start="14510" end="14527" title="Northern Rhodesia" label="Northern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18509056" start="14556" end="14562" title="Nyasaland in World War II" label="fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14570" end="14586" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184945" start="14605" end="14626" title="Hastings Kamuzu Banda" label="Hastings Kamuzu Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="14717" end="14722" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037389" start="14781" end="14802" title="Malawi Congress Party" label="Malawi Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q399316" start="14837" end="14849" title="Gwelo" label="Gwelo Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070926" start="15014" end="15028" title="Nyasaland legislative election, 1961" label="in an election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="15656" end="15668" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825157" start="15829" end="15851" title="Cabinet Crisis of 1964" label="Cabinet Crisis of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="15918" end="15932" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725576" start="16818" end="16834" title="Henry Masauko Blasius Chipembere" label="Henry Chipembere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050296" start="16975" end="16989" title="Yatuta Chisiza" label="Yatuta Chisiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105088" start="17141" end="17153" title="Orton Chirwa" label="Orton Chirwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="17342" end="17357" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="17459" end="17477" title="President for life" label="President for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037389" start="17611" end="17632" title="Malawi Congress Party" label="Malawi Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10950472" start="17638" end="17652" title="Malawi Young Pioneers" label="Young Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="17679" end="17691" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="17835" end="17843" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="19461" end="19485" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="20776" end="20784" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="20801" end="20805" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="21166" end="21184" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="21189" end="21210" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="21418" end="21427" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="21432" end="21444" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="21654" end="21665" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="21790" end="21811" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317107" start="21949" end="21962" title="Bakili Muluzi" label="Bakili Muluzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q775844" start="21978" end="22001" title="United Democratic Front (Malawi)" label="United Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732363" start="22151" end="22173" title="Alliance for Democracy (Malawi)" label="Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126179" start="22356" end="22374" title="Lincoln University (Missouri)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="22378" end="22386" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q746418" start="22542" end="22556" title="liberalisation" label="liberalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181586" start="23798" end="23816" title="Bingu wa Mutharika" label="Bingu wa Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396322" start="23840" end="23850" title="John Tembo" label="John Tembo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623289" start="23855" end="23871" title="Gwanda Chakuamba" label="Gwanda Chakuamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185876" start="24386" end="24414" title="Democratic Progressive Party (Malawi)" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57388" start="24521" end="24532" title="Joyce Banda" label="Joyce Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206416" start="24581" end="24611" title="2014 Malawian general election" label="2014 Malawian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176020" start="24664" end="24679" title="Peter Mutharika" label="Peter Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788222" start="24723" end="24753" title="2019 Malawian general election" label="2019 Malawian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202782" start="25127" end="25143" title="Lazarus Chakwera" label="Lazarus Chakwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q84358626" start="25148" end="25183" title="2020 Malawian presidential election" label="2020 Malawian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381726" start="25724" end="25753" title="Heads of Government of Malawi" label="Heads of Government of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="25755" end="25772" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158749" start="25774" end="25800" title="History of Southern Africa" label="History of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q854910" start="25802" end="25834" title="List of heads of state of Malawi" label="List of heads of state of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154901" start="25836" end="25854" title="Politics of Malawi" label="Politics of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876" start="25866" end="25873" title="History of Lilongwe" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088105" start="25878" end="25886" title="Timeline of Lilongwe" label="timeline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19100" wikidata="Q2366173" url="?curid=19100" title="Demographics of Malawi">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Malawi include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

== Region distribution ==

=== Northern region ===
The Tumbuka people make up of 91% of the population of the Northen region. The other ethnic group with the second majority is the Tonga people of Nkhatabay District that constitutes about 6% of the population of the region. Other groups include the Ngonde, Lambya and Sukwa. The common language in the region is Chitumbuka.

=== Central region ===

The Chewas make up about 90% of the population of the central region. Other ethnic groups found in the region include the Ngoni and Nyanja, among others. Chichewa is the common language in the region. 

=== Southern region ===
The Southern region is made up of the Yao and the Lomwe people. They are both the Bantu groups who came from Mozambique due to wars.
==Population ==


Total and Percent Distribution of Population by Single Year of Age (Census 09.03.2018)


===UN population projections===
Numbers are in thousands. UN medium variant projections 
*2015 17,522
*2020 20,677
*2025 24,212
*2030 28,173
*2035 32,667
*2040 37,797
*2045 43,521
*2050 49,719

==Vital statistics==
Registration of vital events is in Malawi not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations.


===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

Fertility data as of 2016 (DHS Program):

==Ethnic groups==

*Chewa 24.3%
*Tumbuka 21.4%
* Lomwe 17.8%
* Yao 13.2%
* Ngoni 11.4%
* Sena 3.8%
* Mang&#x27;anja 3.2%
* Tonga 1.8%
* Nyakyusa 1%
* Asians 0.09%
* Europeans 0.04%
*Other 2.5%

==Languages==
The official language of Malawi is English and the other common languages understood by the majority of the population are Chichewa and Chitumbuka.

English (official)
*Chichewa 6,180,000
*Chitumbuka - 4,180,000
*Chiyao - 3,760,000
*Chilomwe - 3,290,000
*Chisena - 2,468,000
*Chingoni - 37,500
*Chitonga - 471,000
*Chinyika - 5,000
*Chindali - 70,000
*Chinyakyusa - 149,000
*Chilambya - 59,500

==Religion==
Protestant 33.5% (includes Church of Central Africa Presbyterian 14.2%, Seventh Day Adventist/Baptist 9.4%, Pentecostal 7.6%, Anglican 2.3%), Roman Catholic 17.2%, other Christian 26.6%, Muslim 13.8%, traditionalist 1.1%, other 5.6%, none 2.1% (2018 est.)

==See also==
* Malawi
* Malawian American

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="42" end="48" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="57" end="75" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="77" end="86" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071390" start="611" end="617" title="Chewa people" label="Chewas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="1357" end="1374" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1466" end="1480" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071390" start="1663" end="1668" title="Chewa people" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q534134" start="1676" end="1683" title="Tumbuka people" label="Tumbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868817" start="1692" end="1697" title="Lomwe people" label="Lomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255780" start="1706" end="1709" title="Yao people (East Africa)" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109664" start="1718" end="1723" title="Ngoni people" label="Ngoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478487" start="1732" end="1736" title="Sena people" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748566" start="1744" end="1758" title="Mang&amp;#x27;anja" label="Mang&amp;#x27;anja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993042" start="1766" end="1771" title="Tonga people (Malawi)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140817" start="1779" end="1787" title="Nyakyusa people" label="Nyakyusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126870391" start="1808" end="1817" title="White Malawians" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2000" end="2007" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="2020" end="2028" title="Chichewa" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34138" start="2040" end="2050" title="Chitumbuka" label="Chitumbuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36902" start="2064" end="2070" title="Chiyao" label="Chiyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q35824" start="2084" end="2092" title="Lomwe language" label="Chilomwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="2106" end="2113" title="Sena language" label="Chisena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022547" start="2127" end="2135" title="Ngoni language" label="Chingoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847648" start="2146" end="2154" title="Tonga (Nyasa) language" label="Chitonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917497" start="2166" end="2174" title="Nyika language" label="Chinyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983678" start="2184" end="2192" title="Ndali language" label="Chindali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272620" start="2203" end="2214" title="Nyakyusa language" label="Chinyakyusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481626" start="2226" end="2235" title="Lambya language" label="Chilambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="2531" end="2537" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741486" start="2540" end="2557" title="Malawian American" label="Malawian American"/>
</links>
</doc>
