<doc id="16674" wikidata="Q710" url="?curid=16674" title="Kiribati">
<text>Kiribati ( , ), officially the Republic of Kiribati (), is an island country in the Micronesia subregion of Oceania in the central Pacific Ocean. Its permanent population is over 119,000 as of the 2020 census, and more than half live on Tarawa atoll. The state comprises 32 atolls and one remote raised coral island, Banaba. Its total land area is dispersed over of ocean.

The islands&#x27; spread straddles the equator and the 180th meridian, making Kiribati the only country in the world located simultaneously in all four hemispheres: the Northern, Southern, Western, and Eastern hemispheres. The International Date Line goes around Kiribati and swings far to the east, almost reaching 150°W. This brings Kiribati&#x27;s easternmost islands, the southern Line Islands south of Hawaii, into the same day as the Gilbert Islands and places them in the most advanced time zone on Earth: UTC+14.

Kiribati gained its independence from the United Kingdom, becoming a sovereign state in 1979. The capital, South Tarawa, now the most populated area, consists of a number of islets, connected by a series of causeways. These comprise about half the area of Tarawa Atoll. Prior to its independence the country exported phosphate, but those mines are no longer viable. Fisheries and the export of copra drive much of the economy. Kiribati is one of the least developed countries in the world and is highly dependent on international aid for its economy.

Kiribati is a member of the Pacific Community, Commonwealth of Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, and became a full member of the United Nations in 1999. As an island nation, the islands are vulnerable to climate change and tsunamis. Addressing climate change has been a central part of its international policy, as a member of the Alliance of Small Island States.

==Etymology and pronunciation==
The name is pronounced , as in the Gilbertese language represents an sound. Similarly, the name of its people, the I-Kiribati, is pronounced .

The name &quot;Kiribati&quot; was adopted upon the country&#x27;s independence in 1979. It is the Gilbertese rendition of Gilberts, the plural of the English name of the nation&#x27;s main archipelago, the Gilbert Islands. It was named (French for &#x27;Gilbert Islands&#x27;) in about 1820 by Russian admiral Adam von Krusenstern and French captain Louis Duperrey, after the British captain Thomas Gilbert. Gilbert and captain John Marshall sighted some of the islands in 1788, while crossing the &quot;outer passage&quot; route from Port Jackson to Canton. Both von Krusenstern&#x27;s and Duperrey&#x27;s maps, published in 1824, were written in French.

In French, the Northern Islands were until then called and Byron Island was not part of them. In English, the archipelago, particularly the southern part, was often referred to as the &quot;Kingsmills&quot; in the 19th century, although the name &quot;Gilbert Islands&quot; was used increasingly, including in the Western Pacific Order in Council of 1877 and in the Pacific Order of 1893.

The name &quot;Gilbert&quot;, already in the name of the British protectorate since 1892, was incorporated into the name of the entire Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony (GEIC) from 1916 and was retained after the Ellice Islands became the separate country of Tuvalu in 1976. The spelling of Gilberts in the Gilbertese language as may be found in books in Gilbertese prepared by missionaries, but with the meaning of Gilbertese (demonym and language) (see e.g., Hawaiian Board of Missionaries, 1895). The first mention as a dictionary entry of the word &quot;Kiribati&quot; as the native name of the country was written down in 1952 by Ernest Sabatier in his comprehensive . 

The indigenous name often suggested for the Gilbert Islands proper is (see e.g., Ernest Sabatier, 1952–1953, or Arthur Grimble, 1989). The rendition &quot;Kiribati&quot; for Gilberts was chosen as the official name of the new independent state by the chief minister, Sir Ieremia Tabai and his cabinet, on such grounds that it was modern, and to comprehend the inclusion of outer islands (e.g., the Phoenix Group and Line Islands), which were not considered part of the Tungaru (or Gilberts) chain.

==History==

=== Early history ===
The area now called Kiribati has been inhabited by Austronesian peoples speaking the same Oceanic language, from north to south, including the southernmost Nui, since sometime between 3000 BC and 1300 AD. The area was not completely isolated; later, voyagers from Samoa, Tonga, and Fiji introduced some Polynesian and Melanesian cultural aspects, respectively. Intermarriage and intense navigation between the islands tended to blur cultural differences and resulted in a significant degree of cultural homogenization. Local oral historians chiefly in the form of lore keepers suggest that the area was first inhabited by a group of seafaring people from Melanesia, who were described as being dark-skinned, frizzy-haired, and short in stature. These indigenous peoples were then visited by early Austronesian seafarers from the west, a place called Matang, orally described as being tall and fair-skinned. Eventually, both groups intermittently clashed and intermingled until they slowly became a uniform population.
Around AD 1300, a mass departure occurred from Samoa leading to the addition of Polynesian ancestry into the mix of most Gilbertese people. These Samoans later brought strong features of Polynesian languages and culture, creating clans based on their own Samoan traditions and slowly intertwining with the indigenous clans and powers already dominant in Kiribati. Around the 15th century, starkly contrasting systems of governance arose between the northern islands, primarily under chiefly rule (&quot;uea&quot;), and the central and southern islands, primarily under the rule of their council of elders (&quot;unimwaane&quot;). Tabiteuea could be an exception as the sole island that is known as maintaining a traditional egalitarian society. The name Tabiteuea stems from the root phrase &quot;Tabu-te-Uea&quot;, meaning &quot;chiefs are forbidden&quot;. Civil war soon became a factor, with acquisition of land being the main form of conquest. Clans and chiefs began fighting over resources, stimulated by hatred and reignited blood feuds, which had their origins months, years, or even decades before.

The turmoil lasted well into the European visitation and colonial era, which led to certain islands decimating their foes with the help of guns and cannon-equipped ships that Europeans provided to some I-Kiribati leaders. The typical military arms of the I-Kiribati at this time were shark tooth-embedded wooden spears, knives, and swords, and garbs of armour fashioned from dense coconut fibre. They chiefly used these instead of the gunpowder and weapons of steel available at the time, because of the strong sentimental value of the equipment handed down through generations. Ranged weapons, such as bows, slings, and javelins, were seldom used; hand-to-hand combat was a prominent skill still practised today, though seldom mentioned because of various taboos associated with it, secrecy being the primary one. Abemama&#x27;s High Chief Tembinok&#x27; was the last of the dozens of expansionist chiefs of Gilbert Islands of this period, despite Abemama historically conforming to the traditional southern islands&#x27; governance of their respective &quot;unimwaane&quot;. He was immortalised in Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s book &quot;In the South Seas&quot;, which delved into the high chief&#x27;s character and method of rule during Stevenson&#x27;s stay in Abemama. The 90th anniversary of his arrival in the Gilbert Islands was chosen to celebrate the independence of Kiribati on 12 July 1979.

===Colonial era===
Chance visits by European ships occurred in the 17th and 18th centuries, while those ships attempted circumnavigations of the world, or sought sailing routes from the south to north Pacific Ocean, a passing trade, whaling the On-The-Line grounds, and labour ships associated with the coercive labour recruitment practices, known as blackbirding. This recruitment of Kanaka workers in large numbers during the 19th century, had social, economic, political, religious and cultural consequences. More than 9,000 workers were sent abroad from 1845 to 1895, most of them not returning.

The passing trade gave rise to European, Indian, Chinese, Samoan, and other residents from the 1830s; they included beachcombers, castaways, traders, and missionaries. Dr Hiram Bingham II of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM) arrived on Abaiang in 1857. The Roman Catholic faith was introduced on Nonouti around 1880 by 2 Gilbert islanders, Betero and Tiroi, who had become Christians in Tahiti. Father Joseph Leray, Father Edward Bontemps and Brother Conrad Weber, Roman Catholic Missionaries of the Sacred Heart arrived on Nonouti in 1888. The Protestant missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) were also active in the southern Gilberts. On 15 October 1870, Rev. Samuel James Whitmee of the LMS arrived at Arorae, and later that month he visited Tamana, Onotoa and Beru. In August 1872, George Pratt of the LMS visited the islands.
In 1886, an Anglo-German agreement partitioned the &quot;unclaimed&quot; central Pacific, leaving Nauru in the German sphere of influence, while Ocean Island and the future GEIC wound up in the British sphere of influence. In 1892, local Gilbertese authorities (an &quot;uea&quot;, a chief from the Northern Gilbert Group, and &quot;atun te boti&quot; or head of clan) on each of the Gilbert Islands agreed to Captain Edward Davis commanding HMS &quot;Royalist&quot; of the Royal Navy declaring them part of a British protectorate, along with the nearby Ellice Islands. They were administered by a resident commissioner based first on Makin Islands (1893–95), then in Betio, Tarawa (1896–1908) and Ocean Island (1908–1942), protectorate who was under the Western Pacific High Commission (WPHC) based in Fiji. Banaba, known to Europeans as Ocean Island, was added to the protectorate in 1900, because of the phosphate rock of its soil (discovered in 1900). This discovery and the mining provided a significant amount of revenue, in the form of taxes and duties, to the WPHC.

The conduct of William Telfer Campbell, the second resident commissioner of the Gilberts and Ellice Islands of 1896 to 1908, was criticised as to his legislative, judicial and administrative management (including allegations of forced labour exacted from islanders) and became the subject of the 1909 report by Arthur Mahaffy. In 1913, an anonymous correspondent to &quot;The New Age&quot; newspaper described the maladministration of W. Telfer Campbell and challenged the impartiality of Arthur Mahaffy, because he was a former colonial official in the Gilberts. The anonymous correspondent also criticised the operations of the Pacific Phosphate Company on Ocean Island.
The islands became the crown colony of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands in 1916. The Northern Line Islands, including Christmas Island (Kiritimati), were added to the colony in 1919, and the Phoenix Islands were added in 1937 with the purpose of a Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme. On 12 July 1940, Pan Am Airways&#x27; &quot;American Clipper&quot; landed at Canton Island for the first time during a flight from Honolulu to Auckland. Sir Arthur Grimble was a cadet administrative officer based at Tarawa (1913–1919) and became Resident Commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony in 1926.
In 1902, the Pacific Cable Board laid the first trans-Pacific telegraph cable from Bamfield, British Columbia, to Fanning Island (Tabuaeran) in the Line Islands, and from Fiji to Fanning Island, thus completing the All Red Line, a series of telegraph lines circumnavigating the globe completely within the British Empire. The location of Fanning Island, one of the closest formations to Hawaii, led to its annexation by the British Empire in 1888. Nearby candidates including Palmyra Island were not favoured due to the lack of adequate landing sites.

The United States eventually incorporated the Northern Line Islands into its territories, and did the same with the Phoenix Islands, which lie between Gilberts and the Line Islands, including Howland, Jarvis, and Baker islands, thus causing a territorial dispute. That was eventually resolved and they finally became part of Kiribati under the Treaty of Tarawa.
After the attack on Pearl Harbor, during World War II, Butaritari and Tarawa, and others of the Northern Gilbert group, were occupied by Japan from 1941 to 1943. Betio became an airfield and supply base. The expulsion of the Japanese forces in late 1943 involved one of the bloodiest battles in US Marine Corps history. Marines landed in November 1943 and the Battle of Tarawa ensued. Ocean Island, the headquarters of the colony, was bombed, evacuated and occupied by Japan in 1942 and not freed until 1945, after the massacre of all but one of the Gilbertese on the island by the Japanese forces. Funafuti then hosted the provisional headquarters of the colony from 1942 to 1946, when Tarawa returned to host the headquarters, replacing Ocean Island.

At the end of 1945, most of the remaining inhabitants of Banaba, repatriated from Kosrae, Nauru and Tarawa, were relocated to Rabi Island, an island of Fiji that the British government had acquired in 1942 for this purpose.

On 1 January 1953, the British Western Pacific High Commissioner of the colony was transferred from Fiji to the new capital of Honiara, to the British Solomon Islands, with the Gilberts&#x27; Resident Commissioner still located in Tarawa.

Further military operations in the colony occurred in the late 1950s and early 1960s when Christmas Island was used by the United States and United Kingdom for nuclear weapons testing including hydrogen bombs.

Institutions of internal self-rule were established on Tarawa from about 1967. The Ellice Islands requested their separation from the rest of the colony in 1974 and were granted their own internal self-rule institutions. The separation entered into force on 1 January 1976. In 1978, the Ellice Islands became the independent state of Tuvalu.

===Independence===

The Gilbert Islands gained independence as the Republic of Kiribati on 12 July 1979. Then, in September, the United States relinquished all claims to the sparsely inhabited Phoenix and Line Islands, in a 1979 treaty of friendship with Kiribati (ratified in 1983). Although the indigenous Gilbertese name for the Gilbert Islands proper is &quot;Tungaru&quot;, the new state chose the name &quot;Kiribati&quot;, the Gilbertese spelling of &quot;Gilberts&quot;, because it was more modern and as an equivalent of the former colony to acknowledge the inclusion of Banaba, the Line Islands, and the Phoenix Islands. The last two archipelagoes were never initially occupied by Gilbertese until the British authorities, and later the republic&#x27;s government, resettled Gilbertese there under resettlement schemes. In 1982, the first elections since independence were held. A no-confidence vote provoked another election in 1983. In the post-independence period, overcrowding has been an issue, at least in British and aid organisations&#x27; eyes. In 1988, an announcement was made that 4,700 residents of the main island group would be resettled onto less populated islands. In September 1994, Teburoro Tito from the opposition was elected president.

In 1995, Kiribati unilaterally moved the International Date Line far to the east to encompass the Line Islands group, so that the country would no longer be divided by the date line. The move, which fulfilled one of President Tito&#x27;s campaign promises, was intended to allow businesses across the expansive territory to keep the same business week. This also enabled Kiribati to become the first country to see the dawn of the third millennium, an event of significance for tourism. Tito was re-elected in 1998. In 1999, Kiribati became a full member of the United Nations, 20 years after independence. In 2002, Kiribati passed a controversial law that enabled the government to shut down newspaper publishers. The legislation followed the launching of Kiribati&#x27;s first successful non-government-run newspaper. President Tito was re-elected in 2003 but was removed from office in March 2003 by a no-confidence vote and replaced by a Council of State. Anote Tong of the opposition party Boutokaan Te Koaua was elected to succeed Tito in July 2003. He was re-elected in 2007 and in 2011.

In June 2008, Kiribati officials asked Australia and New Zealand to accept Kiribati citizens as permanent refugees. Kiribati is expected to be the first country to lose all its land territory to climate change. In June 2008, Kiribati President Anote Tong said that the country had reached &quot;the point of no return.&quot; He added, &quot;To plan for the day when you no longer have a country is indeed painful but I think we have to do that.&quot;

In January 2012, Anote Tong was re-elected for a third and last successive term. In early 2012, the government of Kiribati acquired the 2,200-hectare Natoavatu Estate on the second largest island of Fiji, Vanua Levu. At the time it was widely reported that the government planned to evacuate the entire population of Kiribati to Fiji. In April 2013, President Tong began urging citizens to evacuate the islands and migrate elsewhere. In May 2014, the Office of the President confirmed the purchase of some 5,460 acres of land on Vanua Levu at a cost of 9.3 million Australian dollars.

In March 2016, Taneti Maamau was elected ana he took office as the fifth President of Kiribati. In June 2020, President Maamau won re-election for a second four-year term. President Maamau was considered pro-China and he supported closer ties with Beijing. On 16 November 2021, the Kiribati government announced it would expose the world&#x27;s largest marine protected area to commercial fishing. The 2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis started with the suspension of all 5 major Justices of the judiciary of Kiribati.

In 2020, Kiribati’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, consistent with most of the COVID-19 responses of Oceania island nations, was to impose strict limits on tourism and commercial travel. Kiribati reported that it remained essentially COVID-free (two cases) until January 2022 when the first commercial international flight in two years included 36 passengers who tested positive. In 2024, 5,085 Coronavirus Cases were reported which causes 24 deaths, while 2,703 were reported to have recovered.

On 29 January 2023, Kiribati confirmed its intention to rejoin the Pacific Islands Forum, ending a bitter two-year leadership split.

==Politics==


The Constitution of Kiribati, promulgated 12 July 1979, provides for free and open elections in a parliamentary democratic republic.

The executive branch consists of a president (&quot;te Beretitenti&quot;), a vice-president and a cabinet. The president, who is also chief of the cabinet, is directly elected by the citizens, after the legislature nominates three or four persons from among its members to be candidates in the ensuing presidential election. The president is limited to serving three four-year terms, and remains a member of the assembly. The cabinet is composed of the president, vice-president, and 13 ministers (appointed by the president) who are also members of parliament.

The legislative branch is the unicameral &quot;Maneaba ni Maungatabu&quot; (House of Assembly). Its members are elected, including by constitutional mandate, a nominated representative of the Banaban people in Rabi Island, Fiji (Banaba, former Ocean Island), in addition to, until 2016, the attorney general, who served as an &quot;ex officio&quot; member from 1979 to 2016. Legislators serve for a four-year term.

The constitutional provisions governing administration of justice are similar to those in other former British colonies in that the judiciary is free from governmental interference. The judicial branch is made up of the High Court (in Betio) and the Court of Appeal. The president appoints the presiding judges.

Local government is through island councils with elected members. Local affairs are handled in a manner similar to town meetings in colonial America. Island councils make their own estimates of revenue and expenditure and generally are free from central government controls. There are a total of 21 inhabited islands in Kiribati. Each inhabited island has its own council. Kiribati is currently divided into 5 districts: Northern Kiribati, Central Kiribati, Southern Kiribati, South Tarawa, and Line &amp; Phoenix.

Kiribati has formal political parties but their organisation is quite informal. Ad hoc opposition groups tend to coalesce around specific issues. There is universal suffrage at age 18. Today the only recognisable parties are the Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party, former &quot;Boutokaan te Koaua&quot;, and Tobwaan Kiribati Party.

===Foreign relations===
Kiribati maintains close relations with its Pacific neighbours, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Fiji. The first three of these provide the bulk of the country&#x27;s foreign aid. Taiwan and Japan also have specified-period licences to fish in Kiribati&#x27;s waters. There are three resident diplomatic missions headquartered in South Tarawa: the Embassies of the Republic of China (Taiwan) until 2019, replaced by People&#x27;s Republic of China in 2020 and the High Commissions of Australia and New Zealand. Since 2022, there have been talks of opening a US Embassy. The current U.S. Embassy responsible for Kiribati is located in Suva, Fiji.

In November 1999, Kiribati agreed to allow Japan&#x27;s National Space Development Agency to lease land on Kiritimati (formerly Christmas Island) for 20 years, on which to build a spaceport. The agreement stipulated that Japan was to pay US$840,000 per year and would also pay for any damage to roads and the environment. A Japanese-built downrange tracking station operates on Kiritimati and an abandoned airfield on the island was designated as the landing strip for a proposed reusable unmanned space shuttle called HOPE-X. HOPE-X, however, was eventually cancelled by Japan in 2003.
As one of the world&#x27;s most vulnerable nations to the effects of global warming, Kiribati has been an active participant in international diplomatic efforts relating to climate change, most importantly the UNFCCC conferences of the parties (COP). Kiribati is a member of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), an intergovernmental organisation of low-lying coastal and small island countries.
Established in 1990, the main purpose of the alliance is to consolidate the voices of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) to address global warming. AOSIS has been very active from its inception, putting forward the first draft text in the Kyoto Protocol negotiations as early as 1994.

In 2009, President Tong attended the Climate Vulnerable Forum (V11) in the Maldives, with 10 other countries that are vulnerable to climate change, and signed the Bandos Island declaration on 10 November 2009, pledging to show moral leadership and commence greening their economies by voluntarily committing to achieving carbon neutrality.

In November 2010, Kiribati hosted the Tarawa Climate Change Conference (TCCC) to support the president of Kiribati&#x27;s initiative to hold a consultative forum between vulnerable states and their partners. The conference strove to create an enabling environment for multi-party negotiations under the auspices of the UNFCCC. The conference was a successor event to the Climate Vulnerable Forum. The ultimate objective of TCCC was to reduce the number and intensity of fault lines between parties to the COP process, explore elements of agreement between the parties and thereby to support Kiribati&#x27;s and other parties&#x27; contribution to COP16 held in Cancun, Mexico, from 29 November to 10 December 2010.

In 2013, President Tong spoke of climate-change induced sea level rise as &quot;inevitable&quot;. &quot;For our people to survive, then they will have to migrate. Either we can wait for the time when we have to move people en masse or we can prepare them—beginning from now ...&quot; In New York in 2014, per &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, President Tong told &quot;The New York Times&quot; that &quot;according to the projections, within this century, the water will be higher than the highest point in our lands&quot;. In 2014, President Tong finalised the purchase of a stretch of land on Vanua Levu, one of the larger Fiji islands, 2,000 km away. A move described by Tong as an &quot;absolute necessity&quot; should the country&#x27;s territory be completely submerged under water.

In 2013, attention was drawn to a claim of a Kiribati man of being a &quot;climate change refugee&quot; under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951). However, this claim was determined by the New Zealand High Court to be untenable. The New Zealand Court of Appeal also rejected the claim in a 2014 decision.
On further appeal, the New Zealand Supreme Court confirmed the earlier adverse rulings against the application for refugee status, but rejected the proposition &quot;that environmental degradation resulting from climate change or other natural disasters could never create a pathway into the Refugee Convention or protected person jurisdiction&quot;. In 2017, Kiribati signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

On 20 September 2019, the government of Kiribati restored its diplomatic relationship with the People&#x27;s Republic of China and simultaneously stopped its diplomatic relationship with Taiwan. China offered a 737 aircraft and ferries to Kiribati for the decision, according to Taiwan&#x27;s foreign minister, Joseph Wu.

====Peace Corps====
From 1973 until 2008, a total of almost 500 US Peace Corps volunteers were based on the Islands, as many as 45 in a given year. Activities included assisting in the planning, design and construction of wells, libraries, and other infrastructure, and agricultural, environmental, and community health education. In 2006, volunteer placement was significantly scaled down due to the reduction of consistent air transportation to the outer islands; it was later ended because the associated ability to provide medical care to volunteers could not be assured. In July 2022, US Vice President Harris announced plans to build a new embassy in Kiribati and Tonga and reestablish the Peace Corps presence in the region.

===Law enforcement and military===

Law enforcement in Kiribati is carried out by the Kiribati Police Service, which is responsible for all law enforcement and paramilitary duties for the island nation. There are police posts located on all of the islands. The police have one patrol boat, the RKS &quot;Teanoai II&quot;.

The main prison in Kiribati is located in Betio, named the Walter Betio Prison. There is also a prison in London on Kiritimati.

Male homosexuality is illegal in Kiribati, with a penalty up to 14 years in prison, according to a historical British law. However, this law is not enforced. Kiribati has not yet followed the lead of the United Kingdom, following its Wolfenden report, to decriminalise acts of male homosexuality, beginning with provisions in the UK&#x27;s Sexual Offences Act 1957. Female homosexuality is legal, but lesbians may face violence and discrimination. However, employment discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is prohibited.

=== Administrative divisions ===

There are 21 inhabited islands in Kiribati. Kiribati can be geographically divided into three archipelagoes or groups of islands, which have no administrative functions. They are:
* Gilbert Islands
* Phoenix Islands, in one of the largest marine protected areas on Earth (was the largest from 2008 to 2010)
* Line Islands

The original districts before independence were:
* Banaba (Ocean Island)
* Tarawa Atoll
* Northern Gilbert Islands
* Central Gilbert Island
* Southern Gilbert Islands
* Line Islands

Four of the former districts (including Tarawa) lie in the Gilbert Islands, where most of the country&#x27;s population lives. Five of the Line Islands are uninhabited (Malden Island, Starbuck Island, Millennium Island, Vostok Island and Flint Island). The Phoenix Islands are uninhabited except for Kanton, and have no representation. Banaba itself is sparsely inhabited now. There is also a non-elected representative of the Banabans on Rabi Island in Fiji.

Each of the 21 inhabited islands has its own local council that takes care of daily affairs. There is one council for each inhabited island, with two exceptions: Tarawa Atoll has three councils: Betio Town Council, (TUC) (for the rest of South Tarawa) and Eutan Tarawa Council (ETC) (for North Tarawa); and Tabiteuea has two councils.

== Geography ==


Kiribati consists of 32 atolls and one solitary island (Banaba), extending into the eastern and western hemispheres, as well as the northern and southern hemispheres. Its extensive exclusive economic zone (EEZ) covers three, non-contiguous, traditional geographic subregions: Banaba (Melanesian-Micronesian area), the Gilbert Islands (Micronesia) and the Line and Phoenix Islands (Polynesia). The groups of islands are:
* Banaba: an isolated island between Nauru and the Gilbert Islands
* Gilbert Islands: sixteen atolls located approximately north of Fiji
* Phoenix Islands: eight atolls and coral islands located approximately southeast of the Gilberts
* Line Islands: eight atolls and one reef, located approximately east of the Gilberts

Banaba (or Ocean Island) is a raised-coral island. It was once a rich source of phosphates, but was exhausted in mining before independence. The rest of the land in Kiribati consists of the sand and reef rock islets of atolls or coral islands, which rise only one or two meters above sea level.

The soil is thin and calcareous. It has a low water-holding capacity and low organic matter and nutrient content—except for calcium, sodium, and magnesium. Banaba is one of the least suitable places for agriculture in the world.

Kiritimati (previously Christmas Island) in the Line Islands has the largest land area of any atoll in the world. Based on a 1995 realignment of the International Date Line, the Line Islands were the first area to enter into a new year, including the year 2000. For that reason, Caroline Island was renamed Millennium Island in 1997.

=== Environmental issues ===

According to the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (previously South Pacific Regional Environment Programme), two small uninhabited Kiribati islets, Tebua Tarawa and Abanuea, disappeared underwater in 1999. The sea level at Christmas Island, in the 50 years between 1972 and 2022, has risen . The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that sea levels will rise by approximately by 2100 due to global warming and a further rise would be inevitable. It is thus likely that within a century the nation&#x27;s arable land will become subject to increased soil salination and will be largely submerged.

The exposure of Kiribati to changes in sea levels is exacerbated by the Pacific decadal oscillation, which is a climate switch phenomenon that results in changes from periods of La Niña to periods of El Niño. This has an effect on sea levels. For example, in 2000, there was a switch from periods of downward pressure of El Niño on sea levels to an upward pressure of La Niña on sea levels, which upward pressure causes more frequent and higher high tide levels. The Perigean spring tide (often called a king tide) can result in seawater flooding low-lying areas of the islands of Kiribati.


The atolls and reef islands can respond to changes in sea-level. Paul Kench at the University of Auckland in New Zealand and Arthur Webb at the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission in Fiji released a study in 2010 on the dynamic response of atolls and reef islands in the central Pacific. Kiribati was mentioned in the study, and Webb and Kench found that the three major urbanised islands in Kiribati—Betio, Bairiki and Nanikai—increased by 30% (36 hectares), 16.3% (5.8 hectares) and 12.5% (0.8 hectares), respectively.

The study by Paul Kench and Arthur Webb recognises that the islands are extremely vulnerable to sea level rise, and concluded that: &quot;This study did not measure vertical growth of the island surface nor does it suggest there is any change in the height of the islands. Since land height has not changed the vulnerability of the greater part of the land area of each island to submergence due to sea level rise is also unchanged and these low-lying atolls remain immediately and extremely vulnerable to inundation or sea water flooding.&quot;

The Climate Change in the Pacific Report of 2011 describes Kiribati as having a low risk of cyclones. In March 2015 Kiribati experienced flooding and destruction of seawalls and coastal infrastructure as the result of Cyclone Pam, a Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu. Kiribati remains exposed to the risk that cyclones can strip the low-lying islands of their vegetation and soil.

Gradual sea-level rise also allows for coral polyp activity to raise the atolls with the sea level. However, if the increase in sea level occurs at a rate faster than coral growth, or if polyp activity is damaged by ocean acidification, then the resilience of the atolls and reef islands is less certain.

The Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that the climate crisis has worsened human rights conditions moderately (4.8 out of 6) in Kiribati. Human rights experts reported that the climate crisis has compromised access to food and clean water, as well as women&#x27;s rights, housing security and cultural integrity.

The Kiribati Adaptation Program (KAP), started in 2003, is a US$5.5 million initiative that was originally enacted by the national government of Kiribati with the support of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the World Bank, the United Nations Development Program, and the Japanese government. Australia later joined the coalition, donating US$1.5 million to the effort. The program aims to take place over six years, supporting measures that reduce Kiribati&#x27;s vulnerability to the effects of climate change and sea level rise by raising awareness of climate change, assessing and protecting available water resources, and managing inundation.
At the start of the Adaptation Program, representatives from each of the inhabited atolls identified key climatic changes that had taken place over the past 20–40 years and proposed coping mechanisms to deal with these changes under four categories of urgency of need. The program is now focusing on the country&#x27;s most vulnerable sectors in the most highly populated areas.
Initiatives include improving water supply management in and around Tarawa; coastal management protection measures such as mangrove re-plantation and protection of public infrastructure; strengthening laws to reduce coastal erosion; and population settlement planning to reduce personal risks.

The government has taken specific action to ensure food security, as sea level rise, drought, and overfishing have created food and water shortages. This has involved diversifying food sources and ensuring existing resources are managed sustainably.

The issue of plastic pollution has also been a key challenge for Kiribati as it hurts both its marine biodiversity and its economy that relies primarily on tourism and fishery. As a result, the government of Kiribati, more specifically the Environment and Conservation Division (ECD) which forms part of the Kiribati Government&#x27;s Ministry of Environment, Lands and Agricultural Development, has made efforts to tackle this issue nationally through environment acts and state policy papers. To a further extent, it has also recognized the global nature of plastic pollution, and consequently, has promoted international cooperation and multilateral solutions. This is notably observable during the current negotiations of the Global Plastic Pollution Treaty planned to be finally drafted by the end of 2024.

===Climate===

Kiribati has a tropical rainforest climate (Af). From April to October, there are predominant northeastern winds and stable temperatures close to . From November to April, western gales bring rain.

The Kiribati wet season (&quot;te Auu-Meang&quot;), also known as the tropical cyclone (TC) (&quot;te Angibuaka&quot;) season, starts from November to April every year. Kiribati therefore typically experiences more extreme weather events associated with tropical disturbances or tropical cyclones during &quot;te Auu-Meang&quot;. Tropical cyclones rarely develop or pass along the equator where Kiribati is located, but Kiribati has historically been impacted by distant tropical cyclones. The impacts were observed while the systems were still in their development stages (Tropical Low/disturbance) or even before they reached Tropical cyclone category.

The fair season starts when &quot;Ten Rimwimata&quot; (Antares) appears in the sky after sunset, from May to November, when more gentle winds and currents and less rain. Then towards December, when &quot;Nei Auti&quot; (Pleiades) replaces Antares, the season of sudden westerly winds and more heavy rain discourages any far travel from island to island.

Kiribati does not experience cyclones but effects may occasionally be experienced during cyclone seasons affecting nearby Pacific Island countries such as Fiji.

Precipitation varies significantly between islands. For example, the annual average is 3,000 mm (120 in) in the north and 500 mm (20 in) in the south of the Gilbert Islands. Most of these islands are in the dry belt of the equatorial oceanic climatic zone and experience prolonged droughts.

=== Ecology ===

Kiribati contains three ecosystems: Central Polynesian tropical moist forests, Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests, and Western Polynesian tropical moist forests.

Because of the relatively young geological age of the islands and atolls and the high level of soil salination, the flora of Kiribati is somewhat unhealthy. The Gilbert Islands contain about 83 indigenous and 306 introduced plants, whereas the corresponding numbers for Line and Phoenix Islands are 67 and 283. None of these species are endemic, and about half of the indigenous ones have a limited distribution and have become endangered or nearly extinct due to human activities such as phosphate mining.

Coconut, pandanus palms and breadfruit trees are the most common &quot;wild&quot; plants, whereas the five most cultivated crops but the traditional &quot;Babai&quot;, &quot;Cyrtosperma merkusii&quot;, are imported Chinese cabbage, pumpkin, tomato, watermelon and cucumber. Over eighty percent of the population participates in either farming or fishing.

Seaweed farming is an important part of the economy , with two major species &quot;Eucheuma alvarezii&quot; and &quot;Eucheuma spinosium&quot; introduced to the local lagoons from the Philippines in 1977. It competes with a collection of the black-lipped pearl oyster (&quot;Pinctada margaritifera&quot;) and shellfish, which are dominated by the strombid gastropod (&quot;Strombus luhuanus&quot;) and Anadara cockles (&quot;Anadara uropigimelana&quot;), whereas the stocks of the giant clam (&quot;Tridacna gigas&quot;) have been largely exhausted.

Kiribati has a few land mammals, none being indigenous or endemic. They include the Polynesian rat (&quot;Rattus exulans&quot;), dogs, cats and pigs. Among the 75 bird species, the Bokikokiko (&quot;Acrocephalus aequinoctialis&quot;) is endemic to Kiritimati.

There are 600–800 species of inshore and pelagic finfish, some 200 species of corals and about 1000 species of shellfish. Fishing mostly targets the family Scombridae, particularly the skipjack tuna and yellowfin tuna as well as flying fish (&quot;Cypselurus&quot; spp.).

Dogs were already accompanying the first inhabitants but were re-introduced by European settlers: they have continued to grow in numbers and are roaming in traditional packs, particularly around South Tarawa.

==Economy==

Kiribati has few natural resources. Commercially viable phosphate deposits on Banaba were exhausted at the time of independence. Copra and fish now represent the bulk of production and exports. Kiribati has the lowest GDP out of any sovereign state in Oceania, and is considered one of the least developed countries in the world.

In one form or another, Kiribati gets a large portion of its income from abroad. Examples include fishing licences, development assistance, workers&#x27; remittances, especially the seafarers issued from Marine Training Centre, and a few tourists. Given Kiribati&#x27;s limited domestic production ability, it must import nearly all of its essential foodstuffs and manufactured items; it depends on these external sources of income for financing.

The economy of Kiribati benefits from international development assistance programs. The multilateral donors providing development assistance in 2009 were the European Union (A$9 million), the United Nations Development Programme (A$3.7 million), UNICEF, and the World Health Organization (A$100,000). The bilateral donors providing development assistance in 2009 were Australia (A$11 million), Japan (A$2 million), New Zealand (A$6.6 million), Taiwan (A$10.6 million), and other donors providing A$16.2 million, including technical assistance grants from the Asian Development Bank.

The major donors in 2010/2011 were Australia (A$15 million), Taiwan (A$11 million); New Zealand (A$6 million), the World Bank (A$4 million) and the Asian Development Bank.

In 1956, Gilbert and Ellice Islands established a sovereign wealth fund to act as a store of wealth for the country&#x27;s earnings from phosphate mining.
In 2008, the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund was valued at US$400 million. The RERF assets declined from A$637 million (420% of GDP) in 2007 to A$570.5 million (350% of GDP) in 2009 as the result of the global financial crisis and exposure to failed Icelandic banks. In addition, draw-downs were made by the government of Kiribati to finance budgetary shortfalls during this period.

In May 2011, the IMF country report assessment of the economy of Kiribati is that &quot;After two years of contraction, the economy recovered in the second half of 2010 and inflation pressure dissipated. It is estimated to have grown by 1.75% for the year. Despite a weather-related drop in copra production, private sector activity appears to have picked up, especially in retail. Tourist arrivals rebounded by 20% compared to 2009, although from a very low base.
Despite the rise in world food and fuel prices, inflation has bounced from 2008 crisis-highs into negative territory, reflecting the strong appreciation of the Australian dollar, which is used as the domestic currency, and a decline in the world price of rice. Credit growth in the overall economy declined in 2009 as economic activity stalled. But it started to pick up in the second half of 2010 as the recovery gained traction&quot;.

A major Australian bank, ANZ, maintains a presence on Kiribati with a number of branches and ATM units.

===Ornamental fish===
Kiribati is a major exporter of hand-caught ornamental fish. There are eight licensed operators based on Kiritimati (Christmas Island). At the end of 2005, the number of pet fish exported was 110,000. All operators have a land-based facility but fish are kept in containers on the reef until the day before the shipment. This is to reduce the running cost and the mortality of pet fish to be exported. The flame angelfish (&quot;Centropyge loriculus&quot;) is the major species exported.

===Transport===
Kiribati has had two domestic airlines: Air Kiribati and Coral Sun Airways. Both airlines are based in Tarawa&#x27;s Bonriki International Airport and serve destinations across the Gilbert Islands and Line Islands only: Banaba and the Phoenix Islands are not served by the domestic carriers. The Coral Sun Airways airline flies from Bonriki international airport to the islands of Abaing, Abermama, Aranuka, Arorae, Beru, Butaritari, Kuria, Makin, Marakei, Onotoa, Nonouti, Nikunau, Tabitevea &amp; Tamana.

Cassidy International Airport on Kiritimati has an international service provided by Fiji Airways: Nadi to Cassidy Airport and then to Honolulu.

== Communications and media ==

With the combination of the islands&#x27; remote location in the Central Pacific at approximately the International Date Line, and islands spanning hundreds of miles north and south of the equator, communications within the country have always been challenging. Primarily, communication is conducted by radio and print media. TV Kiribati Ltd was owned by the government and operated between 2004 and mid-2012, but could not reach all of the islands. Radio Kiribati, based on Tarawa and operated by the government&#x27;s Broadcasting and Publications Authority (BPA) on 1440 kHz AM, is the only form of mass media that reaches all the major islands. Transmission hours are limited and local content in Gilbertese is supplemented by English summaries and BBC News. The BPA and a private broadcaster also operate FM stations accessible on Tarawa.

Inter-island communications for many years relied on a centralized shortwave radio network operated by Telecom Services Kiribati, Ltd (TSKL) based in each Island&#x27;s Council Headquarters. Numerous issues including low availability, maintenance, privacy, and only one per island led TSKL to adopt satellite-based telephones. However, the system is more expensive and still only located at Council Headquarters.

Print weeklies in Gilbertese include the &quot;Te Uekara&quot; published by the government, &quot;Te Mauri&quot; published by the Kiribati Protestant Church, and the &quot;Kiribati Independent&quot;, published from Auckland as well as the &quot;Kiribati Newstar&quot;, published in English.

In December 2019, SpaceX launched the Kacific1 broadband satellite that provides 100 Mbit/s mobile and broadband service to 25 countries throughout to the Asia-Pacific region including Kiribati. Three of the satellite&#x27;s 56 spot beams provide overlapping coverage of the Gilbert Islands and Tuvalu; however, the more eastern regions of the country, the Phoenix and Line Islands, are outside of the satellite&#x27;s coverage.

The Southern Cross NEXT cable system, which entered service in July 2022, connects the US to Australia and provides service to eastern part of Kiribati (Kiritimati island) through the Kiritimati Branch with one fiber pair. The network, which is an upgrade to the existing Southern Cross Cable, also connects to Samoa, Fiji, and New Zealand.

In June 2021, the World Bank-backed procurement for the East Micronesian Cable system was cancelled due to security concerns. The undersea fiberoptic system, which would have originated in Guam, was &quot;designed to improve the communications in the island nations of Nauru, Kiribati and Federated States of Micronesia (FSM).&quot; In January 2023, ministers from the three Pacific island nations signed a joint communiqué for moving forward with the stalled project. Funded by the U.S., Japan and Australia the project is valued at $70 million. In early 2023, it was reported that Kiribati became the first Pacific island country to receive Starlink services.

==Demographics==
The November 2020 census showed a population of 119,940. About 90% lived in the Gilbert Islands, with 52.9% of them on South Tarawa, including Betio, the biggest township.

Until recently, people lived mostly in villages with populations between 50 and 3,000 on the outer islands. Most houses are made of materials obtained from coconut and pandanus trees. Frequent droughts and infertile soil hinder reliable large-scale agriculture, so the islanders have largely turned to the sea for livelihood and subsistence. Most are outrigger sailors and fishermen. Copra plantations serve as a second source of employment. In recent years, large numbers of citizens have moved to the more urban island capital of Tarawa, where Betio is the largest town and South Tarawa reunites larger towns like Bikenibeu or Teaoraereke. South Tarawa&#x27;s 2024 population is now estimated at 69,710. In 1978, the population of South Tarawa was 17,921.

=== Ethnicity ===
The native people of Kiribati are called I-Kiribati. Ethnically, the I-Kiribati are Oceanians, a sub-ethnicity of Austronesians. Recent archaeological evidence indicates that Austronesians originally settled the islands thousands of years ago . Around the 14th century, Fijians, Samoans, and Tongans invaded the islands, thus diversifying the ethnic range and introducing Polynesian linguistic traits. Intermarriage among all ancestral groups, however, has led to a population reasonably homogeneous in appearance and traditions.

=== Languages ===
The people of Kiribati speak Gilbertese, an Oceanic language. English is the other official language, but is not used very often outside the island capital of Tarawa. It is more likely that some English words are mixed in their use with Gilbertese. Older generations of I-Kiribati tend to use more complicated versions of the language. Several words in Gilbertese have been adopted from European settlers, for instance, &quot;kamea&quot; is one of the Gilbertese words for dog, &quot;kiri&quot; being the Oceanic one, which has its origins in the I-Kiribati people hearing the European settlers saying &quot;come here&quot; to their dogs, and adopting that as &quot;kamea&quot;.

Many other loanwords have been adopted (like &quot;buun&quot;, spoon, &quot;moko&quot;, smoke, &quot;beeki&quot;, pig, &quot;batoro&quot;, bottle) but some typical Gilbertese words are quite common, even for European objects (like &quot;wanikiba&quot;, plane – the flying canoe, &quot;rebwerebwe&quot;, motorbike – for the motor noise, &quot;kauniwae&quot;, shoes – the cow for the feet).

=== Religion ===

Christianity is the major religion in Kiribati, having been lately introduced by missionaries, because of its remoteness and the absence of any significant European presence until the latter half of the 19th century. The population is predominantly Roman Catholic (58.9%), with two main Protestant denominations (Kiribati Protestant Church 8.4% and Kiribati Uniting Church 21.2%) accounting for 29.6%. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (5.6%), Baháʼí Faith (2.1%), Seventh-day Adventist Church (2.1%), Pentecostals, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and other small faiths together account for less than 2% (2020 census).

===Health===
The Gilbert Islands where 90% of the Kiribati population live, boast some of the highest population densities in the Pacific, rivalling cities like Hong Kong or Singapore without any skyscrapers or other forms of conventional high-density housing. This overcrowding produces a great amount of pollution, worsening the quality and length of life. Due to insufficient sanitation and water filtration systems, worsened by the fragility of the water lens of the atolls and by climate change, only about 66% have access to clean water. Waterborne diseases grow at record levels throughout the islands. Poor sanitation has led to an increase in cases of conjunctivitis, diarrhoea, dysentery, and fungal infections. Kiribati is the country with the third highest prevalence of smoking in the world, with 54–57% of the population reported as smokers. Due to this and other &quot;lifestyle diseases&quot;, such as type 2 diabetes, there has been a drastic spike in amputations on the islands, doubling in a few years.

As a consequence, the population of Kiribati has a quite low life expectancy at birth of 68.46 years. Even if this data is of only 66.9 years, provided elsewhere, Kiribati ranks last in life expectancy out of the 20 nations of Oceania. This life expectancy is 64.3 for males, and 69.5 for females and there is an infant mortality rate of 41 deaths per 1,000 live births. Tuberculosis has a small presence in the country, with 365 cases per 100,000 a year. Government expenditure on health was at US$268 per capita (PPP) in 2006. In 1990–2007, there were 23 physicians per 100,000 persons. Since the arrival of Cuban doctors in 2006, the infant mortality rate has decreased significantly.

Most health problems are related to consumption of semi-raw seafood, limited food storage facilities, and bacterial contamination of fresh water supplies. In the early 2000s, between 1 and 7% of the population, depending on the island, were annually treated for food poisoning in a hospital. Modernization and cross-cultural exchange of the late 20th century brought new issues of unhealthy diet and lifestyle, heavy smoking, especially among the young, and external infections, including HIV/AIDS.

Fresh water remains a concern of Kiribati – during the dry season (Aumaiaki), water has been drilled for instead of using rain water tanks. In recent years, there has been a longer than usual Aumaikai season resulting in additional water having to be drilled from beneath the water table. This has introduced water-borne illnesses, compounding the health problems within Kiribati.

The Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that Kiribati is fulfilling 77.2% of what it should be fulfilling for the right to health based on its level of income. When looking at the right to health with respect to children, Kiribati achieves 93.8% of what is expected based on its current income. In regards to the right to health amongst the adult population, the country achieves 92.2% of what is expected based on the nation&#x27;s level of income. Kiribati falls into the &quot;very bad&quot; category when evaluating the right to reproductive health because the government is fulfilling only 45.5% of what the country is expected to achieve based on the resources (income) it has available.

===Education===
Primary education is free and compulsory for the first nine years, beginning at age six. Mission schools are slowly being absorbed into the government primary school system. Higher education is expanding; students may seek technical, teacher or marine training, or study in other countries. Most choosing to do the latter have gone to Fiji to attend the University of the South Pacific, and those wishing to complete medical training have been sent to Australia, New Zealand or Cuba.

The education system is organised as follows:
* Preschool for childhood from 1 to 5 years;
* Primary school (Class 1 to 6) from 6 to 11 years;
* Junior secondary school (Form 1 to 3) from 12 to 14;
* Senior secondary school (Form 4 to 7) from 15 to 18.

Kiribati Ministry of Education is the education ministry. The government high schools are King George V and Elaine Bernacchi School, &quot;Tabiteuea North Senior Secondary School&quot;, and &quot;Melaengi Tabai Secondary School&quot;. Thirteen high schools are operated by Christian churches.

The University of the South Pacific has a campus in Teaoraereke for distant/flexible learning, but also to provide preparatory studies towards obtaining certificates, diplomas and degrees at other campus sites.

The other prominent schools in Kiribati are:
* the Marine Training Centre in Betio;
* the Kiribati Institute of Technology;
* the Kiribati Fisheries Training Centre;
* the Kiribati School of Nursing;
* the Kiribati Police Academy;
* the Kiribati Teachers College.

==Culture==

Songs (&quot;te anene&quot;) and above all, dances (&quot;te mwaie&quot;), are held in high regard.

===Music===

Kiribati folk music is generally based on chanting or other forms of vocalising, accompanied by body percussion. Public performances in modern Kiribati are generally performed by a seated chorus, accompanied by a guitar. However, during formal performances of the standing dance (&quot;Te Kaimatoa&quot;) or the hip dance (&quot;Te Buki&quot;), a wooden box is used as a percussion instrument. This box is constructed to give a hollow and reverberating tone when struck simultaneously by a chorus of men sitting around it. Traditional songs are often love-themed, but there are also competitive, religious, children&#x27;s, patriotic, war and wedding songs. There are also stick dances which accompany legends and semi-historical stories. These stick dances or &quot;tirere&quot; (pronounced seerere) are performed only during major festivals.

===Dance===
The uniqueness of Kiribati when compared with other forms of Pacific island dance is its emphasis on the outstretched arms of the dancer and the sudden birdlike movement of the head. The Frigate bird (&quot;Fregata minor&quot;) on the Kiribati flag refers to this bird-like style of Kiribati dancing. Most dances are in the standing or sitting position with movement limited and staggered. Smiling whilst dancing is generally considered vulgar within the context of Kiribati dancing. This is due to its origin of not being solely as a form of entertainment but as a form of storytelling and a display of the skill, beauty and endurance of the dancer.

=== Cuisine ===
Traditionally, the staple diet of the I-Kiribati was the abundance of seafood and coconuts. Starch-based carbohydrate sources were not plentiful due to the hostile climate of the atolls with only the northernmost atolls being viable for constant agriculture. The national crop &quot;bwabwai&quot; was only eaten during special celebrations along with pork.

To complement the rather low consumption of carbohydrates in their diets, the I-Kiribati processed the sap and fruit of the abundant pandanus and coconut trees into different beverages and foods such as &quot;te karewe&quot; (fresh daily sap of the coconut tree) or &quot;te tuae&quot; (dried pandanus cake) and &quot;te kabubu&quot; (dried pandanus flour) from pandanus fruit pulp and &quot;te kamaimai&quot; (coconut sap syrup) from coconut sap.

After World War II, rice became a daily staple in most households, which is still the case today. The majority of seafood—in particular, fish—is eaten sashimi-style with either coconut sap, soy sauce or vinegar-based dressings, often combined with chillies and onions.

Coconut crabs and mud crabs are traditionally given to breastfeeding mothers, with the belief that the meat stimulates the production of high-quality breast milk.

===Sport===


Kiribati has competed at the Commonwealth Games since 1998 and the Summer Olympics since 2004. It sent three competitors to its first Olympics, two sprinters and a weightlifter. Kiribati won its first ever Commonwealth Games medal at the 2014 Commonwealth Games, when weightlifter David Katoatau won Gold in the 105 kg Group.

Football is the most popular sport. Kiribati Islands Football Federation (KIFF) is an associate member of the Oceania Football Confederation, but not of world-governing body FIFA. Instead, they are member of ConIFA. The Kiribati National team has played ten matches, all of which they have lost, and all at the Pacific Games from 1979 to 2011. The Kiribati football stadium is Bairiki National Stadium, which has a capacity of 2,500.

The Betio Soccer Field is home to a number of local sporting teams.

===Outside perspectives===
Edward Carlyon Eliot, who was Resident Commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands (now Kiribati and Tuvalu) from 1913 to 1920, describes this period in his autobiography &quot;Broken Atoms&quot;.

Sir Arthur Grimble wrote about his time working in the British colonial service in Kiribati (then the Gilbert Islands) from 1914 to 1932 in two popular books &quot;A Pattern of Islands&quot; (1952) and &quot;Return to the Islands&quot; (1957). He also undertook academic studies of Gilbertese culture.

John Smith, the last governor of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, wrote his memoir &quot;An Island in the Autumn&quot; (2011).

J. Maarten Troost&#x27;s more recent autobiographical experiences in Tarawa are documented in his book &quot;The Sex Lives of Cannibals&quot; (2004).

Alice Piciocchi&#x27;s illustrated essay, &quot;Kiribati. Cronache illustrate da una terra (s)perduta&quot;, (2016) Milan: 24 ORE Cultura, also translated into French (2018, éditions du Rouergue), tries to write and portray a comprehensive encyclopaedic book of modern Kiribati.

==See also==

* List of towns and villages in Kiribati
* Outline of Kiribati

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* (also in French)
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Map of Kiribati from World Maps
* Kiribati National Tourism Office
* Parliament of Kiribati
* Kiribati National Climate Change Portal 
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members (archived 6 May 2009)

=== General information ===
* Kiribati. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Kiribati from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot; (archived 7 June 2008)
* Kiribati from BBC News
* 
* Exhibit: The Alfred Agate Collection: The United States Exploring Expedition, 1838–1842 from the Navy Art Gallery (archived 14 January 2012)
* Birds of Kiribati from Conservation International</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="0" end="8" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="31" end="51" title="Kiribati" label="Republic of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="62" end="76" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="84" end="94" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="108" end="115" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="131" end="144" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="237" end="243" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="244" end="249" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608198" start="271" end="280" title="list of islands of Kiribati" label="32 atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285116" start="296" end="315" title="raised coral atoll" label="raised coral island"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="317" end="323" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="366" end="371" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="413" end="420" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q838283" start="429" end="443" title="180th meridian" label="180th meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="543" end="551" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="553" end="561" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="563" end="570" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="576" end="583" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="601" end="624" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697791" start="690" end="695" title="150th meridian west" label="150°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="759" end="771" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="814" end="829" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="" start="887" end="893" title="UTC+14:00" label="UTC+14"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="965" end="980" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q131233" start="1003" end="1015" title="South Tarawa" label="South Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="1103" end="1111" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="1152" end="1164" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="1213" end="1222" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="1262" end="1271" title="Fisheries" label="Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="1290" end="1295" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="1346" end="1371" title="least developed countries" label="least developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="1476" end="1493" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1495" end="1518" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1524" end="1551" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1557" end="1567" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="1577" end="1630" title="Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States" label="Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1664" end="1678" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580027" start="1725" end="1753" title="Effects of climate change on small island countries" label="vulnerable to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="1768" end="1793" title="Climate change mitigation" label="Addressing climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q496967" start="1866" end="1897" title="Alliance of Small Island States" label="Alliance of Small Island States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="1967" end="1986" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="2282" end="2297" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2313" end="2319" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q160888" start="2386" end="2406" title="Adam Johann von Krusenstern" label="Adam von Krusenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871768" start="2426" end="2440" title="Louis-Isidore Duperrey" label="Louis Duperrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="2460" end="2467" title="sea captain" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474478" start="2468" end="2482" title="Thomas Gilbert (sea captain)" label="Thomas Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q639410" start="2504" end="2517" title="John Marshall (Royal Navy officer, born 1748)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="2611" end="2623" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="2627" end="2633" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059287" start="2792" end="2804" title="Nikunau" label="Byron Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545934" start="3047" end="3079" title="British Western Pacific Territories" label="Western Pacific Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="3258" end="3291" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="3382" end="3388" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="3501" end="3513" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="3551" end="3558" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q132219" start="3758" end="3773" title="Ernest Sabatier" label="Ernest Sabatier"/>
<link wikidata="Q132219" start="3880" end="3895" title="Ernest Sabatier" label="Ernest Sabatier"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="3911" end="3925" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299331" start="4070" end="4083" title="Ieremia Tabai" label="Ieremia Tabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015529" start="4092" end="4099" title="cabinet of Kiribati" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="4193" end="4210" title="Phoenix Islands" label="the Phoenix Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="4384" end="4404" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="4423" end="4439" title="Oceanic languages" label="Oceanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="4489" end="4492" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="4597" end="4602" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="4604" end="4609" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="4615" end="4619" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="4636" end="4645" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="4651" end="4660" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="4988" end="4997" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="5084" end="5102" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="5130" end="5142" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="5398" end="5403" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="5538" end="5558" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059267" start="5981" end="5990" title="Tabiteuea" label="Tabiteuea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="6075" end="6086" title="Egalitarianism" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7108" end="7127" title="Culture of Kiribati#Kiribati traditional martial arts" label="hand-to-hand combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q318801" start="7274" end="7281" title="Abemama" label="Abemama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454408" start="7300" end="7314" title="Tembinok&amp;#x27;" label="Tembinok&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="7559" end="7581" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="8216" end="8228" title="blackbirding" label="blackbirding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118286" start="8250" end="8256" title="Kanaka (Pacific Island worker)" label="Kanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757816" start="8582" end="8594" title="beachcombing" label="beachcombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769048" start="8637" end="8653" title="Hiram Bingham II" label="Hiram Bingham II"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="8661" end="8713" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q304887" start="8733" end="8740" title="Abaiang" label="Abaiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059275" start="8793" end="8800" title="Nonouti" label="Nonouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615041" start="8977" end="9009" title="Missionaries of the Sacred Heart" label="Missionaries of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="9073" end="9098" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q698352" start="9216" end="9222" title="Arorae" label="Arorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q944319" start="9256" end="9262" title="Tamana, Kiribati" label="Tamana"/>
<link wikidata="Q576865" start="9264" end="9270" title="Onotoa" label="Onotoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q613386" start="9275" end="9279" title="Beru (atoll)" label="Beru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543531" start="9297" end="9309" title="George Pratt (missionary)" label="George Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28310551" start="9354" end="9376" title="Anglo-German Declarations about the Western Pacific Ocean" label="Anglo-German agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="9440" end="9445" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="9487" end="9499" title="Banaba" label="Ocean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="9536" end="9563" title="British Empire" label="British sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q98549593" start="9760" end="9772" title="Edward H.M. Davis" label="Edward Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634137" start="9784" end="9808" title="HMS Royalist (1883)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Royalist&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="9816" end="9826" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="9852" end="9872" title="British protectorate" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="9896" end="9910" title="Ellice Islands" label="Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379805" start="9940" end="9961" title="Governor of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="resident commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="9977" end="9990" title="Butaritari" label="Makin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="10010" end="10015" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="10017" end="10023" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="10040" end="10052" title="Banaba" label="Ocean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580879" start="10097" end="10128" title="High Commissioner for the Western Pacific" label="Western Pacific High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="10151" end="10157" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424327" start="10249" end="10263" title="Phosphorite" label="phosphate rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="10303" end="10327" title="Phosphate mining in Banaba and Nauru" label="discovery and the mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q101095912" start="10432" end="10455" title="William Telfer Campbell" label="William Telfer Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q125844581" start="10728" end="10742" title="Arthur William Mahaffy" label="Arthur Mahaffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753491" start="10789" end="10800" title="The New Age" label="The New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259912" start="11047" end="11072" title="Pacific Phosphate Company" label="Pacific Phosphate Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="11113" end="11125" title="crown colony" label="crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="11133" end="11159" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="11224" end="11234" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="11279" end="11294" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q239588" start="11336" end="11369" title="Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme" label="Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="11388" end="11394" title="Pan Am" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q890166" start="11415" end="11431" title="Boeing 314 Clipper" label="American Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q30895" start="11448" end="11461" title="Kanton Island" label="Canton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="11502" end="11510" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="11514" end="11522" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="11528" end="11542" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089769" start="11702" end="11721" title="Pacific Cable Station" label="Pacific Cable Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q806004" start="11772" end="11780" title="Bamfield" label="Bamfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q127335" start="11803" end="11817" title="Fanning Island" label="Fanning Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837523" start="11904" end="11916" title="All Red Line" label="All Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q123076" start="12165" end="12179" title="Palmyra Island" label="Palmyra Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="12358" end="12373" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131305" start="12434" end="12441" title="Howland Island" label="Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62218" start="12443" end="12449" title="Jarvis Island" label="Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46879" start="12455" end="12460" title="Baker Island" label="Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q484826" start="12586" end="12602" title="Treaty of Tarawa" label="Treaty of Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="12614" end="12636" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12645" end="12657" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="12659" end="12669" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q65270011" start="12729" end="12746" title="Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands" label="occupied by Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="12766" end="12771" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="12899" end="12914" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="12964" end="12980" title="Battle of Tarawa" label="Battle of Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="12989" end="13001" title="Banaba" label="Ocean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="13203" end="13211" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q459848" start="13440" end="13446" title="Kosrae" label="Kosrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="13448" end="13453" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q762070" start="13484" end="13495" title="Rabi Island" label="Rabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433336" start="13606" end="13647" title="List of resident commissioners and governors of the Solomon Islands" label="British Western Pacific High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q40921" start="13710" end="13717" title="Honiara" label="Honiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410267" start="13726" end="13749" title="British Solomon Islands" label="British Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="13913" end="13929" title="Kiritimati" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="13983" end="14006" title="nuclear weapons testing" label="nuclear weapons testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="14017" end="14031" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="hydrogen bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="14368" end="14374" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="14570" end="14577" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q484826" start="14642" end="14658" title="Treaty of Tarawa" label="ratified in 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="14685" end="14695" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="14991" end="15006" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415119" start="15226" end="15254" title="1982 Kiribati parliamentary election" label="elections since independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415120" start="15304" end="15320" title="1983 Kiribati parliamentary election" label="election in 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113614" start="15355" end="15367" title="overcrowding" label="overcrowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q965155" start="15588" end="15601" title="Teburoro Tito" label="Teburoro Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="15687" end="15710" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q26224" start="16077" end="16093" title="third millennium" label="third millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q57456" start="16606" end="16616" title="Anote Tong" label="Anote Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q546130" start="16641" end="16659" title="Boutokaan Te Koaua" label="Boutokaan Te Koaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="16937" end="16951" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q327733" start="17399" end="17409" title="Vanua Levu" label="Vanua Levu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23034482" start="17795" end="17808" title="Taneti Maamau" label="Taneti Maamau"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512532" start="17813" end="17820" title="2016 Kiribati presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q84027066" start="17911" end="17922" title="2020 Kiribati presidential election" label="re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q113501945" start="18182" end="18217" title="2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis" label="2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25058146" start="18277" end="18298" title="judiciary of Kiribati" label="judiciary of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q106929393" start="18310" end="18354" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Kiribati" label="Kiribati’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q86694210" start="18384" end="18428" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Oceania" label="COVID-19 responses of Oceania island nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="18869" end="18890" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543648" start="18955" end="18979" title="Constitution of Kiribati" label="Constitution of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="19049" end="19062" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="19063" end="19073" title="representative democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878250" start="19120" end="19129" title="President of Kiribati" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925054" start="19162" end="19176" title="Vice-President of Kiribati" label="vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015529" start="19183" end="19190" title="Cabinet of Kiribati" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281107" start="19624" end="19645" title="House of Assembly (Kiribati)" label="members of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281107" start="19695" end="19716" title="House of Assembly (Kiribati)" label="Maneaba ni Maungatabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="19840" end="19854" title="Banaban people" label="Banaban people"/>
<link wikidata="Q762070" start="19858" end="19869" title="Rabi Island" label="Rabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="19871" end="19875" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373866" start="21122" end="21150" title="Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party" label="Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058731" start="21195" end="21217" title="Tobwaan Kiribati Party" label="Tobwaan Kiribati Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="21425" end="21431" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131233" start="21575" end="21587" title="South Tarawa" label="South Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="21610" end="21627" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21661" end="21692" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073662" start="21729" end="21738" title="List of Australian High Commissioners to Kiribati" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="21743" end="21754" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q468512" start="21803" end="21813" title="List of diplomatic missions of the United States" label="US Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="21885" end="21889" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704796" start="21948" end="21981" title="National Space Development Agency" label="National Space Development Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="21999" end="22009" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="22072" end="22081" title="spaceport" label="spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="22241" end="22257" title="tracking station" label="tracking station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627566" start="22411" end="22417" title="HOPE-X" label="HOPE-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="22537" end="22562" title="effects of global warming" label="effects of global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="22689" end="22695" title="UNFCCC" label="UNFCCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q496967" start="22758" end="22789" title="Alliance of Small Island States" label="Alliance of Small Island States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434887" start="22968" end="22998" title="Small Island Developing States" label="Small Island Developing States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="23124" end="23138" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133453" start="23208" end="23232" title="Climate Vulnerable Forum" label="Climate Vulnerable Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133453" start="23234" end="23237" title="Climate Vulnerable Forum" label="V11"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="23246" end="23254" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834114" start="23289" end="23317" title="Climate change vulnerability" label="vulnerable to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="23492" end="23509" title="carbon neutrality" label="carbon neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685601" start="23550" end="23582" title="Tarawa Climate Change Conference" label="Tarawa Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q115777615" start="24159" end="24164" title="COP16" label="COP16"/>
<link wikidata="Q8969" start="24173" end="24179" title="Cancun" label="Cancun"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="24284" end="24298" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="24543" end="24557" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24591" end="24609" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q327733" start="24817" end="24827" title="Vanua Levu" label="Vanua Levu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25081" end="25115" title="Environmental migrant#Asia and the Pacific" label="&amp;quot;climate change refugee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60433" start="25126" end="25171" title="Convention relating to the Status of Refugees" label="Convention relating to the Status of Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876655" start="25323" end="25336" title="Teitiota v Chief Executive Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment" label="2014 decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="25721" end="25765" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288088" start="26079" end="26088" title="Joseph Wu" label="Joseph Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="26155" end="26169" title="Peace Corps" label="US Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="26684" end="26705" title="Vice President Harris" label="Vice President Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503251" start="26860" end="26887" title="Law enforcement in Kiribati" label="Law enforcement in Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q92121854" start="27118" end="27144" title="RKS Teanoai II (301)" label="RKS &amp;quot;Teanoai II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="27189" end="27194" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477346" start="27253" end="27259" title="London, Kiribati" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="27263" end="27273" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458045" start="27281" end="27294" title="LGBT rights in Kiribati" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q771738" start="27510" end="27526" title="Wolfenden report" label="Wolfenden report"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="27938" end="27949" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="28026" end="28041" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="28044" end="28059" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625031" start="28075" end="28105" title="List of largest protected areas in the world" label="largest marine protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="28153" end="28165" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q924986" start="28180" end="28189" title="Districts of Kiribati" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="28218" end="28224" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="28242" end="28254" title="Tarawa Atoll" label="Tarawa Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="28257" end="28281" title="Northern Gilbert Islands" label="Northern Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="28284" end="28306" title="Central Gilbert Island" label="Central Gilbert Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="28309" end="28333" title="South Gilbert Islands" label="Southern Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="28336" end="28348" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q532590" start="28519" end="28532" title="Malden Island" label="Malden Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q911028" start="28534" end="28549" title="Starbuck Island" label="Starbuck Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q822151" start="28551" end="28568" title="Millennium Island" label="Millennium Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q976570" start="28570" end="28583" title="Vostok Island" label="Vostok Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q741650" start="28588" end="28600" title="Flint Island" label="Flint Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q30895" start="28650" end="28656" title="Kanton Island" label="Kanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q762070" start="28789" end="28800" title="Rabi Island" label="Rabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="29006" end="29011" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131233" start="29049" end="29061" title="South Tarawa" label="South Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647452" start="29099" end="29111" title="North Tarawa" label="North Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059267" start="29118" end="29127" title="Tabiteuea" label="Tabiteuea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608198" start="29186" end="29188" title="List of islands of Kiribati" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="29221" end="29227" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q399984" start="29269" end="29280" title="Hemispheres of Earth" label="hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="29346" end="29369" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="29449" end="29458" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="29520" end="29524" title="Line Islands" label="Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="29546" end="29555" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="29622" end="29627" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="29717" end="29721" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285116" start="29937" end="29956" title="Raised coral atoll" label="raised-coral island"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="29987" end="29996" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="30224" end="30234" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="30433" end="30443" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="30582" end="30605" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q822151" start="30740" end="30757" title="Millennium Island" label="Millennium Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922764" start="30815" end="30853" title="Pacific Regional Environment Programme" label="Pacific Regional Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516790" start="30952" end="30964" title="Tebua Tarawa" label="Tebua Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18468082" start="30969" end="30976" title="Abanuea" label="Abanuea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="31027" end="31043" title="Kiritimati" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="31115" end="31156" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="31224" end="31238" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="31382" end="31397" title="soil salination" label="soil salination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033747" start="31502" end="31529" title="Pacific decadal oscillation" label="Pacific decadal oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="31608" end="31615" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="31630" end="31637" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168469" start="31897" end="31917" title="Perigean spring tide" label="Perigean spring tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303867" start="31934" end="31943" title="king tide" label="king tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="32027" end="32033" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="32038" end="32042" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="32106" end="32128" title="University of Auckland" label="University of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="32167" end="32210" title="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission" label="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="33192" end="33200" title="cyclones" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19567333" start="33318" end="33329" title="Cyclone Pam" label="Cyclone Pam"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="33368" end="33375" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q689884" start="33536" end="33541" title="polyp (zoology)" label="polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="33707" end="33726" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415100" start="34123" end="34150" title="Kiribati Adaptation Program" label="Kiribati Adaptation Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q384410" start="34297" end="34324" title="Global Environment Facility" label="Global Environment Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="34336" end="34346" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="34352" end="34386" title="United Nations Development Program" label="United Nations Development Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="34621" end="34635" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="35227" end="35245" title="coastal management" label="coastal management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="35497" end="35510" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="35710" end="35727" title="plastic pollution" label="plastic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912561" start="36427" end="36458" title="Global plastic pollution treaty" label="Global Plastic Pollution Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="36540" end="36567" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="36569" end="36571" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Af"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="36794" end="36810" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513417" start="36978" end="36998" title="tropical disturbance" label="tropical disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166" start="37435" end="37442" title="Antares" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="37600" end="37608" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q102377386" start="38242" end="38283" title="Central Polynesian tropical moist forests" label="Central Polynesian tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102411732" start="38285" end="38326" title="Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests" label="Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102398172" start="38332" end="38373" title="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests" label="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="38471" end="38486" title="soil salination" label="soil salination"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="38713" end="38720" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="38884" end="38891" title="Coconut" label="Coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q312736" start="38893" end="38901" title="Pandanus tectorius" label="pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="38912" end="38922" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515765" start="39058" end="39078" title="Cyrtosperma merkusii" label="Cyrtosperma merkusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q18968514" start="39099" end="39114" title="Chinese cabbage" label="Chinese cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442281" start="39240" end="39255" title="Seaweed farming" label="Seaweed farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q820786" start="39515" end="39537" title="Pinctada margaritifera" label="Pinctada margaritifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162153" start="39613" end="39630" title="Strombus luhuanus" label="Strombus luhuanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q547961" start="39665" end="39672" title="Anadara" label="Anadara"/>
<link wikidata="Q751784" start="39739" end="39753" title="Tridacna gigas" label="Tridacna gigas"/>
<link wikidata="Q339418" start="39897" end="39911" title="Rattus exulans" label="Rattus exulans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585161" start="39972" end="39982" title="Bokikokiko" label="Bokikokiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="40039" end="40049" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q215185" start="40208" end="40218" title="Scombridae" label="Scombridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q633957" start="40237" end="40250" title="skipjack tuna" label="skipjack tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q269781" start="40255" end="40269" title="yellowfin tuna" label="yellowfin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q183686" start="40281" end="40292" title="flying fish" label="flying fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="40604" end="40613" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="40626" end="40632" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="40677" end="40682" title="Copra" label="Copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="40800" end="40807" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="40838" end="40863" title="Least developed country" label="least developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="41033" end="41043" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933072" start="41083" end="41105" title="Marine Training Centre" label="Marine Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="41486" end="41500" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="41520" end="41556" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="41590" end="41615" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="41772" end="41778" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="41887" end="41909" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="42027" end="42037" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="42060" end="42082" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="42094" end="42120" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="42135" end="42156" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="42222" end="42231" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317998" start="42253" end="42286" title="Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund" label="Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="42445" end="42468" title="Financial crisis of 2007–08" label="global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q714641" start="43554" end="43557" title="Australia and New Zealand Banking Group" label="ANZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="43622" end="43625" title="Automated teller machine" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q125152573" start="43700" end="43715" title="ornamental fish" label="ornamental fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="43761" end="43771" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426988" start="44062" end="44077" title="flame angelfish" label="flame angelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q407416" start="44201" end="44213" title="Air Kiribati" label="Air Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131887" start="44218" end="44235" title="Coral Sun Airways" label="Coral Sun Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q522496" start="44278" end="44307" title="Bonriki International Airport" label="Bonriki International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="44381" end="44387" title="Banaba" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="44396" end="44411" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431055" start="44669" end="44698" title="Cassidy International Airport" label="Cassidy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="44702" end="44712" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q407719" start="44754" end="44766" title="Fiji Airways" label="Fiji Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150557" start="44768" end="44772" title="Nadi International Airport" label="Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q531178" start="44804" end="44812" title="Daniel K. Inouye International Airport" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953238" start="45173" end="45188" title="Television Kiribati" label="TV Kiribati Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695824" start="45827" end="45831" title="Amalgamated Telecom Holdings Kiribati Limited" label="TSKL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="46321" end="46329" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084813" start="46436" end="46464" title="Kacific Broadband Satellites" label="Kacific1 broadband satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569826" start="47100" end="47120" title="Southern Cross Cable" label="Southern Cross Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="47359" end="47363" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="47813" end="47821" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="47930" end="47945" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="47993" end="47998" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q860026" start="48639" end="48648" title="Bikenibeu" label="Bikenibeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378793" start="48652" end="48663" title="Teaoraereke" label="Teaoraereke"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="48841" end="48851" title="I-Kiribati" label="I-Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="48884" end="48893" title="Oceanic languages" label="Oceanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="48914" end="48927" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="49172" end="49182" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="49378" end="49388" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="49393" end="49409" title="Oceanic languages" label="Oceanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="49432" end="49449" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="49508" end="49514" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="50040" end="50048" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="50518" end="50530" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667917" start="50686" end="50700" title="Catholic Church in Kiribati" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113427691" start="50750" end="50776" title="Kiribati Protestant Church" label="Kiribati Protestant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415103" start="50786" end="50809" title="Kiribati Uniting Church" label="Kiribati Uniting Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="50839" end="50886" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843005" start="50895" end="50907" title="Baháʼí Faith in Kiribati" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="50916" end="50944" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="50953" end="50965" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="50967" end="50991" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="51083" end="51098" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="51262" end="51272" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449157" start="51519" end="51529" title="Lens (hydrology)" label="water lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12600757" start="51950" end="51967" title="lifestyle disease" label="lifestyle disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="51984" end="51999" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="52460" end="52472" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="54731" end="54762" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623269" start="55116" end="55146" title="Kiribati Ministry of Education" label="Kiribati Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616033" start="55206" end="55247" title="King George V and Elaine Bernacchi School" label="King George V and Elaine Bernacchi School"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378793" start="55462" end="55473" title="Teaoraereke" label="Teaoraereke"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933072" start="55673" end="55695" title="Marine Training Centre" label="Marine Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553339" start="56056" end="56064" title="chanting" label="chanting"/>
<link wikidata="Q890073" start="56110" end="56125" title="body percussion" label="body percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215250" start="56687" end="56698" title="tirere" label="stick dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q648494" start="57058" end="57070" title="Great frigatebird" label="Frigate bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515765" start="57822" end="57829" title="Cyrtosperma merkusii" label="bwabwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q111632005" start="58169" end="58176" title="te tuae" label="te tuae"/>
<link wikidata="Q206070" start="58616" end="58629" title="Coconut crabs" label="Coconut crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877556" start="58634" end="58643" title="mud crabs" label="mud crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="58766" end="58777" title="breast milk" label="breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="58823" end="58841" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="58861" end="58876" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116999" start="59032" end="59055" title="2014 Commonwealth Games" label="2014 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q938187" start="59075" end="59089" title="David Katoatau" label="David Katoatau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="59121" end="59129" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091580" start="59157" end="59193" title="Kiribati Islands Football Federation" label="Kiribati Islands Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180344" start="59231" end="59261" title="Oceania Football Confederation" label="Oceania Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="59295" end="59299" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999031" start="59329" end="59335" title="ConIFA" label="ConIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q725543" start="59341" end="59363" title="Kiribati national football team" label="Kiribati National team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478088" start="59432" end="59445" title="Football at the Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q803944" start="59498" end="59522" title="Bairiki National Stadium" label="Bairiki National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342213" start="59652" end="59672" title="Edward Carlyon Eliot" label="Edward Carlyon Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="59711" end="59737" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="59857" end="59871" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058278" start="60156" end="60166" title="John Hilary Smith" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676354" start="60283" end="60300" title="J. Maarten Troost" label="J. Maarten Troost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="60352" end="60358" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763503" start="60392" end="60418" title="The Sex Lives of Cannibals" label="The Sex Lives of Cannibals"/>
<link wikidata="Q385855" start="60730" end="60768" title="List of towns and villages in Kiribati" label="List of towns and villages in Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112325" start="60771" end="60790" title="Outline of Kiribati" label="Outline of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="61137" end="61155" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="61163" end="61190" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="61281" end="61289" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127365" start="61461" end="61487" title="Conservation International" label="Conservation International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16675" wikidata="Q726698" url="?curid=16675" title="History of Kiribati">
<text>The islands which now form the Republic of Kiribati have been inhabited for at least seven hundred years, and possibly much longer. The initial Austronesian peoples’ population, which remains the overwhelming majority today, was visited by Polynesian and Melanesian invaders before the first European sailors visited the islands in the 17th century. For much of the subsequent period, the main island chain, the Gilbert Islands, was ruled as part of the British Empire. The country gained its independence in 1979 and has since been known as Kiribati.

==Pre-history==

For several millennia, the islands were inhabited by Austronesian peoples who had arrived from the Solomon Islands or Vanuatu. The &quot;I-Kiribati&quot; or Gilbertese people settled what would become known as the Gilbert Islands (named for British captain Thomas Gilbert by von Krusenstern in 1820) some time in between 3000 BC and 1300 AD. Subsequent invasions by Samoans and Tongans introduced Polynesian elements to the existing Micronesian culture, and invasions by Fijians introduced Melanesian elements. Extensive intermarriage produced a population reasonably homogeneous in appearance, language and traditions.

==Contact with other cultures==

In 1606 Pedro Fernandes de Queirós sighted Butaritari and Makin, which he named the Buen Viaje (&#x27;good trip&#x27; in Spanish) Islands.

Captain John Byron passed through the islands in 1764 during his circumnavigation of the globe as captain of HMS &quot;Dolphin&quot;.

In 1788, Captain Thomas Gilbert in and Captain John Marshall in . Messrs. Gilbert and Marshall passed close to Abemama, Kuria, Aranuka, Tarawa, Abaiang, Butaritari, and Makin without attempting to land on shore.

== Further exploration ==

In 1820, the islands were named the &quot;îles Gilbert&quot; (in French, Gilbert Islands) by Adam Johann von Krusenstern, a Russian admiral of the Czar after the British Captain Thomas Gilbert, who crossed the archipelago in 1788. In 1824, French captain Louis-Isidore Duperrey was the first to map the whole Gilbert Islands archipelago. He commanded &quot;La Coquille&quot; on its circumnavigation of the earth (1822–1825).

Two ships of the United States Exploring Expedition, and , under the command of Captain Hudson, surveyed the Gilbert Islands of Tabiteuea, Nonouti, Aranuka, Maiana, Abemama, Kuria, Tarawa, Marakei, Butaritari, and Makin (then called the Kingsmill Islands or Kingsmill Group in English). While in the Gilberts, they devoted considerable time to mapping and charting reefs and anchorages. Alfred Thomas Agate made drawings of men of Butaritari and Makin.

At one time, a subset of the northern Gilbert islands was known as Scarborough Islands and a subset of the southern Gilberts as the Kingsmill Group; in some 19th century texts, this last name of Kingsmills was applied to the entire Gilberts group.

==Missionaries==
Missionaries began to be active in the Gilbert Islands in the 1850s. Dr Hiram Bingham II of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM) arrived on Abaiang in 1857. The protestant missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) were active in the southern Gilberts. On 15 October 1870, Rev. Samuel James Whitmee of the LMS arrived at Arorae, and later that month he visited Tamana, Onotoa and Beru. In August 1872, George Pratt of the LMS visited the islands. The Roman Catholic faith was introduced on Nonouti around 1880 by 2 Gilbert islanders, Betero and Tiroi, who had become christians in Tahiti. Father Joseph Leray, Father Edward Bontemps and Brother Conrad Weber, Roman Catholic Missionaries of the Sacred Heart arrived on Nonouti in 1888.

==Visit of Robert Louis Stevenson to Abemama and Butaritari in 1889==
Robert Louis Stevenson, Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson, and her son Lloyd Osbourne, stayed for 2 months on Abemama in 1889, which was described by Stevenson in his account of the 1889 voyage of the &quot;Equator&quot; published as &quot;In the South Seas&quot; At the time of their visit, the High Chief was Tembinok&#x27;, the last of the dozens of expansionist chiefs of Gilbert Islands of this period, despite Abemama historically conforming to the traditional southern islands&#x27; governance of their respective &quot;unimwaane&quot;. Tembinok&#x27; was immortalised in Stevenson&#x27;s book as &quot;the last tyrant&quot;, with Stevenson delved into the high chief&#x27;s character and method of rule during his stay on Abemama; Tembinok&#x27; controlled the access of european traders to the atolls under his control and jealously guarded his revenue and his prerogatives as monarch. 

Robert Louis Stevenson, Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne also visited Butaritari from 14 July 1889 to early August. At this time Nakaeia was the ruler of Butaritari and Makin atolls, his father being Tebureimoa and his grandfather being Tetimararoa. Nakaeia was described by Stevenson as “a fellow of huge physical strength, masterful, violent … Alone in his islands it was he who dealt and profited; he was the planter and the merchant” with Stevenson describing his subjects toiling in servitude and fear.

Nakaeia allowed two San Francisco trading firms to operate, Messrs. Crawford and Messrs. Wightman Brothers, with up to 12 Europeans resident on islands of the atolls. The presence of the Europeans, and the alcohol they traded to the islanders, resulted in periodic alcoholic binges that only ended with Nakaeia making tapu (forbidding) the sale of alcohol. During the 15 or so days that Stevenson spent on Butaritari the islanders were engaged in a drunken spree that threatened the safety of Stevenson and his family. Stevenson adopted the strategy of describing himself as the son of Queen Victoria so as to ensure that he would be treated as a person who should not be threatened or harmed.

Robert Louis Stevenson, Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne returned to Abemama in July 1890 during their cruise on the trading steamer, &quot;Janet Nicoll&quot;.

==Early traders and trading companies==

The first traders resident in the Gilberts were Richard Randell and George Durant who arrived in 1846. Durant moved on to Makin, while Randell remained on Butaritari. The earliest trading companies on Butaritari were the Hamburg-based Handels-und Plantagen-Gesellschaft der Südsee-Inseln zu Hamburg (DHPG) with Pacific headquarters in Samoa, and On Chong (Chinese traders with Australian connections via the goldfields). The Japanese trading company Nanyo Boeki Kabushiki Kaisha established operations on Butaritari. Two San Francisco trading firms, Messrs. Crawford and Messrs. Wightman Brothers, were operating on Butaritari in 1889.

W. R. Carpenter &amp; Co. (Solomon Islands) Ltd was established in 1922. Through the 1920s On Chong experienced gradual decline in its operations as the result of low copra prices. Eventually On Chong was taken over by W. R. Carpenter &amp; Co. These traders helped Butaritari became the commercial and trading capital of the Gilbert Islands until Burns Philp, the trading company based in Sydney, Australia, moved to Tarawa, following the seat of political power.

==Colonial era==

Whalers, blackbirders, and merchant vessels arrived in great numbers in the 19th century, and the resulting upheaval fomented local tribal conflicts and introduced damaging European diseases. In an effort to restore a measure of order, the Gilbert Islands were declared as the British Protectorate by Captain Edward Davis of on 27 May 1892. The neighboring Ellice Islands (now Tuvalu) were declared a British Protectorate later in 1892. The Gilbert and Ellice Islands Protectorate was administered as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT). 

===British Western Pacific Territories===

The BWPT were administered by a High Commissioner resident in Fiji until 1952, then in Honiara. 

A Resident Commissioner, Charles Swayne, was appointed in 1893 following the protectorate on the Gilbert group and on the Ellice group becoming formal and effective in 1892. The protectorate&#x27;s headquarters was established on Tarawa in 1896, where Resident Commissioner William Telfer Campbell presided from 1896 until 1908. The headquarters were then moved to Ocean Island (now Banaba), and continued upon the transition to a Crown Colony. This move in headquarters arose from the operations of the Pacific Phosphate Company resulting in good shipping connections to Ocean Island, and in any case the role of the British colonial authorities emphasised the procurement of labour for the mining and shipping of phosphate and keeping order among the workers.

Ocean Island (now Banaba) was included in the protectorate in 1900 and then in the colony in 1916. In the same year, Fanning Island and Washington Island were included in it together with the islands of the Union Islands (now Tokelau).

In 1916, the administration of the BWTP changed as the islands became a Crown Colony on 12 January 1916. But the new colony remained under the jurisdiction of BWTP until 1971.

===Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony===

The islands became a Crown Colony on 12 January 1916 by the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Order in Council, 1915. Christmas Island was included in the colony in 1919 although it was contested by the U.S. under the Guano Islands Act of 1856. The Union Islands were unofficially transferred to New Zealand administration in 1926 and officially in 1948. The Phoenix Islands were added in 1937 and the five islands of the Central and Southern Line Islands were added in 1972.

The Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony continued to be administered by a Resident Commissioner. One very famous colonial officer in the colony was Sir Arthur Grimble (1888–1956), at first as a cadet officer in 1914, under Edward Carlyon Eliot who was Resident Commissioner of the BWPT then the colony from 1913 to 1920. This period is described in Eliot&#x27;s book &quot;Broken Atoms&quot; (autobiographical reminiscences) (Pub. G. Bles, London, 1938) and in Sir Arthur Grimble&#x27;s &quot;A Pattern of Islands&quot; (Pub. John Murray, London, 1952). Arthur Grimble became the Resident Commissioner of the colony in 1926. In 1930 Grimble, issued revised laws, &quot;Regulations for the good Order and Cleanliness of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands&quot;, which replaced laws created during the BWPT.

Ocean Island remained the headquarters of the colony until the British evacuation in 1942 because of the Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands. After World War II, the colony headquarters was re-established on Tarawa, first on Betio islet (then occupied by American forces following the Battle for Tarawa) and subsequently on Bairiki.

==World War II==

Japan seized part of the islands during World War II to form part of their island defenses. On 20 November 1943, Allied forces threw themselves against Japanese positions at Tarawa and Makin in the Gilberts, resulting in some of the bloodiest fighting of the Pacific campaign. The Battle of Tarawa and the Battle of Makin (in fact Butaritari) were a major turning point in the war for the Allies, which battles were the implementation of &quot;Operation Galvanic&quot;.

==Self-determination==

===Transition to self-determination===

The formation of the United Nations Organisation after World War II resulted in the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization committing to a process of decolonisation; as a consequence the British colonies in the Pacific started on a path to self-determination.

As a consequence of the 1974 Ellice Islands self-determination referendum, separation occurred in two stages. The Tuvaluan Order 1975 made by the Privy Council, which took effect on 1 October 1975, recognised Tuvalu as a separate British dependency with its own government. The second stage occurred on 1 January 1976 when separate administrations were created out of the civil service of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.

===Independence for Kiribati===

The Gilberts obtained internal self-government in 1977 and held general elections in February 1978 which saw Ieremia Tabai elected Chief Minister at only age 27. Kiribati attained independence as a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations on 12 July 1979 by the Kiribati Independence Order 1979 made by the Privy Council of the United Kingdom.

Although the indigenous Gilbertese language name for the Gilbert Islands proper is &quot;Tungaru&quot;, the new state chose the name &quot;Kiribati,&quot; the Gilbertese rendition of &quot;Gilberts,&quot; as an equivalent of the former colony to acknowledge the inclusion of islands which were never considered part of the Gilberts chain. The United States gave up its claims to 14 islands of the Line and Phoenix chains (previously asserted under the Guano Islands Act) in the 1979 Treaty of Tarawa.

==Independence==

Following independence, the Kiribati head of state was Ieremia Tabai. At 29-years-old, Tabai served three terms as &quot;Beretitenti&quot; (President), from 1979 to 1991. Tabai was the youngest head of state in the Commonwealth of Nations.

In 1994, Teburoro Tito was elected &quot;Beretitenti&quot;. He was reelected in 1998 and 2002 but was ousted in a no-confidence vote in March 2003, and having served the maximum three terms, he is barred by the constitution from running for another term. Tito&#x27;s temporary replacement was Tion Otang, the Council of State chairman. In 2003, a new presidential election was held, in which two brothers, Anote and Harry Tong, were the two main candidates (a third candidate, Banuera Berina, won just 9.1% of the vote.

Anote Tong, a London School of Economics graduate, won on 4 July 2003, and was sworn in as President soon afterward. He was re-elected in 2007 and in 2012 for a third term. 

In March 2016, Taneti Maamau was elected as the new President of Kiribati. He was the fifth president since the country became independent in 1979. In June 2020, President Maamau won re-election for second four-year term. President Maamau was considered pro-China and he supported closer ties with Beijing.

==The Banaba issue==

An emotional issue has been the protracted bid by the residents of Banaba to secede and have their island placed under the protection of Fiji. Because Banaba was devastated by phosphate mining, the vast majority of Banabans was deported to the island of Rabi in the Fiji Islands in the 1940s where they now number some 5,000 and enjoy full Fijian citizenship. The Kiribati government has responded by including several special provisions in the Constitution, such as the designation of a Banaban seat in the legislature and the return of land previously acquired by the government for phosphate mining. Only around 300 people remain on Banaba. Despite being part of Kiribati, Banaba&#x27;s municipal administration is by the Rabi Council of Leaders and Elders, which is based on Rabi Island, in Fiji. In 2006, Teitirake Corrie, the Rabi Island Council&#x27;s representative to the Parliament of Kiribati, called for Banaba to secede from Kiribati and join Fiji.

==COVID-19 pandemic==

When the COVID-19 pandemic began in early 2020, Kiribati closed off its borders, to the extent that citizens living abroad were prevented from returning. The nation remained free of the infection and in late 2021, as the case rate seemed to be declining in many countries, the government considered relaxing restrictions. By that time, 33 percent of the nation&#x27;s residents had been fully vaccinated against infection. In January 2022, a group of Kiribati citizens who had been living and travelling abroad as missionaries for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints when the pandemic began returned to Kiribati on a chartered plane. Despite negative tests for the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 before and after arrival, and a quarantine period, 36 of the 54 passengers tested positive soon after their arrival. Within a few days, the viral infection had spread to more than 180 members of the community.

==See also==
*History of Oceania
*Gilbert Islands
*Kiribati
*Politics of Kiribati
*President of Kiribati

==Bibliography==

*&quot;Cinderellas of the Empire&quot;, Barrie Macdonald, IPS, University of the South Pacific, 2001
*&quot;Les Insulaires du Pacifique&quot;, Ian C. Campbell &amp; Jean-Paul Latouche, PUF, Paris, 2001
*&quot;Kiribati: aspects of history&quot;, Sister Alaima Talu et al., IPS, USP, 1979, reprinted 1998
*&quot;A Pattern of Islands&quot;, Sir Arthur Grimble, John Murray &amp; Co, London, 1952
*&quot;Return to the Islands&quot;, Sir Arthur Grimble, John Murray &amp; Co, London, 1957
*&quot;A History of Kiribati: from the Earliest Times to the 40th Anniversary of the Republic&quot;, Michael Ravell Walsh, 2020 (Independently published).

==References==
==External links==
* U.S. State Department Background Note: Kiribati
* The Kiribati international date line adjustment of 1994/95</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="43" end="51" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="144" end="164" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="240" end="250" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="255" end="265" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="292" end="298" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="412" end="427" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="454" end="468" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="623" end="643" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="669" end="684" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="688" end="695" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="701" end="723" title="I-Kiribati people" label="&amp;quot;I-Kiribati&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="727" end="737" title="Gilbertese" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="784" end="799" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474478" start="827" end="841" title="Thomas Gilbert (captain)" label="Thomas Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q160888" start="845" end="860" title="Adam Johann von Krusenstern" label="von Krusenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q211523" start="891" end="898" title="3000 BC" label="3000 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="936" end="941" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="948" end="953" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226618" start="967" end="977" title="Polynesian culture" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="1003" end="1013" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="1015" end="1022" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="1041" end="1045" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="1060" end="1069" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313633" start="1232" end="1258" title="Pedro Fernandes de Queirós" label="Pedro Fernandes de Queirós"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="1267" end="1277" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q867455" start="1282" end="1287" title="Makin (atoll)" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q507665" start="1372" end="1382" title="John Byron" label="John Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q933175" start="1473" end="1496" title="HMS Dolphin (1751)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Dolphin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474478" start="1516" end="1530" title="Thomas Gilbert (captain)" label="Thomas Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q639410" start="1546" end="1559" title="John Marshall (British captain)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q318801" start="1610" end="1617" title="Abemama" label="Abemama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139401" start="1619" end="1624" title="Kuria (islands)" label="Kuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q626095" start="1626" end="1633" title="Aranuka" label="Aranuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="1635" end="1641" title="Tarawa Atoll" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q304887" start="1643" end="1650" title="Abaiang" label="Abaiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="1652" end="1662" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q867455" start="1668" end="1673" title="Makin (islands)" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160888" start="1832" end="1859" title="Adam Johann von Krusenstern" label="Adam Johann von Krusenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="1886" end="1890" title="Czar" label="Czar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474478" start="1917" end="1931" title="Thomas Gilbert (captain)" label="Thomas Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871768" start="1994" end="2016" title="Louis-Isidore Duperrey" label="Louis-Isidore Duperrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013847" start="2090" end="2113" title="French ship Astrolabe (1811)" label="&amp;quot;La Coquille&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="2182" end="2216" title="United States Exploring Expedition, 1838-1842" label="United States Exploring Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="2274" end="2289" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059267" start="2293" end="2302" title="Tabiteuea" label="Tabiteuea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059275" start="2304" end="2311" title="Nonouti" label="Nonouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q626095" start="2313" end="2320" title="Aranuka" label="Aranuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q909742" start="2322" end="2328" title="Maiana" label="Maiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q318801" start="2330" end="2337" title="Abemama" label="Abemama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139401" start="2339" end="2344" title="Kuria (islands)" label="Kuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="2346" end="2352" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q909758" start="2354" end="2361" title="Marakei" label="Marakei"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="2363" end="2373" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q867455" start="2379" end="2384" title="Makin (islands)" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="2530" end="2534" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373427" start="2552" end="2571" title="Alfred Thomas Agate" label="Alfred Thomas Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="2596" end="2606" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q867455" start="2611" end="2616" title="Makin (atoll)" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769048" start="2957" end="2973" title="Hiram Bingham II" label="Hiram Bingham II"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="2981" end="3033" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q304887" start="3053" end="3060" title="Abaiang" label="Abaiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="3105" end="3130" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q698352" start="3243" end="3249" title="Arorae" label="Arorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q944319" start="3283" end="3289" title="Tamana, Kiribati" label="Tamana"/>
<link wikidata="Q576865" start="3291" end="3297" title="Onotoa" label="Onotoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q613386" start="3302" end="3306" title="Beru (atoll)" label="Beru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543531" start="3324" end="3336" title="George Pratt (missionary)" label="George Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059275" start="3412" end="3419" title="Nonouti" label="Nonouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615041" start="3596" end="3628" title="Missionaries of the Sacred Heart" label="Missionaries of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="3728" end="3750" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066501" start="3752" end="3778" title="Fanny Van de Grift" label="Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387643" start="3792" end="3806" title="Lloyd Osbourne" label="Lloyd Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q132674848" start="3831" end="3838" title="Kingdom of Abemama" label="Abemama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384243" start="3928" end="3935" title="Equator (schooner)" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454408" start="4032" end="4046" title="Tembinok&amp;#x27;" label="Tembinok&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="4701" end="4711" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q867455" start="4800" end="4805" title="Makin (islands)" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="4806" end="4812" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="5299" end="5305" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5726" end="5740" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q867455" start="6172" end="6177" title="Makin (atoll)" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="6205" end="6215" title="Butaritari" label="Butaritari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865305" start="6230" end="6247" title="trading company" label="trading companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="6271" end="6278" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="6385" end="6390" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6396" end="6404" title="On Chong" label="On Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6406" end="6413" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6427" end="6436" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6500" end="6528" title="Nanshin-ron#Economic development" label="Nanyo Boeki Kabushiki Kaisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965915" start="6687" end="6734" title="Walter Randolph Carpenter" label="W. R. Carpenter &amp;amp; Co. (Solomon Islands) Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="6854" end="6859" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="7013" end="7028" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928575" start="7035" end="7046" title="Burns Philp" label="Burns Philp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="7105" end="7111" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="7180" end="7192" title="Blackbirding" label="blackbirders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7448" end="7468" title="Protectorate#British protectorates" label="British Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98549593" start="7480" end="7492" title="Edward H.M. Davis" label="Edward Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="7528" end="7542" title="Ellice Islands" label="Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="7548" end="7554" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545934" start="7684" end="7719" title="British Western Pacific Territories" label="British Western Pacific Territories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7805" end="7822" title="Western Pacific Territories#List of High Commissioners for the Western Pacific (1877–1976)" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="7835" end="7839" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q40921" start="7860" end="7867" title="Honiara" label="Honiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379805" start="7873" end="7894" title="Governor of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Resident Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q97694877" start="7896" end="7910" title="Charles Richard Swayne" label="Charles Swayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="8101" end="8107" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q101095912" start="8145" end="8168" title="William Telfer Campbell" label="William Telfer Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="8236" end="8248" title="Banaba" label="Ocean Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8375" end="8400" title="John T. Arundel#Pacific Phosphate Company Ltd" label="Pacific Phosphate Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="8586" end="8595" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="8634" end="8646" title="Banaba" label="Ocean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q127335" start="8751" end="8765" title="Tabuaeran" label="Fanning Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q911037" start="8770" end="8787" title="Teraina" label="Washington Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="8841" end="8854" title="Tokelau" label="Union Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="8943" end="8955" title="Crown Colony" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="9110" end="9122" title="Crown Colony" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="9200" end="9216" title="Kiritimati" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="9300" end="9317" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="9331" end="9344" title="Tokelau" label="Union Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="9441" end="9456" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="9525" end="9537" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="9709" end="9723" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342213" start="9780" end="9800" title="Edward Carlyon Eliot" label="Edward Carlyon Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315432" start="9809" end="9830" title="Resident Commissioner" label="Resident Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="10022" end="10036" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932152" start="10050" end="10070" title="A Pattern of Islands" label="A Pattern of Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="10111" end="10125" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315432" start="10137" end="10158" title="Resident Commissioner" label="Resident Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q65270011" start="10465" end="10507" title="Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands" label="Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="10575" end="10581" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="10592" end="10597" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="10652" end="10669" title="Battle of Tarawa" label="Battle for Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q999487" start="10691" end="10698" title="Bairiki" label="Bairiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="10719" end="10724" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10759" end="10771" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="10832" end="10838" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="10893" end="10899" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="10904" end="10909" title="Butaritari" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="10978" end="10994" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="11000" end="11016" title="Battle of Tarawa" label="Battle of Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670873" start="11025" end="11040" title="Battle of Makin" label="Battle of Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="11163" end="11181" title="Operation Galvanic" label="Operation Galvanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="11275" end="11302" title="United Nations Organisation" label="United Nations Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="11338" end="11388" title="United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization" label="United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="11506" end="11524" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365294" start="11551" end="11600" title="1974 Ellice Islands self-determination referendum" label="1974 Ellice Islands self-determination referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="11673" end="11686" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="11736" end="11742" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="11993" end="12001" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299331" start="12098" end="12111" title="Ieremia Tabai" label="Ieremia Tabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="12151" end="12159" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="12187" end="12230" title="republic within the Commonwealth of Nations" label="republic within the Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12254" end="12286" title="Kiribati Independence Order 1979" label="Kiribati Independence Order 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="12299" end="12334" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="Privy Council of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="12361" end="12380" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="12789" end="12806" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q484826" start="12820" end="12836" title="Treaty of Tarawa" label="Treaty of Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="12894" end="12907" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299331" start="12912" end="12925" title="Ieremia Tabai" label="Ieremia Tabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q878250" start="12978" end="12989" title="President of Kiribati" label="Beretitenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="13072" end="13095" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q965155" start="13107" end="13120" title="Teburoro Tito" label="Teburoro Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250160" start="13391" end="13401" title="Tion Otang" label="Tion Otang"/>
<link wikidata="Q73675623" start="13575" end="13589" title="Banuera Berina" label="Banuera Berina"/>
<link wikidata="Q57456" start="13619" end="13629" title="Anote Tong" label="Anote Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="13633" end="13659" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415136" start="13670" end="13673" title="July 2003 Kiribati presidential election" label="won"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115024" start="13743" end="13753" title="2007 Kiribati presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633663" start="13780" end="13790" title="2012 Kiribati presidential election" label="third term"/>
<link wikidata="Q23034482" start="13809" end="13822" title="Taneti Maamau" label="Taneti Maamau"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512532" start="13827" end="13834" title="2016 Kiribati presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q84027066" start="13977" end="13988" title="2020 Kiribati presidential election" label="re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="14191" end="14197" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="14261" end="14265" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187432" start="14275" end="14316" title="Phosphate mining in Banaba and Nauru" label="Banaba was devastated by phosphate mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="14339" end="14347" title="Banabans" label="Banabans"/>
<link wikidata="Q762070" start="14378" end="14382" title="Rabi Island" label="Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278690" start="14849" end="14883" title="Rabi Council of Leaders" label="Rabi Council of Leaders and Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q762070" start="14903" end="14914" title="Rabi Island" label="Rabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="14919" end="14923" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14934" end="14950" title="Teitirake Corrie" label="Teitirake Corrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281107" start="15005" end="15027" title="Parliament of Kiribati" label="Parliament of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15119" end="15136" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q627754" start="15624" end="15636" title="Mormon missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="15641" end="15688" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q149509" start="16045" end="16063" title="History of Oceania" label="History of Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="16065" end="16080" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="16082" end="16090" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153951" start="16092" end="16112" title="Politics of Kiribati" label="Politics of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q878250" start="16114" end="16135" title="President of Kiribati" label="President of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932152" start="16465" end="16485" title="A Pattern of Islands" label="A Pattern of Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="16497" end="16511" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Arthur Grimble"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16676" wikidata="Q2739569" url="?curid=16676" title="Geography of Kiribati">
<text>Kiribati consists of 33 atolls and one island in an expanse of ocean equivalent in size to the contiguous United States. The islands are scattered such that Kiribati has territory located in each of the four hemispheres. The islands of Kiribati lie roughly halfway between Hawaii and Australia in the Micronesian and Polynesian regions of the South Pacific. The three main island groupings are the Gilbert Islands, Phoenix Islands, and Line Islands. On 1 January 1995 Kiribati moved the International Date Line to include its easternmost islands and make it the same day throughout the country.

== Geography ==
Kiribati includes Kiritimati (Christmas Atoll; in the Line Islands), the largest coral atoll (in terms of land area, not dimensions) in the world, and Banaba (Ocean Island), one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific.

Kiribati straddles the equator in the Pacific Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to Australia. On 1 January 1995, Kiribati unilaterally moved the International Date Line from the middle of the country to include its easternmost islands and make it the same day throughout the country.

=== Area ===
The total land area mass total . It includes three island groups - Gilbert Islands, Line Islands, Phoenix Islands. Most of the land on these islands is less than two metres above sea level. Including the amount of water, the total water and land area is 2485 square miles. A 1989 United Nations report identified Kiribati as one of the countries that could completely disappear in the 21st century if steps are not taken to address global climate change.

The coastline of the islands total 1,143 km (710 mi) in length. Kiribati has the 12th largest exclusive economic zone of (200 nautical miles). The islands are relatively flat and very spread out. The highest point, on Banaba Island, is 265 feet above sea level.

=== Climate ===
Due to its location, Kiribati exhibits a maritime climate. Temperatures range between 26 and 32 °C year-round, with the water temperature sitting on a comfortable year-round 28-29 °C. The dry season is from December to March while the wet season last from February to May and from September to November. In the driest years, the islands have received 150mm of rainfall while its wettest years have seen upwards of 4000mm.

=== Land use ===
The amount of arable land is at 2.5%. Crop usage stands at about 40% of the available land. A few trees exist and occupy 10% of the land. About 50% of the land is used for housing and commercial use.

=== Natural environment ===
==== Ecoregions ====

Kiribati is part of three terrestrial ecoregions:
* the Line Islands are in the Central Polynesian tropical moist forests ecoregion
* the Phoenix Islands are in the Western Polynesian tropical moist forests ecoregion
* the Gilbert islands and Banaba are in the Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests ecoregion

==== Natural resources ====
Much of the natural resources have been exhausted before its 1979 independence. On the island of Banaba, the British mined guano for phosphorus, until exhaustion of supply, an event that was before independence.

==== Natural hazards ====
Cyclones can occur any time, but usually November to March; occasional tornadoes; low level of some of the islands make them very sensitive to changes in sea level. The Climate Change in the Pacific Report (2011) describes Kiribati as having a low risk of cyclones; however in March 2015 Kiribati experienced flooding and destruction of seawalls and coastal infrastructure as the result of Cyclone Pam, a Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu.

==== Pollution ====
The island of Banaba has suffered greatly from the after effects of the massive phosphorus mining. Most of the population were forced to evacuate to the island country of Fiji due to its effects. In addition, the atoll near the island of Tarawa is vulnerable to the effects of solid waste disposal. A report by the United Nations say the wildlife from the region are endangered. The islands are very sensitive to the damaging effects.

=== International conventions ===
The country signed the Convention on Diversity on 6 August 1994.

It also signed conventions on the Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection.

=== Protected area ===

The Phoenix Islands Protected Area constitutes 11.34% of Kiribati&#x27;s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) with a size of . This is the second largest marine protected area (MPA) in the Pacific Ocean.

=== Additional notes ===
21 of the 33 islands are inhabited.

Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean.

Kiribati is the only country in the world whose land exists in all four hemispheres.

== Extreme points ==
This is a list of the extreme points of Kiribati, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point – Teraina (Washington Island), Line Islands
* Easternmost point – Caroline Island, Line Islands
* Southernmost point – Flint Island, Line Islands
* Westernmost point - Banaba Island

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="0" end="8" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="24" end="29" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="95" end="119" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="273" end="279" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="284" end="293" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="301" end="311" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="317" end="326" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="349" end="356" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="398" end="413" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="415" end="430" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="436" end="448" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="487" end="510" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="630" end="640" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="763" end="769" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="1225" end="1240" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="1242" end="1254" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q271674" start="1256" end="1271" title="Phoenix Islands" label="Phoenix Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1438" end="1452" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="1708" end="1731" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="1832" end="1845" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="2610" end="2632" title="terrestrial ecoregions" label="terrestrial ecoregions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102377386" start="2664" end="2705" title="Central Polynesian tropical moist forests" label="Central Polynesian tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102398172" start="2749" end="2790" title="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests" label="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q102411732" start="2845" end="2886" title="Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests" label="Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2987" end="3005" title="Kiribati#Independence" label="1979 independence."/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="3049" end="3054" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="3165" end="3173" title="Cyclones" label="Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="3236" end="3243" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q19567333" start="3555" end="3566" title="Cyclone Pam" label="Cyclone Pam"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="3605" end="3612" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="3806" end="3810" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="4205" end="4234" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="4236" end="4251" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="4271" end="4285" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q863815" start="4356" end="4386" title="Phoenix Islands Protected Area" label="Phoenix Islands Protected Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="4425" end="4448" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625031" start="4484" end="4498" title="List of largest protected areas in the world" label="second largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="4499" end="4520" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4534" end="4547" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="4612" end="4633" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba (Ocean Island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="4865" end="4873" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q911037" start="4979" end="4986" title="Teraina" label="Teraina"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="5008" end="5020" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q822151" start="5043" end="5058" title="Caroline Island" label="Caroline Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q741650" start="5096" end="5108" title="Flint Island" label="Flint Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="5145" end="5158" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16677" wikidata="Q7880472" url="?curid=16677" title="Demographics of Kiribati">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Kiribati include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

== Population ==
* 110,136 (2015 Census)
* 119,940 (2020 Census)


===Structure of the population===



== Vital statistics ==
Vital statistics registration is incomplete.

=== Total fertility rate ===
* 2.25 children born/woman (2020 est.)
* 3.3 (2018–19) - Pacific community

==Ethnic groups ==
* I-Kiribati 96.2%, 105,983 
* Mixed/I-Kiribati 1.8% 1,974
* Tuvaluans 0.2% 198
* Others 1.8% 1,981 (2015 census)

== Languages ==
* English (official)
* Gilbertese (official)

== Religions ==
* Roman Catholic: 57.3%
* Kiribati Uniting Church: 31.3%
* Latter-day Saints: 5.3%
* Baháʼí: 2.1%
* Seventh-day Adventist: 1.9%
* Other: 2.1% (2015 est.)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="42" end="50" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="59" end="77" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="79" end="88" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="508" end="518" title="I-Kiribati" label="I-Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044350" start="567" end="576" title="Demographics of Tuvalu" label="Tuvaluans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="639" end="646" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="660" end="670" title="Gilbertese" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="701" end="715" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415103" start="725" end="748" title="Kiribati Uniting Church" label="Kiribati Uniting Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="758" end="775" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="784" end="790" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="799" end="820" title="Seventh-day Adventist" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16678" wikidata="Q1153951" url="?curid=16678" title="Politics of Kiribati">
<text>Politics of Kiribati takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the &quot;Beretitenti&quot;, President of Kiribati, is both the head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, Beretitenti, and his cabinet, all MPs. Legislative power is exercised by the House of Assembly. The Judiciary of Kiribati is independent of the executive and the legislature.
The Constitution of Kiribati, promulgated at independence on 12 July 1979, establishes the Republic of Kiribati as a sovereign democratic republic and guarantees the fundamental rights of its citizens and residents.

==Executive branch==

After each general election, the new-elected &quot;Maneaba ni Maungatabu&quot; (House of Assembly) nominates not less than three nor more than four of its own members to stand as candidates for President (&quot;Beretitenti&quot;). The voting public then elects the Beretitenti from among these candidates. On 22 June 2020, for the first election ever since 1979 Independence, two candidates only have been nominated — unless Section 32(2) of the Constitution writes “not less than 3”. On 17 June 2020, Judgment of Sir John Muria, the Chief Justice on Civil Case 56, allowed this reading of the Constitution. The elected Beretitenti appoints a &quot;Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti&quot; (vice-president) and up to ten other Cabinet Ministers from among the members of the Maneaba. 


=== Cabinet ===

The Cabinet is the top decision-making body in Kiribati, through which all functions of the government get their authority. Parliament can undo Cabinet decisions through a vote of no confidence, triggering a new election.

The current Cabinet consists of the following Ministers:

The first nine ministers sworn in on 2 July 2020 at the State House in Bairiki (South Tarawa) and include Dr Teuea Toatu, Willie Tokataake, Ruateki Tekaiara, Ribanataake Awira, Dr Tinte Itinteang, Boutu Bateriki, Booti Nauan, Martin Moreti and Taabeta Teakaiao.

The remaining four ministers who are stranded in the outer islands, at their respective island, which include Alexander Teabo, Tarakabu Martin, Tekeeua Tarati and Mikarite Temari, have been sworn later.

=== Attorneys-General of Kiribati ===

In Kiribati, the Attorney-General is defined by section 42 of the Constitution as &quot;the principal legal adviser to the Government.&quot; The Constitution specifies: &quot;No person shall be qualified to hold or to act in the office of Attorney-General unless he is qualified to practise in Kiribati as an advocate in the High Court.&quot;

The Attorney-General of Kiribati was also until October 2016 a member of Cabinet of Kiribati and a member of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu as an ex-officio member of parliament. According to a 2005 source, the Attorney-General &quot;is designated by the Republic of Kiribati as the Central Authority who shall have the responsibility and power to receive requests for mutual legal assistance.&quot;

==Legislative branch==

In a Westminster system, the unicameral House of Assembly (&quot;Maneaba ni Maungatabu&quot;) has 45 members: 44 elected in single-seat and multi-seat constituencies; one appointed member from the Banaban community on Rabi Island in Fiji. The Attorney general was no longer an &quot;ex officio&quot; member. The elected members of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu serve four-year terms. The Speaker of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu is elected by the members of the Maneaba from outside of its membership. The total number of the Legisters is forty four from the island in Kiribati and one representative nominated from Rabi Council representing the people in Rabi island in Fiji. 

All citizens of Kiribati are eligible to vote at the age of 18.

==Judiciary==
The Chapter VI of the Constitution of 1979 describes the Judiciary of Kiribati.
The judicial system consists of magistrates&#x27; courts, the High Court and the Kiribati Court of Appeal. The Beretitenti (President), acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission, makes all judicial appointments, and amongst them, the Chief Justice, the main judge of the High Court. The High Court is in Betio. Sir John Muria was the Chief Justice of Kiribati until his replacement by Bill Hastings in August 2021, after a 8 months vacancy. On 30 June 2022, Hastings was abruptly suspended from his office during the 2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis.

The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, England has jurisdiction only if a case involves constitutional rights. Appeals are taken directly to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council itself.

The Court of Appeal of Kiribati is otherwise the supreme court in Kiribati.

=== The People&#x27;s Lawyer of Kiribati ===

The People&#x27;s Lawyer of Kiribati represents disadvantaged residents and those who are unable to access legal representation. Accordingly, the office represents clients in &quot;Land, Civil and Criminal Matters and act for them in the Magistrates and High Court as well as the Court of Appeal.&quot; The position had long been filled by expatriate lawyers who were volunteering from either Australia or New Zealand with the &quot;role...funded by the Australian Government through [the] Australian Volunteers International.&quot; In 2015, the role of The People&#x27;s Lawyer changed in that it was now filled by a Kiribati citizen: Raweita Beniata (male lawyer; 2015- ).

==Political conditions==

Political parties have existed since 1965 but are more similar to informal coalitions in behaviour. They do not have official platforms or party structures. Most candidates formally present themselves as independents, then they joined one party at the first meeting of the House. The website of the House of Assembly explains that in this way:
:&quot;There [were] four political parties in Kiribati, Boutokaan Te Koaua (BTK), Maurin Kiribati Party (MKP), Maneaban Te Mauri Party (MMP) and Kiribati Tabomoa Party. The parties are loose groupings rather than disciplined blocks, with little or no structure. Members may change allegiance on a number of occasions during their tenure. It is also common for members to vote according to the special interests of their electorate on certain issues.&quot;

Kiribati Tabomoa Party (&quot;National Progressive Party&quot;) and Christian Democratic Party merged into Maneaban Te Mauri (MMP, &quot;Protect the Maneaba&quot;) in 2003, which later merged with Kiribati Independent Party into Karikirakean Te I-Kiribati (KTK, &quot;United Coalition Party&quot;) in 2010, which later merged with Maurin Kiribati Party (MKP) to form Tobwaan Kiribati Party (TKP), the only one facing &quot;Boutokaan Te Koaua&quot; (BTK, &quot;Pillars of Truth&quot;).

A major source of conflict has been the protracted bid by the residents of Banaba Island to secede and have their island placed under the protection of Fiji. The government&#x27;s attempts to placate the Banabans include several special provisions in the constitution, such as the designation of a Banaban seat in the legislature and the return of land previously acquired by the government for phosphate mining.

==Political parties and elections==

There is no solid tradition of formally organized political parties in Kiribati, even if the 2 first political parties were founded in 1965; they more closely resemble factions or interest groups with no formal platforms: 
* BKM = Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party, former BTK = Boutokaan te Koaua (Pillars of Truth, split from NPP), merged with KM, in May 2020;
* TKP = Tobwaan Kiribati Party (Embracing Kiribati Party, BTK opposition, merger of KTK and Maurin Kiribati, est. 19 Jan 2016); 
* Former parties:
** CDP = Maneabau te Mauri (Christian Democratic Party, 1965–1994, merged into MTM);
** GNP = Gilbertese National Party (supported Gilbert Islands’ separation from Ellice Islands, est. 16 Oct 1965);
** KM = Kiribati Moa (Kiribati First, split from TKP, est. Nov 2019) then merged with BTK in May 2020;
** KTK = Karikirakean Tei I-Kiribati (United Coalition Party, 2010–2016, merged into TKP);
** MTM = Maneaban te Mauri (Protect the Maneaba, Christian-democratic, conservative, merger of CDP and NPP, 2010 merged into KTK);
** NPP = National Progressive Party (merged into MTM)

=== 2020 presidential election===
=== 2016 presidential election===

===2015-16 legislative election===

==See also==
*2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis

==References==

==External links==
*Politics of Kiribati as of 2007: a brief overview on the official website of the Commonwealth of Nations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153951" start="0" end="20" title="Politics of Kiribati" label="Politics of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="53" end="66" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="67" end="92" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="93" end="101" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878250" start="140" end="161" title="President of Kiribati" label="President of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="175" end="188" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="193" end="211" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="222" end="240" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="242" end="257" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015529" start="311" end="318" title="Cabinet of Kiribati" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="329" end="346" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281107" start="367" end="384" title="House of Assembly of Kiribati" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q25058146" start="390" end="411" title="Judiciary of Kiribati" label="Judiciary of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543648" start="469" end="493" title="Constitution of Kiribati" label="Constitution of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="556" end="576" title="Kiribati" label="Republic of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249867" start="1222" end="1232" title="John Muria" label="John Muria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015529" start="1496" end="1507" title="Cabinet of Kiribati" label="The Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="1668" end="1689" title="Motion of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q131233" start="1857" end="1869" title="South Tarawa" label="South Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="2286" end="2294" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015529" start="2700" end="2719" title="Cabinet of Kiribati" label="Cabinet of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281107" start="2740" end="2761" title="House of Assembly (Kiribati)" label="Maneaba ni Maungatabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="3052" end="3070" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281107" start="3087" end="3104" title="House of Assembly (Kiribati)" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="3198" end="3212" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="3244" end="3261" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaban community"/>
<link wikidata="Q762070" start="3265" end="3276" title="Rabi Island" label="Rabi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="3280" end="3284" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="3290" end="3306" title="Attorney general" label="Attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q25058146" start="3854" end="3875" title="Judiciary of Kiribati" label="Judiciary of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q113510441" start="3958" end="3982" title="Kiribati Court of Appeal" label="Kiribati Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="4139" end="4152" title="Chief Justice" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q831455" start="4209" end="4214" title="Betio" label="Betio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249867" start="4220" end="4230" title="John Muria" label="John Muria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909345" start="4290" end="4303" title="Bill Hastings (judge)" label="Bill Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q113501945" start="4422" end="4457" title="2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis" label="2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="4464" end="4503" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4507" end="4513" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4515" end="4522" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q113510441" start="4674" end="4701" title="Court of Appeal of Kiribati" label="Court of Appeal of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="4719" end="4732" title="supreme court" label="supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366926" start="5495" end="5512" title="List of political parties in Kiribati" label="Political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q546130" start="5895" end="5913" title="Boutokaan Te Koaua" label="Boutokaan Te Koaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793695" start="5921" end="5942" title="Maurin Kiribati Party" label="Maurin Kiribati Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254124" start="5950" end="5973" title="Maneaban Te Mauri Party" label="Maneaban Te Mauri Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366396" start="5984" end="6006" title="Kiribati Tabomoa Party" label="Kiribati Tabomoa Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366396" start="6296" end="6318" title="Kiribati Tabomoa Party" label="Kiribati Tabomoa Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254124" start="6364" end="6390" title="Christian Democratic Party (Kiribati)" label="Christian Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254124" start="6403" end="6420" title="Maneaban Te Mauri" label="Maneaban Te Mauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254124" start="6433" end="6452" title="Protect the Maneaba" label="Protect the Maneaba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6493" end="6519" title="Kiribati Independent Party" label="Kiribati Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058753" start="6525" end="6551" title="Karikirakean Te I-Kiribati" label="Karikirakean Te I-Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058753" start="6564" end="6586" title="United Coalition Party" label="United Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793695" start="6627" end="6648" title="Maurin Kiribati Party" label="Maurin Kiribati Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058731" start="6663" end="6685" title="Tobwaan Kiribati Party" label="Tobwaan Kiribati Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q546130" start="6719" end="6737" title="Boutokaan Te Koaua" label="Boutokaan Te Koaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q546130" start="6756" end="6772" title="Pillars of Truth" label="Pillars of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="6857" end="6870" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="6986" end="6994" title="Banabans" label="Banabans"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373866" start="7464" end="7492" title="Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party" label="Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q546130" start="7507" end="7525" title="Boutokaan te Koaua" label="Boutokaan te Koaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q86680899" start="7574" end="7576" title="Kiribati First Party" label="KM"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058731" start="7599" end="7621" title="Tobwaan Kiribati Party" label="Tobwaan Kiribati Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058753" start="7675" end="7678" title="United Coalition Party" label="KTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793695" start="7683" end="7698" title="Maurin Kiribati Party" label="Maurin Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7747" end="7764" title="Maneabau te Mauri" label="Maneabau te Mauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q97578272" start="7832" end="7857" title="Gilbertese National Party" label="Gilbertese National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="7902" end="7916" title="Tuvalu" label="Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q86680899" start="7945" end="7957" title="Kiribati First Party" label="Kiribati Moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058753" start="8049" end="8076" title="United Coalition Party" label="Karikirakean Tei I-Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254124" start="8140" end="8157" title="Protect the Maneaba" label="Maneaban te Mauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366396" start="8271" end="8297" title="National Progressive Party (Kiribati)" label="National Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84027066" start="8339" end="8347" title="2020 Kiribati presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512532" start="8373" end="8381" title="2016 Kiribati presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647565" start="8409" end="8417" title="Kiribati parliamentary election, 2015-16" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q113501945" start="8436" end="8471" title="2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis" label="2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="8590" end="8613" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16681" wikidata="Q7835010" url="?curid=16681" title="Transport in Kiribati">
<text>The following article outlines transport in Kiribati.

==Roadways==
There are 670 km of highways in Kiribati (1996 est.) of which 27 km are paved in South Tarawa (2001). The longest stretch of road travels from South Tarawa to North Tarawa.

There are no railways.

==Water transport==
Ports and harbours include Banaba, Betio, English Harbor, and Kanton. There is a small network of canals, totaling 5 km, in the Line Islands.
The Merchant marine includes the ships of the Kiribati JMR Group that operates the Coral Sea Shipping Line, which has three ships: &quot;Coral Sea number 1&quot;, &quot;Coral Sea number 2&quot; and &quot;Coral Sea number 3&quot;. One merchant ship connects, from time to time, the Line Islands (Kiritimati, Fanning and Washington) and makes stops en route at the Phoenix Islands.

==Air travel==
2 small aeroplanes fly out of the Gilbert Islands, except for Banaba. Beginning in January 2009, Kiribati has two domestic airlines: Air Kiribati and Coral Sun Airways. Both airlines are based in Tarawa&#x27;s Bonriki International Airport and serve destinations across the Gilbert Islands only. Neither the Phoenix nor Line Islands are served by the domestic carriers. The only served airport by any airline is Cassidy International Airport on Kiritimati. Fiji&#x27;s national carrier Fiji Airways provides an international service from Fiji&#x27;s main airport, Nadi International Airport to Cassidy Airport as well as to Bonriki Airport. Fiji Airways currently flies a twice weekly flight from Nadi International Airport to Bonriki, Kiribati.

=== Airports ===
As of 2010, there are 23 airports in Kiribati, of which 4 have paved runways, the only international ones being Bonriki International Airport and Cassidy International Airport. Bonriki International Airport is currently undergoing an upgrade program to bring airport security up to IATA standards - this includes the construction of a fence around the entire perimeter.

== See also ==
* Kiribati
== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7835010" start="31" end="52" title="Transport in Kiribati" label="transport in Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q234796" start="414" end="426" title="Line Islands" label="Line Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="723" end="733" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q407416" start="957" end="969" title="Air Kiribati" label="Air Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131887" start="974" end="991" title="Coral Sun Airways" label="Coral Sun Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q522496" start="1034" end="1063" title="Bonriki International Airport" label="Bonriki International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431055" start="1236" end="1265" title="Cassidy International Airport" label="Cassidy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="1269" end="1279" title="Kiritimati" label="Kiritimati"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="1281" end="1285" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q407719" start="1310" end="1322" title="Fiji Airways" label="Fiji Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150557" start="1388" end="1414" title="Nadi International Airport" label="Nadi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q407719" start="1465" end="1477" title="Fiji Airways" label="Fiji Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150557" start="1521" end="1547" title="Nadi International Airport" label="Nadi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839804" start="1610" end="1633" title="List of airports in Kiribati" label="23 airports in Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q522496" start="1700" end="1729" title="Bonriki International Airport" label="Bonriki International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431055" start="1734" end="1763" title="Cassidy International Airport" label="Cassidy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="1976" end="1984" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16683" wikidata="Q3395207" url="?curid=16683" title="Foreign relations of Kiribati">
<text>[[Kiribati]] is a full member of the Commonwealth, the IMF and the World Bank, and became a full member of the United Nations in 1999. Kiribati hosted the Thirty-First Pacific Islands Forum in October 2000. Kiribati has Least Developed Country Status and its interests rarely extend beyond the region. Through accession to the Lomé Convention, then Cotonou Agreement, Kiribati is also a member of the African Caribbean and Pacific Group. Kiribati maintains good relations with most countries and has particularly close ties to Pacific neighbours Japan, Australia, South Korea and New Zealand. Kiribati briefly suspended its relations with France in 1995 over that country&#x27;s decision to renew nuclear testing in the South Pacific.

Kiribati established diplomatic relations with Taiwan in November 2003, but cut off all relations in September 2019 when Kiribati switched diplomatic recognition to Beijing. Taiwan&#x27;s foreign minister stated that Kiribati had &quot;unrealistic&quot; expectations from China and ordered the embassy to evacuate.

==Regional relations==

Kiribati maintains strong regional ties in the Pacific. Until recently it was a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, the South Pacific Tourism Organisation, the Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community. Kiribati is one of the eight signatories of the Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Interest which collectively controls 25–30% of the world&#x27;s tuna supply and approximately 60% of the western and central Pacific tuna supply . In 1985, Kiribati was one of the nine initial endorsers of the Treaty of Rarotonga creating the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty.

===Extra-regional relations===

Kiribati was admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations in 1979 upon its independence, and to the United Nations in 1999.

Additionally outside the region, Kiribati is a member or participant of the ACP (Lomé Convention), the Asian Development Bank, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the IMF, International Maritime Organization, International Olympic Committee, International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Universal Postal Union and the World Meteorological Organization. Finally, while Kiribati is not a member of the World Trade Organization, it does retain observer status.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Kiribati maintains diplomatic relations with:
== Bilateral relations ==
==Aid &amp; Development==

Kiribati receives development aid from the European Union, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Canada, USA, the Asian Development Bank, UN agencies and (until 2019) Taiwan. In recent years it has accounted for 20–25% of Kiribati&#x27;s GDP. Recent projects and notable inputs by the EU have included telecommunications (improvement of telephone exchanges and provision of radio and navigation equipment), the development of seaweed as an export crop, solar energy systems for the outer islands, the upgrading of the Control Tower and fire fighting services at Tarawa&#x27;s Bonriki International Airport, outer island social development, health services and extensive support for the Kiribati Vocational Training Programme. Additionally, Cuba provides doctors, as well as scholarships for I-Kiribati medical students.

==See also==

*Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigration
*List of diplomatic missions in Kiribati
*List of diplomatic missions of Kiribati

==References==

== External links ==

* Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigration 
* Government of Kiribati Climate Change portal
* Tarawa Climate Change Conference website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3395207" start="0" end="12" title="Foreign relations of Kiribati" label="[[Kiribati]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="33" end="49" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="67" end="77" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="111" end="125" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="168" end="189" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="220" end="243" title="Least Developed Country" label="Least Developed Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q980770" start="327" end="342" title="Lomé Convention" label="Lomé Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q832200" start="349" end="366" title="Cotonou Agreement" label="Cotonou Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="401" end="430" title="Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States" label="African Caribbean and Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="438" end="446" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="546" end="551" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="553" end="562" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="564" end="575" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="580" end="591" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="639" end="645" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="697" end="712" title="nuclear testing" label="nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="720" end="733" title="Pacific Ocean" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="783" end="789" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="901" end="908" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1008" end="1013" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="1175" end="1196" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="1202" end="1245" title="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission" label="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568120" start="1251" end="1285" title="South Pacific Tourism Organisation" label="South Pacific Tourism Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922764" start="1291" end="1329" title="Pacific Regional Environment Programme" label="Pacific Regional Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="1338" end="1374" title="Secretariat of the Pacific Community" label="Secretariat of the Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855996" start="1424" end="1512" title="Nauru Agreement" label="Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760687" start="1714" end="1733" title="Treaty of Rarotonga" label="Treaty of Rarotonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1849" end="1872" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1915" end="1929" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="2016" end="2037" title="ACP (Lomé Convention)" label="ACP (Lomé Convention)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="2043" end="2065" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="2071" end="2126" title="Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="2140" end="2173" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="2185" end="2238" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="2244" end="2285" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="2291" end="2340" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="2346" end="2383" title="International Development Association" label="International Development Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="2389" end="2422" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2428" end="2431" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="2433" end="2468" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="2470" end="2501" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="2503" end="2540" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="2548" end="2570" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="2579" end="2612" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2661" end="2685" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q97955491" start="3697" end="3740" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigration" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616408" start="3742" end="3781" title="List of diplomatic missions in Kiribati" label="List of diplomatic missions in Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433596" start="3783" end="3822" title="List of diplomatic missions of Kiribati" label="List of diplomatic missions of Kiribati"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16685" wikidata="Q1516511" url="?curid=16685" title="History of Kuwait">
<text>Kuwait is a sovereign state in Western Asia located at the head of the Persian Gulf. The geographical region of Kuwait has been occupied by humans since antiquity, particularly due to its strategic location at the head of the Persian Gulf. In the pre-oil era, Kuwait was a regional trade port. In the modern era, Kuwait is best known for the Gulf War (1990–1991).

==Antiquity==
===Mesopotamia===
Following the post-glacial flooding of the Persian Gulf basin, debris from the Tigris–Euphrates river formed a substantial delta, creating most of the land in present-day Kuwait and establishing the present coastlines. One of the earliest evidence of human habitation in Kuwait dates back to 8000 BC where Mesolithic tools were found in Burgan. 

During the Ubaid period (6500 BC), Kuwait was the central site of interaction between the peoples of Mesopotamia and Neolithic Eastern Arabia, including Bahra 1 and site H3 in Subiya. The Neolithic inhabitants of Kuwait were among the world&#x27;s earliest maritime traders. One of the world&#x27;s earliest reed-boats was discovered at site H3 dating back to the Ubaid period. Other Neolithic sites in Kuwait are located in Khiran and Sulaibikhat.

Mesopotamians first settled in the Kuwaiti island of Failaka in 2000 B.C. Traders from the Sumerian city of Ur inhabited Failaka and ran a mercantile business. The island had many Mesopotamian-style buildings typical of those found in Iraq dating from around 2000 B.C.
From 4000 BC until 2000 BC, the bay of Kuwait was home to the Dilmun civilization. At its peak, Dilmun may have included Al-Shadadiya, Akkaz, Umm an Namil, and Failaka.
Despite the scholarly consensus that ancient Dilmun encompasses three modern locations - the eastern littoral of Arabia from the vicinity of modern Kuwait to Bahrain; the island of Bahrain; the island of Failaka of Kuwait - few researchers have taken into account the radically different geography of the basin represented by the Persian Gulf before its reflooding as sea levels rose about 6000 BCE. 

During the Dilmun era (from ca. 3000 BC), Failaka was known as &quot;Agarum&quot;, the land of Enzak, a great god in the Dilmun civilization according to Sumerian cuneiform texts found on the island. During the Neo-Babylonian Period, Enzak was identified with Nabu, the ancient Mesopotamian patron god of literacy, the rational arts, scribes and wisdom. As part of Dilmun, Failaka became a hub for the civilization from the end of the 3rd to the middle of the 1st millennium BC. 

After the Dilmun civilization, Failaka was inhabited by the Kassites of Mesopotamia, and was formally under the control of the Kassite dynasty of Babylon. Studies indicate traces of human settlement can be found on Failaka dating back to as early as the end of the 3rd millennium BC, and extending until the 20th century AD. Many of the artifacts found in Falaika are linked to Mesopotamian civilizations and seem to show that Failaka was gradually drawn toward the civilization based in Antioch.

Under Nebuchadnezzar II, the bay of Kuwait was under Babylonian control. Cuneiform documents found in Failaka indicate the presence of Babylonians in the island&#x27;s population. Babylonian Kings were present in Failaka during the Neo-Babylonian Empire period, Nabonidus had a governor in Failaka and Nebuchadnezzar II had a palace and temple in Falaika. Failaka also contained temples dedicated to the worship of Shamash, the Mesopotamian sun god in the Babylonian pantheon.

Most of present-day Kuwait is still archaeologically unexplored. Although there is no scholarly consensus, several archaeologists and geologists have proposed that Kuwait was likely the original location of the Pishon River which watered the Garden of Eden. Juris Zarins argued that the Garden of Eden was situated at the head of the Persian Gulf (present-day Kuwait), where the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers run into the sea, from his research on this area using information from many different sources, including LANDSAT images from space. His suggestion about the Pishon River was supported by James A. Sauer of the American Center of Oriental Research. Sauer made an argument from geology and history that Pishon River was the now-defunct Kuwait River. With the aid of satellite photos, Farouk El-Baz traced the dry channel from Kuwait up the Wadi al-Batin.
After an apparent abandonment of about seven centuries, the bay of Kuwait was repopulated during the Achaemenid period (c. 550‒330 BC). In 4th century BC, the ancient Greeks colonized the bay of Kuwait under Alexander the Great, the ancient Greeks named mainland Kuwait &quot;Larissa&quot; and Failaka was named &quot;Ikaros&quot;.

According to Strabo and Arrian, Alexander the Great named Failaka &quot;Ikaros&quot; because it resembled the Aegean island of that name in size and shape. Various elements of Greek mythology were mixed with the local cults in Failaka. &quot;Ikaros&quot; was also the name of a prominent city situated in Failaka.

According to another account, having returned from his Indian campaign to Persia, Alexander the Great ordered the island to be called Icarus, after the Icarus island in the Aegean Sea. This was likely a Hellenization of the local name Akar (Aramaic &#x27;KR), derived from the ancient bronze-age toponym Agarum. Another suggestion is that the name Ikaros was influenced by the local É-kara temple, dedicated to the Babylonian sun-god Shamash. That both Failaka and the Aegean Icarus housed bull cults would have made the identification tempting all the more.

During Hellenistic times, there was a temple of Artemis on the island. The wild animals on the island were dedicated to goddess and no one should harm them. Strabo wrote that on the island there was a temple of Apollo and an oracle of Artemis (Tauropolus) (μαντεῖον Ταυροπόλου). The island is also mentioned by Stephanus of Byzantium and Ptolemaeus.

Remains of the settlement include a large Hellenistic fort and two Greek temples. Failaka was also a trading post (emporion) of the kingdom of Characene. Archaeological remains of Greek colonization were also discovered in Akkaz, Umm an Namil, and Subiya. At the Hellenistic fortress in Failaka, pigs represented 20 percent of the total population, but no pig remains were found in nearby Akkaz.

Nearchos was likely the first Greek to have explored Failaka. The island was further visited and inspected by Archias, Androsthenes of Thasos, and Hiero during three exploration expeditions ordered by Alexander the Great during 324 BC. Failaka might have been fortified and settled during the days of Seleucus I or Antiochos I.

At the time of Alexander the Great, the mouth of the Euphrates River was located in northern Kuwait. The Euphrates river flowed directly into the Persian Gulf via Khor Subiya which was a river channel at the time. Failaka was located 15 kilometers from the mouth of the Euphrates river. By the first century BC, the Khor Subiya river channel dried out completely.
During the Achaemenid period (c. 550‒330 BC), the bay of Kuwait was repopulated. Failaka was under the control of the Achaemenid Empire as evidenced by the archaeological discovery of Achaemenid strata. There are Aramaic inscriptions that testify Achaemenid presence.

In 127 BC, Kuwait was part of the Parthian Empire and the kingdom of Characene was established around Teredon in present-day Kuwait. Characene was centered in the region encompassing southern Mesopotamia, Characene coins were discovered in Akkaz, Umm an Namil, and Failaka. A busy Parthian era Characene commercial station existed in Kuwait.

The earliest recorded mention of Kuwait was in 150 AD in the geographical treatise &quot;Geography&quot; by Greek scholar Ptolemy. Ptolemy mentioned the Bay of Kuwait as &quot;Hieros Kolpos&quot; (&quot;Sacer Sinus&quot; in the Latin versions).

In 224 AD, Kuwait became part of the Sassanid Empire. At the time of the Sassanid Empire, Kuwait was known as &quot;Meshan&quot;, which was an alternative name of the kingdom of Characene.

Late Sassanian settlements were discovered in Failaka.

Akkaz was a Partho-Sassanian site; the Sassanid religion&#x27;s tower of silence was discovered in northern Akkaz.

In Bubiyan, there is archaeological evidence of Sassanian periods of human presence as evidenced by the recent discovery of torpedo-jar pottery sherds on several prominent beach ridges.

In 636 AD, the Battle of Chains between the Sassanid Empire and Rashidun Caliphate was fought in Kuwait near Kazma. At the time, Kuwait was under the control of the Sassanid Empire. The Battle of Chains was the first battle of the Rashidun Caliphate in which the Muslim army sought to extend its frontiers.

As a result of Rashidun victory in 636 AD, the bay of Kuwait was home to the city of Kazma (also known as &quot;Kadhima&quot; or &quot;Kāzimah&quot;) in the early Islamic era. Medieval Arabic sources contain multiple references to the bay of Kuwait in the early Islamic period. The city functioned as a trade port and resting place for pilgrims on their way from Iraq to Hejaz. The city was controlled by the kingdom of Al-Hirah in Iraq. In the early Islamic period, the bay of Kuwait was known for being a fertile area.

Kazma was mainly a stop for caravans coming from Persia and Mesopotamia en route to the Arabian Peninsula. The poet Al-Farazdaq was born in Kazma. Al-Farazdaq is recognized as one of the greatest classical poets of the Arabs.

Early to late Islamic settlements were discovered in Subiya, Akkaz, Kharaib al-Dasht, Umm al-Aish, Al-Rawdatain, Al Qusur, Umm an Namil, Miskan, and Kuwait&#x27;s side of Wadi al-Batin.

There is archaeological evidence of early Islamic periods of human presence in Bubiyan.

Christian Nestorian settlements flourished in the bay of Kuwait from the 5th century until the 9th century. Excavations have revealed several farms, villages and two large churches dating from the 5th and 6th century. Archaeologists are currently excavating nearby sites to understand the extent of the settlements that flourished in the eighth and ninth centuries A.D. An old island tradition is that a community grew up around a Christian mystic and hermit. The small farms and villages were eventually abandoned. Remains of Byzantine era Nestorian churches were found in Akkaz and Al-Qusur. Pottery at the Al-Qusur site can be dated from as early as the first half of the 7th century through the 9th century.

==Pre-oil history==
In 1521, Kuwait was under Portuguese control. In the late 16th century, the Portuguese built a defensive settlement in Kuwait. In the early to mid 1700s, Kuwait City was a small fishing village. Administratively, it was a sheikhdom, ruled by local sheikhs from Bani Khalid clan. Sometime in the mid 1700s, the Bani Utbah settled in Kuwait. Sometime after the death of the Bani Khalid&#x27;s leader Barrak Bin Urair and the fall of the Bani Khalid Emirate, the Utub were able to wrest control of Kuwait as a result of successive matrimonial alliances.

The man chosen was a Sabah, Sabah I bin Jaber. Sabah diplomacy may have also been important with neighbouring clans, especially as Bani Khalid power declined. This selection is usually dated to 1752. 

===Early growth (1760–1899)===
====Economy====
In the latter half of the eighteenth century, Kuwait gradually became a principal commercial center for the transit of goods between India, Muscat, Baghdad, Persia, and Arabia. By the late-1700s, Kuwait had already established itself as a trading route from the Persian Gulf to Aleppo. During the Persian siege of Basra in 1775–1779, Iraqi merchants took refuge in Kuwait and were partly instrumental in the expansion of Kuwait&#x27;s boatbuilding and trading activities. As a result, Kuwait&#x27;s maritime commerce boomed.
Between the years 1775 and 1779, the Indian trade routes with Baghdad, Aleppo, Smyrna and Constantinople were diverted to Kuwait. The East India Company was diverted to Kuwait in 1792. The East India Company secured the sea routes between Kuwait, India and the east coasts of Africa. After the Persians withdrew from Basra in 1779, Kuwait continued to attract trade away from Basra. The flight of many of Basra&#x27;s leading merchants to Kuwait continued to play a significant role in Basra&#x27;s commercial stagnation well into the 1850s.

Regional geopolitical turbulence helped foster economic prosperity in Kuwait in the second half of the 18th century. Kuwait became prosperous due to Basra&#x27;s instability in the late 18th century. In the late 18th century, Kuwait partly functioned as a haven for Basra&#x27;s merchants fleeing Ottoman government persecution. 

In 1776, Sabah I died and was succeeded by his youngest son, Abdullah. Shortly before Sabah&#x27;s death, in 1766, the al-Khalifa and, soon after, the al-Jalahima, left Kuwait en masse for Zubara in Qatar. Domestically, the al-Khalifa and al-Jalahima had been among the top contenders for power. Their emigration left the Sabahs in undisputed control, and by the end of Abdullah I&#x27;s long rule (1776–1814), Sabah rule was secure, and the political hierarchy in Kuwait was well established, the merchants deferring to direct orders from the Shaikh. By the 19th century, not only was the ruling Sabah much stronger than a desert Shaikh but also capable of naming his son successor. This influence was not just internal but enabled the al-Sabah to conduct foreign diplomacy. They soon established good relations with the British East India Company in 1775.

Kuwait was the center of boat building in the Persian Gulf region. Kuwaiti ship vessels were renowned throughout the Indian Ocean. Its sailors developed a positive reputation in the Persian Gulf. In the 19th century, Kuwait became significant in the horse trade, horses were regularly shipped by the way of sailing boats from Kuwait. In the mid 19th century, it was estimated that Kuwait was exporting an average of 800 horses to India annually.

====Assassination of Muhammad Bin Sabah====
In the 1870s, Ottoman officials were reasserting their presence in the Persian Gulf, with a military intervention in 1871—which was not effectively pursued—where family rivalries in Kuwait were breeding chaos. The Ottomans were bankrupt and when the European banks took control of the Ottoman budget in 1881, additional income was required from Kuwait. Midhat Pasha, the governor of Iraq, demanded that Kuwait submit financially to Ottoman rule. The al-Sabah found diplomatic allies in the British Foreign Office. However, under Abdullah II Al-Sabah, Kuwait pursued a general pro-Ottoman foreign policy, formally taking the title of Ottoman provincial governor, this relationship with the Ottoman Empire did result in Ottoman interference with Kuwaiti laws and selection or rulers. 

In May 1896, Shaikh Muhammad Al-Sabah was assassinated by his half-brother, Mubarak, who, in early 1897, was recognized, by the Ottoman sultan, as the &quot;qaimmaqam&quot; (provincial sub-governor) of Kuwait.

====Mubarak the Great====
Mubarak&#x27;s seizure of the throne via murder left his brother&#x27;s former allies as a threat to his rule, especially as his opponents gained the backing of the Ottomans. In July, Mubarak invited the British to deploy gunboats along the Kuwaiti coast. Britain saw Mubarak&#x27;s desire for an alliance as an opportunity to counteract German influence in the region and so agreed. This led to what is known as the First Kuwaiti Crisis, in which the Ottomans demanded that the British stop interfering with their empire. In the end, the Ottoman Empire backed down, rather than go to war.

In January 1899, Mubarak signed an agreement with the British which pledged that Kuwait would never cede any territory nor receive agents or representatives of any foreign power without the British Government&#x27;s consent. In essence, this policy gave Britain control of Kuwait&#x27;s foreign policy. The treaty also gave Britain responsibility for Kuwait&#x27;s national security. In return, Britain agreed to grant an annual subsidy of 15,000 Indian rupees (£1,500) to the ruling family. In 1911, Mubarak raised taxes. Therefore, three wealthy business men Ibrahim Al-Mudhaf, Helal Al-Mutairi, and Shamlan Ali bin Saif Al-Roumi (brother of Hussain Ali bin Saif Al-Roumi), led a protest against Mubarak by making Bahrain their main trade point, which negatively affected the Kuwaiti economy. However, Mubarak went to Bahrain and apologized for raising taxes and the three business men returned to Kuwait. In 1915, Mubarak the Great died and was succeeded by his son Jaber II Al-Sabah, who reigned for just over one year until his death in early 1917. His brother Sheikh Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah succeeded him.

During the reign of Mubarak, Kuwait was dubbed the &quot;Marseille of the Persian Gulf&quot; because its economic vitality attracted a large variety of people. The population was cosmopolitan and ethnically diverse, including Arabs, Persians, Africans, Jews, and Armenians. Kuwait was known for its religious tolerance.

In the first decades of the twentieth century, Kuwait had a well-established elite: wealthy trading families who were linked by marriage and shared economic interests. The elite were long-settled, urban, Sunni families, the majority of which claim descent from the original 30 Bani Utubi families. The wealthiest families were trade merchants who acquired their wealth from long-distance commerce, shipbuilding and pearling. They were a cosmopolitan elite, they traveled extensively to India, Africa and Europe. The elite educated their sons abroad more than other Gulf Arab elite. Western visitors noted that Kuwait&#x27;s elite used European office systems, typewriters and followed European culture with curiosity. The richest families were involved in general trade. The merchant families of Al-Ghanim and Al-Hamad were estimated to be worth millions before the 1940s.

===Anglo-Ottoman convention (1913)===

Informal negotiations began on 29 July 1911 in a British memorandum sent to the Ottoman Government. By this time, it seemed likely that the terminus for the German funded and engineered Berlin–Baghdad railway would be situated in Kuwait. Kuwait had been under Ottoman administration since 1871 and in 1875 was included in the Basra Vilayet. Although the sheikhdom now fell under the Empire’s jurisdiction, no Ottoman official was stationed in Kuwait. Influence over Kuwait was crucial to British foreign policy in the Persian Gulf with regard to commerce and strategic interests concerning India. 

In the Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1913, the British concurred with the Ottoman Empire in defining Kuwait as an autonomous kaza of the Ottoman Empire and that the Shaikhs of Kuwait were not independent leaders, but rather &quot;qaimmaqams&quot; (provincial sub-governors) of the Ottoman government.

The convention ruled that Sheikh Mubarak had authority over an area extending out to a radius of 80 km, from the capital. This region was marked by a red circle and included the islands of Auhah, Bubiyan, Failaka, Kubbar, Mashian, and Warbah. A green circle designated an area extending out an additional 100 km, in radius, within which the &quot;qaimmaqam&quot; was authorized to collect tribute and taxes from the natives.

World War I disrupted elements of Kuwait&#x27;s politics, society, economy and trans-regional networks.

===Mesopotamian Campaign (1914)===

On 6 November 1914, British offensive action began with the naval bombardment of the old fort at Fao in Iraq, located at the point where the Shatt-al-Arab meets the Persian Gulf. At the Fao Landing, the British Indian Expeditionary Force D (IEF D), comprising the 6th (Poona) Division led by Lieutenant General Arthur Barrett with Sir Percy Cox as Political Officer, was opposed by 350 Ottoman troops and 4 guns. After a sharp engagement, the fort was overrun. By mid-November the Poona Division was fully ashore and began moving towards the city of Basra.

The same month, the ruler of Kuwait, Sheikh Mubarak Al-Sabah, contributed to the Allied war effort by sending forces to attack Ottoman troops at Umm Qasr, Safwan, Bubiyan, and Basra. In exchange the British government recognised Kuwait as an &quot;independent government under British protection.&quot; There is no report on the exact size and nature of Mubarak&#x27;s attack, though Ottoman forces did retreat from those positions weeks later. Mubarak soon removed the Ottoman symbol from the Kuwaiti flag and replaced it with &quot;Kuwait&quot; written in Arabic script. Mubarak&#x27;s participation and previous exploits in obstructing the completion of the Baghdad railway helped the British safeguard the Persian Gulf by preventing Ottoman and German reinforcement. He refused to rent any storage facilities to the Germans.

===Kuwait–Najd War (1919–21)===

The Kuwait-Najd War erupted in the aftermath of World War I, when the Ottoman Empire was defeated and the British invalidated the Anglo-Ottoman Convention. The power vacuum, left by the fall of the Ottomans, sharpened the conflict between Kuwait and Najd (Ikhwan). The war resulted in sporadic border clashes throughout 1919–20.

However, Kuwait immensely declined in regional economic importance, mainly due to various trade blockades and the world economic depression. The Great Depression negatively impacted Kuwait&#x27;s economy starting in the late 1920s. International trading was one of Kuwait&#x27;s main sources of income before oil. Kuwaiti merchants were mostly intermediary merchants. As a result of European decline of demand for goods from India and Africa, the economy of Kuwait suffered. The decline in international trade resulted in an increase in gold smuggling by Kuwaiti ships to India. Some Kuwaiti merchant families became rich due to gold smuggling to India.

Kuwait&#x27;s pearling industry also collapsed as a result of the worldwide economic depression. At its height, Kuwait&#x27;s pearling industry led the world&#x27;s luxury market, regularly sending out between 750 and 800 ship vessels to meet the European elite&#x27;s need for luxuries pearls. During the economic depression, luxuries like pearls were in little demand. The Japanese invention of cultured pearls also contributed to the collapse of Kuwait&#x27;s pearling industry.

====Battle of Jahra====

The Battle of Jahra was a battle during the Kuwait-Najd War. The battle took place in Al Jahra, west of Kuwait City on 10 October 1920 between Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah ruler of Kuwait and Ikhwan Wahhabi followers of Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia, king of Saudi Arabia.

A force of 4,000 Saudi Ikhwan, led by Faisal Al-Dawish, attacked the Kuwait Red Fort at Al-Jahra, defended by 2,000 Kuwaiti men. The Kuwaitis were largely outnumbered by the Ikhwan of Najd.

====Sheikh Khaz&#x27;al turns down the throne of Kuwait====
When Percy Cox was informed of the border clashes in Kuwait, he sent a letter to Mohammerah Sheikh Khazʽal Ibn Jabir offering the Kuwaiti throne to either him or one of his heirs, thinking Khaz&#x27;al would be a more competent ruler the Al Sabah family. Khaz&#x27;al, who considered the Al Sabah as his own family, replied &quot;Do you expect me to allow the stepping down of Al Mubarak from the throne of Kuwait? Do you think I can accept this?&quot; He then asked: 

Ibn Saud imposed a tight trade blockade against Kuwait from the years 1923 until 1937. The goal of the Saudi economic and military attacks on Kuwait was to annex as much of Kuwait&#x27;s territory as possible. 

===The Uqair protocol===
The British High Commissioner in Baghdad, Percy Cox, imposed the Uqair Protocol of 1922 which defined the boundaries between Iraq, Kuwait and Nejd. In April 1923, Shaikh Ahmad al-Sabah wrote the British Political Agent in Kuwait, Major John More, &quot;I still do not know what the border between Iraq and Kuwait is, I shall be glad if you will kindly give me this information.&quot; More, upon learning that al-Sabah claimed the outer green line of the Anglo-Ottoman Convention (4 April), would relay the information to Sir Percy.

On 19 April, Sir Percy stated that the British government recognized the outer line of the convention as the border between Iraq and Kuwait. This decision limited Iraq&#x27;s access to the Persian Gulf at 58 km of mostly marshy and swampy coastline. As this would make it difficult for Iraq to become a naval power (the territory did not include any deepwater harbours), the Iraqi King Faisal I (whom the British installed as a puppet king in Iraq) did not agree to the plan. However, as his country was under British mandate, he had little say in the matter. Iraq and Kuwait would formally ratify the border in August. The border was re-recognized in 1932.

Attempts by Faisal I to build an Iraqi railway to Kuwait and port facilities on the Gulf were rejected by Britain. These and other similar British colonial policies made Kuwait a focus of the Arab national movement in Iraq, and a symbol of Iraqi humiliation at the hands of the British.

Kuwait&#x27;s border was revisited by a memorandum sent by the British high commissioner for Iraq in 1923, which became the basis for Kuwait&#x27;s northern border. In Iraq&#x27;s 1932 application to the League of Nations it included information about its borders, including its border with Kuwait, where it accepted the boundary established in 1923.
After the Uqair conference, Kuwait was still subjected to a Saudi economic blockade and intermittent Saudi raiding. Some merchant families left Kuwait in the early 1930s due to the prevalence of economic hardship. At the time of the discovery of oil in 1937, most of Kuwait&#x27;s inhabitants were impoverished. Merchants had the most economic power. Al Sabah family rule remained limited until well into the 1930s because the merchants, owing to their financial power, were the primary sources of income in Kuwait. The inauguration of the oil era freed the rulers from their financial dependency on merchant wealth.

Before Mary Bruins Allison visited Kuwait in 1934, Kuwait had already lost its prominence in long-distance trade. During World War I, the British Empire imposed a trade blockade against Kuwait because Kuwait&#x27;s ruler supported the Ottoman Empire. The British economic blockade heavily damaged Kuwait&#x27;s economy.

In 1937, Freya Stark wrote about the extent of poverty in Kuwait at the time:

Al Sabah became Kuwait&#x27;s dynastic monarchy in 1938. One tradition has it that political power went to the Sabahs as part of an explicit agreement; merchant families focused on the trade while the House of Sabah and other notable Kuwaiti families provided protection of the city housed within Kuwait&#x27;s wall. 

==Modern era==

===Independence and early state-building (1946–89)===

Between 1946 and 1982, Kuwait experienced a period of prosperity driven by oil and its liberal cultural atmosphere; this period is called the &quot;golden era&quot;. In 1946, crude oil was exported for the first time. In 1950, a major public-work programme allowed Kuwaitis to enjoy a modern standard of living. By 1952, the country became the largest oil exporter in the Persian Gulf. This massive growth attracted many foreign workers, especially from Palestine, Egypt, Iran, and India.

In June 1961, Kuwait became independent with the end of the British protectorate and the sheikh Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah became an Emir. Under the terms of the newly drafted constitution, Kuwait held its first parliamentary elections in 1963. Kuwait was the first Arab state in the Persian Gulf to establish a constitution and parliament.
Although Kuwait formally gained independence in 1961, Iraq initially refused to recognize the country&#x27;s independence by maintaining that Kuwait is part of Iraq, albeit Iraq later briefly backed down following a show of force by Britain and Arab League support of Kuwait&#x27;s independence. The short-lived Operation Vantage crisis evolved in July 1961, as the Iraqi government threatened to invade Kuwait and the invasion was finally averted following plans by the Arab League to form an international Arab force against the potential Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. As a result of Operation Vantage, the Arab League took over the border security of Kuwait and the British had withdrawn their forces by 19 October. Iraqi prime minister Abd al-Karim Qasim was killed in a coup in 1963 but, although Iraq recognised Kuwaiti independence and the military threat was perceived to be reduced, Britain continued to monitor the situation and kept forces available to protect Kuwait until 1971. There had been no Iraqi military action against Kuwait at the time: this was attributed to the political and military situation within Iraq which continued to be unstable. A treaty of friendship between Iraq and Kuwait was signed in 1963 by which Iraq recognised the 1932 border of Kuwait. The Kuwait-Iraq 1973 Sanita border skirmish evolved on 20 March 1973, when Iraqi army units occupied El-Samitah near the Kuwaiti border, which evoked an international crisis.

On 6 February 1974, Palestinian militants occupied the Japanese embassy in Kuwait, taking the ambassador and ten others hostage. The militants&#x27; motive was to support the Japanese Red Army members and Palestinian militants who were holding hostages on a Singaporean ferry in what is known as the &quot;Laju&quot; incident. Ultimately, the hostages were released, and the guerrillas allowed to fly to Aden. This was the first time Palestinian guerrillas struck in Kuwait as the Al Sabah ruling family, headed by Sheikh Sabah Al-Salim Al-Sabah, funded the Palestinian resistance movement. Kuwait had been a regular endpoint for Palestinian plane hijacking in the past and had considered itself safe.

In the 1960s and 1970s, Kuwait was the most developed country in the region. Kuwait was first Middle East country to diversify its revenue away from oil exports, establishing the Kuwait Investment Authority as the world&#x27;s first sovereign wealth fund. From the 1970s onward, Kuwait scored highest of all Arab countries on the Human Development Index, and Kuwait University, founded in 1966, attracted students from neighboring countries. Kuwait&#x27;s theatre industry was renowned throughout the Arab world.

At the time, Kuwait&#x27;s press was described as one of the freest in the world. Kuwait was the pioneer in the literary renaissance in the Arab region. In 1958, &quot;Al Arabi&quot; magazine was first published, the magazine went on to become the most popular magazine in the Arab world. Additionally, Kuwait became a haven for writers and journalists in the region, and many, like the Iraqi poet Ahmed Matar, moved to Kuwait for its strong freedom of expression laws, which surpassed those of any other country in the region.

Kuwaiti society embraced liberal and Western attitudes throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Most Kuwaiti women did not wear the hijab in the 1960s and 1970s. At Kuwait University, mini-skirts were more common than the hijab. 

Oil and the social structure of Kuwait were closely interlinked. According to an authoritative of the region such a structure resembled a form of &quot;new slavery&quot; with a &quot;viciously reactionary character&quot;. 90 per cent of the capital generated from oil for investment abroad was concentrated in the hands of eighteen families. The manual as well as a significant section of the managerial workforce was predominantly foreign, mainly Palestinians who were denied Kuwaiti citizenship. Major investment was made into developing new architectural projects reflecting a new liberal economy whilst advancing passive cooling and attempts at weaving in local styles and decoration.

In August 1976, in reaction to heightened assembly opposition to his policies, the emir suspended four articles of the constitution concerned with political and civil rights (freedom of the press and dissolution of the legislature) and the assembly itself. In 1980, however, the suspended articles of the constitution were reinstated along with the National Assembly. In 1982 the government submitted sixteen constitutional amendments that, among other things, would have allowed the emir to declare martial law for an extended period and would have increased both the size of the legislature and the length of terms of office. In May 1983, the proposals were formally dropped after several months of debate. Nonetheless, the issue of constitutional revisions continued as a topic of discussion in both the National Assembly and the palace.

In the early 1980s, Kuwait experienced a major economic crisis after the Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash and decrease in oil price.

During the Iran–Iraq War, Kuwait ardently supported Iraq. As a result, there were various pro-Iran terror attacks across Kuwait, including the 1983 bombings, the attempted assassination of Emir Jaber in May 1985, the 1985 Kuwait City bombings, and the hijacking of several Kuwait Airways planes. Kuwait&#x27;s economy and scientific research sector significantly suffered due to the pro-Iran terror attacks.

In 1986, the constitution was again suspended, along with the National Assembly. As with the previous suspension, popular opposition to this move emerged; indeed, the prodemocracy movement of 1989-90 took its name, the Constitutional Movement, from the demand for a return to constitutional life.

After the Iran–Iraq War ended, Kuwait declined an Iraqi request to forgive its US$65 billion debt. An economic rivalry between the two countries ensued after Kuwait increased its oil production by 40 percent.

The Iraq–Kuwait dispute also involved historical claims to Kuwait&#x27;s territory. Kuwait had been a part of the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s province of Basra, something that Iraq said made Kuwait rightful Iraqi territory. Kuwait&#x27;s ruling dynasty, the Al Sabah family, had concluded a protectorate agreement in 1899 that assigned responsibility for Kuwait&#x27;s foreign affairs to the United Kingdom. The UK drew the border between Kuwait and Iraq in 1922, making Iraq almost entirely landlocked by limiting its access to the Persian Gulf coastline. Kuwait rejected Iraq&#x27;s attempts to secure further coastline provisions in the region. Iraq accused Kuwait of exceeding its OPEC quotas for oil production. In order for the cartel to maintain its desired price of $18 per barrel, discipline was required. Kuwait was consistently overproducing; in part to repair infrastructure losses caused by the Iran–Iraq War attacks on Kuwait and to pay for the losses of economic scandals. The result was a slump in the oil priceas low as with a resulting loss of $7 billion a year to Iraq, equal to its 1989 balance of payments deficit. Resulting revenues struggled to support the government&#x27;s basic costs, let alone repair Iraq&#x27;s damaged infrastructure. Iraq looked for more discipline, with little success. The Iraqi government described it as a form of economic warfare, which it claimed was aggravated by Kuwait slant-drilling across the border into Iraq&#x27;s Rumaila oil field. At the same time, Saddam looked for closer ties with those Arab states that had supported Iraq in the war. This move was supported by the US, who believed that Iraqi ties with pro-Western Gulf states would help bring and maintain Iraq inside the US&#x27; sphere of influence.

In 1989, it appeared that Iraq–Kuwait relations, strong during the war, would be maintained. A pact of non-interference and non-aggression was signed between the countries, followed by a Kuwaiti-Iraqi deal for Iraq to supply Kuwait with water for drinking and irrigation, although a request for Kuwait to lease Iraq Umm Qasr was rejected. GCC-backed development projects were hampered by Iraq&#x27;s large debts, even with the demobilization of 200,000 soldiers. Iraq also looked to increase arms production so as to become an exporter, although the success of these projects was also restrained by Iraq&#x27;s obligations; in Iraq, resentment to OPEC&#x27;s controls mounted.

Iraq&#x27;s relations with its other Arab neighbors were degraded by mounting violence in Iraq against expatriate groups, who were well-employed during the war, by unemployed Iraqis, among them demobilized soldiers. These events drew little notice outside the Arab world because of fast-moving events directly related to the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe. However, the US did begin to condemn Iraq&#x27;s human rights record, including the well-known use of torture. The UK also condemned the execution of Farzad Bazoft, a journalist working for the British newspaper &quot;The Observer&quot;. Following Saddam&#x27;s declaration that &quot;binary chemical weapons&quot; would be used on Israel if it used military force against Iraq, Washington halted part of its funding. A UN mission to the Israeli-occupied territories, where riots had resulted in Palestinian deaths, was vetoed by the US, making Iraq deeply skeptical of US foreign policy aims in the region, combined with the reliance of the US on Middle Eastern energy reserves.

===Gulf War (1990–91)===

Tensions increased further in summer 1990, after Iraq complained to OPEC claiming that Kuwait was stealing its oil from a field near the border by slant drilling of the Rumaila field. In early July 1990, Iraq complained about Kuwait&#x27;s behavior, such as not respecting their quota, and openly threatened to take military action. On the 23rd, the CIA reported that Iraq had moved 30,000 troops to the Iraq-Kuwait border, and the US naval fleet in the Persian Gulf was placed on alert. Saddam believed an anti-Iraq conspiracy was developingKuwait had begun talks with Iran, and Iraq&#x27;s rival Syria had arranged a visit to Egypt. Upon review by the Secretary of Defense, it was found that Syria indeed planned a strike against Iraq in the coming days. Saddam immediately used funding to incorporate central intelligence into Syria and ultimately prevented the impending air strike. On 15 July 1990, Saddam&#x27;s government laid out its combined objections to the Arab League, including that policy moves were costing Iraq $1 billion a year, that Kuwait was still using the Rumaila oil field, that loans made by the UAE and Kuwait could not be considered debts to its &quot;Arab brothers&quot;. He threatened force against Kuwait and the UAE, saying: &quot;The policies of some Arab rulers are American ... They are inspired by America to undermine Arab interests and security.&quot; The US sent aerial refuelling planes and combat ships to the Persian Gulf in response to these threats. Discussions in Jeddah mediated on the Arab League&#x27;s behalf by Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak, were held on 31 July and led Mubarak to believe that a peaceful course could be established.

On the 25th, Saddam met with April Glaspie, the US Ambassador to Iraq, in Baghdad. The Iraqi leader attacked American policy with regards to Kuwait and the UAE:

Glaspie replied:

Saddam stated that he would attempt last-ditch negotiations with the Kuwaitis but Iraq &quot;would not accept death&quot;.

According to Glaspie&#x27;s own account, she stated in reference to the precise border between Kuwait and Iraq. Glaspie similarly believed that war was not imminent.
The invasion of Kuwait and annexation by Iraq took place on 2 August 1990. The initial casus belli was claimed to be support for a Kuwaiti rebellion against the Al Sabah family.

An Iraqi-backed Kuwaiti puppet leader named Alaa Hussein Ali was installed as head of the &quot;Provisional Government of Free Kuwait.&quot; Iraq annexed Kuwait on 8 August. The war was traumatic to both countries.

Kuwaiti civilians founded a local armed following the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. The Kuwaiti resistance&#x27;s casualty rate far exceeded that of the coalition military forces and Western hostages. The resistance predominantly consisted of ordinary citizens who lacked any form of training and supervision.

The underground resistance was punished by summary executions and torture. Almost all Kuwaitis at the time lost some family member. In addition, half the population, including native and foreign-born fled Kuwait to escape persecution.

George H. W. Bush condemned the invasion, and led efforts to drive out the Iraqi forces. Authorized by the United Nations Security Council, an American-led coalition of 34 nations fought the Gulf War to liberate Kuwait. Aerial bombardments began on 17 January 1991, and after several weeks a U.S.-led United Nations (UN) coalition began a ground assault on 23 February 1991 that achieved a complete removal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait in four days.

====Controversies====
=====Oil spill=====
On 23 January 1991, Iraq dumped of crude oil into the Persian Gulf, causing the largest offshore oil spill in history at that time. It was reported as a deliberate natural resources attack to keep US Marines from coming ashore (&quot;Missouri&quot; and &quot;Wisconsin&quot; had shelled Failaka Island during the war to reinforce the idea that there would be an amphibious assault attempt). About 30–40% of this came from allied raids on Iraqi coastal targets.

The land based Kuwait oil spill surpassed the Lakeview Gusher, which spilled nine million barrels in 1910, as the largest oil spill in recorded history.

=====Kuwaiti oil fires=====

The Kuwaiti oil fires were caused by the Iraqi military setting fire to 700 oil wells as part of a scorched earth policy while retreating from Kuwait in 1991 after conquering the country but being driven out by coalition forces. The fires started in January and February 1991, and the last one was extinguished by November.

The resulting fires burned uncontrollably because of the dangers of sending in firefighting crews. Land mines had been placed in areas around the oil wells, and a military cleaning of the areas was necessary before the fires could be put out. Somewhere around of oil were lost each day. Eventually, privately contracted crews extinguished the fires, at a total cost of US$1.5 billion to Kuwait. By that time, however, the fires had burned for approximately 10 months, causing widespread pollution in Kuwait.

The Kuwaiti Oil Minister estimated between twenty-five and fifty million barrels of unburned oil from damaged facilities pooled to create approximately 300 oil lakes, that contaminated around 40 million tons of sand and earth. The mixture of desert sand, unignited oil spilled and soot generated by the burning oil wells formed layers of hard &quot;tarcrete&quot;, which covered nearly five percent of Kuwait&#x27;s land mass.

Cleaning efforts were led by the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research and the Arab Oil Co., who tested a number of technologies including the use of petroleum-degrading bacteria on the oil lakes.

Vegetation in most of the contaminated areas adjoining the oil lakes began recovering by the mid-1990s, but the dry climate has also partially solidified some of the lakes. Over time the oil has continued to sink into the sand, with potential consequences for Kuwait&#x27;s small groundwater resources.

=====Highway of Death=====
On the night of 26–27 February 1991, several Iraqi forces began leaving Kuwait on the main highway north of Al Jahra in a column of some 1,400 vehicles. A patrolling E-8 Joint STARS aircraft observed the retreating forces and relayed the information to the DDM-8 air operations center in Saudi Arabia. These vehicles and the retreating soldiers were subsequently attacked by two A-10 aircraft, resulting in a 60 km stretch of highway strewn with debris—the Highway of Death. &quot;New York Times&quot; reporter Maureen Dowd wrote, &quot;With the Iraqi leader facing military defeat, Mr. Bush decided that he would rather gamble on a violent and potentially unpopular ground war than risk the alternative: an imperfect settlement hammered out by the Soviets and Iraqis that world opinion might accept as tolerable.&quot;

Chuck Horner, Commander of US and allied air operations, has written:

=====Nayriah testimony=====
The Nayirah testimony was a false testimony given before the United States Congressional Human Rights Caucus in October 1990 by a 15-year-old girl who was publicly identified by only her first name, Nayirah. The testimony was widely publicized in the American media and was cited numerous times by United States senators and President George H. W. Bush in their rationale to back Kuwait in the Gulf War. In 1992, it was revealed that Nayirah&#x27;s last name was Al-Ṣabaḥ () and that she was the daughter of Saud bin Nasir Al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti ambassador to the United States. Furthermore, it was revealed that her testimony was organized as part of the Citizens for a Free Kuwait public relations campaign, which was run by the American public relations firm Hill &amp; Knowlton for the Kuwaiti government. Following this, al-Sabah&#x27;s testimony has come to be regarded as a classic example of modern atrocity propaganda.

In her emotional testimony, Nayirah claimed that after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait she had witnessed Iraqi soldiers take babies out of incubators in a Kuwaiti hospital, take the incubators, and leave the babies to die.

Her story was initially corroborated by Amnesty International, a British NGO, which published several independent reports about the killings and testimony from evacuees. Following the liberation of Kuwait, reporters were given access to the country. An ABC report found that &quot;patients, including premature babies, did die, when many of Kuwait&#x27;s nurses and doctors ... fled&quot; but Iraqi troops &quot;almost certainly had not stolen hospital incubators and left hundreds of Kuwaiti babies to die.&quot; Amnesty International reacted by issuing a correction, with executive director John Healey subsequently accusing the Bush administration of &quot;opportunistic manipulation of the international human rights movement&quot;.

=====Palestinian exodus from Kuwait=====

Significant demographic changes occurred in Kuwait as a result of the Gulf War. During the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, 200,000 Palestinians voluntarily fled Kuwait due to various reasons (fear or persecution, food shortages, medical care difficulties, financial shortages, fear of arrest and mistreatment at roadblocks by Iraqis). After the Gulf War in 1991, nearly 200,000 Palestinians fled Kuwait, partly due to economic burdens, regulations on residence and fear of abuse by Kuwaiti security forces.

Prior to the Gulf War, Palestinians numbered 400,000 of Kuwait&#x27;s population of 2.2 million. The Palestinians who fled Kuwait were mostly Jordanian citizens. In 2012, relations resumed and 80,000 Palestinians resided in Kuwait.

===Aftermath of Gulf War liberation (1992–2005)===
Immediately after liberation in 1991, the United Nations, under Security Council Resolution 687, demarcated the Iraq-Kuwait boundary on the basis of the 1932 and the 1963 agreements between the two states. In November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait, which had been further spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 773 (1992) and 833 (1993).

Criticism of the Al Sabah family in Kuwait became more pronounced following the country&#x27;s return to sovereignty in 1991. The Al Sabah family were criticized for their actions during the Iraqi occupation. They were the first to flee Kuwait during the invasion. In early 1992, many press restrictions were lifted in Kuwait. After the October 1992 election, the National Assembly exercised a constitutional right to review all emiri decrees promulgated while the assembly was in dissolution. It has been suggested that the United States significantly pressured Kuwait to implement a more &quot;democratic&quot; political system as a condition for the country&#x27;s liberation in 1991.

The United Nations Security Council has passed nearly 60 resolutions on Iraq and Kuwait since Iraq&#x27;s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The most relevant to this issue is Resolution 678, passed on 29 November 1990. It authorizes &quot;member states co-operating with the Government of Kuwait ... to use all necessary means&quot; to (1) implement Security Council Resolution 660 and other resolutions calling for the end of Iraq&#x27;s occupation of Kuwait and withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwaiti territory and (2) &quot;restore international peace and security in the area&quot;. Resolution 678 has not been rescinded or nullified by succeeding resolutions and Iraq was not alleged after 1991 to invade Kuwait or to threaten to do so.

In March 2003, Kuwait became the springboard for the US-led invasion of Iraq. In preparation for the invasion, 100,000 U.S. troops assembled in Kuwait by 18 February.

===Political crisis and economic turmoil (2006–present)===
From 2006 onwards, Kuwait has suffered from chronic political deadlocks and longstanding periods of cabinet reshuffles and dissolutions. This has significantly hampered investment and economic reforms in Kuwait, making the country&#x27;s economy much more dependent on oil.

On 15 January 2006, Emir Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmed died and his crown prince, Sheikh Saad Al-Abdullah of the Salem branch was named Emir. On 23 January 2006, the assembly unanimously voted in favor of Sheikh Saad Al-Abdullah abdicating in favor of Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed, citing his illness with a form of dementia. Instead of naming a successor from the Salem branch as per convention, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed named his half-brother Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmed as crown prince and his nephew Sheikh Nasser Al-Mohammed as prime minister.

In August 2011, supporters of Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah &quot;discovered&quot; documents that incriminated up to one-third of Kuwaiti politicians in what quickly became the largest political corruption scandal in Kuwaiti history. By October 2011, 16 Kuwaiti politicians were alleged to have received payments of $350m in return for their support of government policy.

In December 2013, allies of Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad claimed to possess tapes purportedly showing that Sheikh Nasser Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah and Jassem Al-Kharafi were discussing plans to topple the Kuwaiti government. Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad appeared on local channel Al-Watan TV describing his claims.

In March 2014, David S. Cohen, then Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, accused Kuwait of funding terrorism. Since the end of the Gulf War in 1991, accusations of Kuwait funding terrorism have been very common and come from a wide variety of sources including intelligence reports, Western government officials, scholarly research, and renowned journalists. From 2014 to 2015, Kuwait was frequently described as the world&#x27;s biggest source of terrorism funding, particularly for ISIS and Al-Qaeda.

In April 2014, the Kuwaiti government imposed a total media blackout to ban any reporting or discussion on the issue. In March 2015, Kuwait&#x27;s public prosecutor dropped all investigations into the alleged coup plot and Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad read a public apology on Kuwait state television renouncing the coup allegations. Since then, &quot;numerous associates of his have been targeted and detained by the Kuwaiti authorities on various charges,&quot; most notably members of the so-called &quot;Fintas Group&quot; that had allegedly been the original circulators of the fake coup video.

On 26 June 2015, a suicide bombing took place at a Shia Muslim mosque in Kuwait. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant claimed responsibility for the attack. Twenty-seven people were killed and 227 people were wounded. In the aftermath, a lawsuit was filed accusing the Kuwaiti government of negligence and direct responsibility for the terror attack.

In December 2015, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad was convicted of &quot;disrespect to the public prosecutor and attributing a remark to the country&#x27;s ruler without a special permission from the emir&#x27;s court,&quot; issuing a suspended six-month prison sentence and a fine of 1,000 Kuwaiti Dinar. In January 2016, the Kuwaiti appeals court overturned the prior ruling and cleared Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad of all charges.
In November 2018, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad, along with four other defendants, were charged in Switzerland with forgery related to the fake coup video. Shortly thereafter, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad temporarily stepped aside from his role at the International Olympic Committee, pending an ethics committee hearing into the allegations.

In June 2019, government official Fahad Al Rajaan and his spouse were given life sentences in absentia by the Kuwait criminal court; personal property was confiscated, and they were ordered to repay $82 million, as well as being fined &quot;twice that amount.

In November 2019, former deputy prime minister and minister of interior Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah Al Sabah was dismissed from office after minister of defense Sheikh Nasser Sabah Al Ahmed Al Sabah filed a complaint with the Kuwaiti Attorney General alleging embezzlement of 240 million Kuwaiti dinars ($794.5 million) of Kuwait government funds had taken place during Khaled&#x27;s tenure as minister of defense.

The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated Kuwait&#x27;s economic crisis. Kuwait&#x27;s economy faced a budget deficit of $46 billion in 2020. Kuwait was downgraded by S&amp;P Global Ratings two times in less than two years because of declining oil revenue and delayed fiscal reforms.

In July 2020, the US Department of Justice filed an asset forfeiture claim against The Mountain Beverly Hills and other real property in the United States, alleging a group of three Kuwaiti officials, including Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah, set up unauthorized accounts in the name of the country&#x27;s Military Attache Office in London, known as the &#x27;Army Fund.&#x27; They allegedly funded the accounts with over $100m of Kuwaiti public money and used it for their own purposes.

In September 2020, Kuwait&#x27;s Crown Prince Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah became the 16th Emir of Kuwait and the successor to Emir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, who died at the age of 91. In October 2020, Sheikh Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah was appointed as the Crown Prince.

Since January 2021, Kuwait has been experiencing its worst political crisis in many decades. Kuwait is also facing a looming debt crisis according to various media sources. Kuwait is widely considered the region&#x27;s most oil-dependent country with the least amount of economic diversification. According to the World Economic Forum, Kuwait is the least economically developed Gulf country. Kuwait has the weakest infrastructure in the entire GCC region.

In March 2021, the Kuwaiti ministerial court ordered the detention of Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah, who was then arrested and imprisoned.

On April 13, 2021, a Kuwaiti court ordered the detention of former prime minister Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah on corruption charges related to the &#x27;Army Fund.&#x27; He is the first former Kuwaiti prime minister to face pre-trial detention over graft charges. The crimes allegedly took place during Jaber Al-Sabah&#x27;s 2001–11 term as defense minister.

In August 2021, Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad attended court in Switzerland alongside three of the other four defendants. In September 2021, the Swiss court convicted Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad of forgery along with the four other defendants. He denied wrongdoing and plans to appeal. On 16 December, 2023 Sheikh Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah appointed as 17th Emir of Kuwait after the death of Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.

==See also==

* Mesopotamia
* Dilmun
* Timeline of Kuwait City
* List of museums in Kuwait

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
* 
==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="0" end="6" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="31" end="43" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="71" end="83" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="342" end="350" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="476" end="498" title="Tigris–Euphrates river system" label="Tigris–Euphrates river"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="703" end="713" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014779" start="734" end="740" title="Burgan field" label="Burgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="755" end="767" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="845" end="856" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="871" end="885" title="Eastern Arabia" label="Eastern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60979194" start="897" end="904" title="Bahra 1" label="Bahra 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q108059997" start="909" end="916" title="H3 (Kuwait)" label="site H3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12189346" start="920" end="926" title="Subiya, Kuwait" label="Subiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q108059997" start="1081" end="1088" title="H3 (Kuwait)" label="site H3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635948" start="1180" end="1191" title="Sulaibikhat" label="Sulaibikhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1194" end="1206" title="Mesopotamian" label="Mesopotamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392962" start="1247" end="1254" title="Failaka Island" label="Failaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="1285" end="1290" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="1302" end="1304" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1429" end="1433" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879647" start="1495" end="1508" title="bay of Kuwait" label="bay of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="1525" end="1544" title="Dilmun civilization" label="Dilmun civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116188" start="1598" end="1603" title="Akkaz Island" label="Akkaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116196" start="1605" end="1617" title="Umm an Namil Island" label="Umm an Namil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392962" start="1623" end="1630" title="Failaka Island" label="Failaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q105070549" start="2103" end="2109" title="Agarum" label="Agarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671840" start="2129" end="2134" title="Enzak" label="Enzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q392239" start="2294" end="2298" title="Nabu" label="Nabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028568" start="2304" end="2335" title="ancient Mesopotamian religion" label="ancient Mesopotamian patron god"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="2575" end="2583" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2587" end="2598" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2642" end="2668" title="Kassites#Kassite Dynasty of Babylon" label="Kassite dynasty of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="3003" end="3010" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="3019" end="3036" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="3066" end="3075" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221002" start="3193" end="3209" title="List of Kings of Babylon" label="Babylonian Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="3245" end="3266" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q239414" start="3275" end="3284" title="Nabonidus" label="Nabonidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332188" start="3428" end="3435" title="Shamash" label="Shamash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914395" start="3702" end="3714" title="Pishon" label="Pishon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="3733" end="3747" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713981" start="3749" end="3761" title="Juris Zarins" label="Juris Zarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q849791" start="4004" end="4011" title="LANDSAT" label="LANDSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q466721" start="4108" end="4144" title="American Schools of Oriental Research" label="American Center of Oriental Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904604" start="4232" end="4244" title="Kuwait River" label="Kuwait River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750619" start="4280" end="4293" title="Farouk El-Baz" label="Farouk El-Baz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904604" start="4336" end="4349" title="Wadi al-Batin" label="Wadi al-Batin"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4452" end="4469" title="Achaemenid period" label="Achaemenid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4510" end="4524" title="ancient Greeks" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4559" end="4578" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995390" start="4669" end="4675" title="Ikaros (Failaka Island)" label="Ikaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="4697" end="4703" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="4708" end="4714" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="4794" end="4807" title="Aegean island" label="Aegean island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="4860" end="4875" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200795" start="5050" end="5069" title="Indian campaign of Alexander the Great" label="his Indian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5073" end="5079" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209576" start="5151" end="5182" title="Icaria" label="Icarus island in the Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="5202" end="5215" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="5240" end="5247" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5284" end="5294" title="bronze-age" label="bronze-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q105070549" start="5303" end="5309" title="Agarum" label="Agarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q797944" start="5414" end="5424" title="Babylonian mythology" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332188" start="5433" end="5440" title="Shamash" label="Shamash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427313" start="5489" end="5499" title="bull worship" label="bull cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5566" end="5583" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic times"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="5607" end="5614" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="5716" end="5722" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="5770" end="5776" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="5784" end="5790" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="5870" end="5892" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="5897" end="5907" title="Ptolemaeus" label="Ptolemaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5952" end="5963" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5964" end="5968" title="Towns of ancient Greece#Military settlements" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="5977" end="5989" title="Greek temple" label="Greek temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q655593" start="6025" end="6033" title="Emporia (ancient Greece)" label="emporion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062946" start="6053" end="6062" title="Characene" label="Characene"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="6206" end="6210" title="pigs" label="pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q320132" start="6307" end="6315" title="Nearchos" label="Nearchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786181" start="6417" end="6424" title="Archias of Pella" label="Archias"/>
<link wikidata="Q324140" start="6426" end="6448" title="Androsthenes of Thasos" label="Androsthenes of Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q313675" start="6454" end="6459" title="Hiero II of Syracuse" label="Hiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q184176" start="6608" end="6618" title="Seleucus I" label="Seleucus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q211488" start="6622" end="6633" title="Antiochos I" label="Antiochos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="6689" end="6704" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12189346" start="6804" end="6810" title="Subiya, Kuwait" label="Subiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="7011" end="7028" title="Achaemenid period" label="Achaemenid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="7118" end="7135" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="7213" end="7220" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="7303" end="7318" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062946" start="7338" end="7347" title="Characene" label="Characene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404398" start="7371" end="7378" title="Teredon" label="Teredon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="7701" end="7710" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7734" end="7741" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="7895" end="7910" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="8116" end="8122" title="Parthian Empire" label="Partho"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="8123" end="8132" title="Sassanian" label="Sassanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="8143" end="8160" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Sassanid religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157739" start="8168" end="8184" title="tower of silence" label="tower of silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="8223" end="8230" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026625" start="8422" end="8438" title="Battle of Chains" label="Battle of Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="8471" end="8489" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381345" start="8516" end="8521" title="Kazma" label="Kazma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381345" start="8800" end="8805" title="Kazma" label="Kazma"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="9018" end="9028" title="port city" label="trade port"/>
<link wikidata="Q310799" start="9135" end="9143" title="Al-Hirah" label="Al-Hirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9286" end="9292" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q591558" start="9353" end="9364" title="Al-Farazdaq" label="Al-Farazdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="9433" end="9448" title="classical literature" label="classical poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164575" start="9601" end="9607" title="Miskan Island" label="Miskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904604" start="9635" end="9648" title="Wadi al-Batin" label="Wadi al-Batin"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="9730" end="9737" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="9740" end="9749" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="9750" end="9759" title="Nestorian" label="Nestorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="10267" end="10276" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="10499" end="10509" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="10627" end="10638" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317251" start="10651" end="10666" title="fishing village" label="fishing village"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="10721" end="10727" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827617" start="10734" end="10745" title="Bani Khalid" label="Bani Khalid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570677" start="10783" end="10793" title="Bani Utbah" label="Bani Utbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772890" start="11001" end="11022" title="Marriage of state" label="matrimonial alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q26922" start="11053" end="11070" title="Sabah I bin Jaber" label="Sabah I bin Jaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="11407" end="11412" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="11414" end="11420" title="Muscat, Oman" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="11422" end="11429" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="11443" end="11449" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567862" start="11608" end="11623" title="Iraqi people" label="Iraqi merchants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="11878" end="11884" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11889" end="11903" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="11933" end="11951" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12046" end="12051" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="12075" end="12081" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141882" start="12639" end="12657" title="Ottoman government" label="Ottoman government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269513" start="12734" end="12742" title="Abdullah I Al-Sabah" label="Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727469" start="12862" end="12868" title="Zubara" label="Zubara"/>
<link wikidata="Q893164" start="13557" end="13570" title="boat building" label="boat building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="13649" end="13661" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905705" start="13782" end="13793" title="horse trading" label="horse trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q369930" start="14376" end="14388" title="Midhat Pasha" label="Midhat Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716262" start="14394" end="14410" title="List of Ottoman governors of Baghdad" label="governor of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269504" start="14552" end="14572" title="Abdullah II Al-Sabah" label="Abdullah II Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="14820" end="14826" title="Sheikh" label="Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="15266" end="15273" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="16089" end="16094" title="rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984425" start="16196" end="16213" title="Ibrahim Al-Mudhaf" label="Ibrahim Al-Mudhaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701459" start="16215" end="16231" title="Helal Al-Mutairi" label="Helal Al-Mutairi"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="16351" end="16358" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26919" start="16604" end="16621" title="Jaber II Al-Sabah" label="Jaber II Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="16807" end="16816" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166341" start="17003" end="17007" title="History of the Jews in Kuwait" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17013" end="17022" title="Armenians in Kuwait#History" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="17049" end="17068" title="religious tolerance" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="17731" end="17742" title="typewriters" label="typewriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="17756" end="17772" title="European culture" label="European culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q639128" start="18170" end="18192" title="Berlin–Baghdad railway" label="Berlin–Baghdad railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862138" start="18310" end="18323" title="Basra Vilayet" label="Basra Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q935921" start="18706" end="18710" title="kaza" label="kaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935593" start="19072" end="19077" title="Auhah Island" label="Auhah"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="19079" end="19086" title="Bubiyan" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q944666" start="19097" end="19103" title="Kubbar Island" label="Kubbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q285416" start="19118" end="19124" title="Warbah Island" label="Warbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="19272" end="19279" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19309" end="19320" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164081" start="19547" end="19550" title="Al-Faw, Iraq" label="Fao"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="19591" end="19604" title="Shatt-al-Arab" label="Shatt-al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286106" start="19636" end="19647" title="Fao Landing" label="Fao Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605509" start="19661" end="19689" title="Indian Expeditionary Force D" label="Indian Expeditionary Force D"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642566" start="19714" end="19734" title="6th (Poona) Division" label="6th (Poona) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378403" start="19761" end="19775" title="Arthur Barrett (Indian Army officer)" label="Arthur Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q266452" start="19785" end="19794" title="Percy Cox" label="Percy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847320" start="19798" end="19815" title="Political officer (British Empire)" label="Political Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="20000" end="20005" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q388730" start="20052" end="20068" title="Mubarak Al-Sabah" label="Mubarak Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q842407" start="20153" end="20161" title="Umm Qasr" label="Umm Qasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669409" start="20163" end="20169" title="Safwan, Iraq" label="Safwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="20171" end="20178" title="Bubiyan" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="20184" end="20189" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q639128" start="20669" end="20684" title="Berlin–Baghdad railway" label="Baghdad railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="20906" end="20930" title="aftermath of World War I" label="aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20941" end="20955" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208154" start="21121" end="21125" title="Najd" label="Najd"/>
<link wikidata="Q143509" start="21127" end="21133" title="Ikhwan" label="Ikhwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="21346" end="21362" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029022" start="22253" end="22268" title="cultured pearls" label="cultured pearls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871302" start="22368" end="22383" title="Battle of Jahra" label="Battle of Jahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077024" start="22450" end="22458" title="Al Jahra" label="Al Jahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364766" start="22507" end="22532" title="Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah" label="Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q143509" start="22553" end="22559" title="Ikhwan" label="Ikhwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="22581" end="22605" title="Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia" label="Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738479" start="22668" end="22684" title="Faisal Al-Dawish" label="Faisal Al-Dawish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191336" start="22699" end="22714" title="Kuwait Red Fort" label="Kuwait Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q266452" start="22886" end="22895" title="Percy Cox" label="Percy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q458396" start="22962" end="22972" title="Khorramshahr" label="Mohammerah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771698" start="22980" end="22997" title="Khazʽal Ibn Jabir" label="Khazʽal Ibn Jabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q151509" start="23351" end="23359" title="Ibn Saud" label="Ibn Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q266452" start="23630" end="23639" title="Percy Cox" label="Percy Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q94635" start="23653" end="23675" title="Uqair Protocol of 1922" label="Uqair Protocol of 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q400907" start="23758" end="23772" title="Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Ahmad al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q94635" start="23824" end="23833" title="John More (major)" label="John More"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="24507" end="24515" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="Faisal I"/>
<link wikidata="Q476807" start="25526" end="25533" title="raid (military)" label="raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793324" start="26044" end="26063" title="Mary Bruins Allison" label="Mary Bruins Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26158" end="26169" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="26175" end="26189" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364766" start="26238" end="26257" title="Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah" label="Kuwait&amp;#x27;s ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="26272" end="26286" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q292480" start="26367" end="26378" title="Freya Stark" label="Freya Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q291639" start="26638" end="26652" title="House of Sabah" label="House of Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480281" start="27377" end="27397" title="Sheikhdom of Kuwait" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183167" start="27413" end="27439" title="Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah" label="Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164201" start="27493" end="27505" title="Constitution of Kuwait" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448997" start="27529" end="27560" title="Kuwaiti parliamentary election, 1963" label="parliamentary elections in 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="27583" end="27613" title="Arab States of the Persian Gulf" label="Arab state in the Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="27903" end="27914" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117991" start="27970" end="27987" title="Operation Vantage" label="Operation Vantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q299732" start="28394" end="28412" title="Abd al-Karim Qasim" label="Abd al-Karim Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043309" start="28939" end="28978" title="Kuwait-Iraq 1973 Sanita border skirmish" label="Kuwait-Iraq 1973 Sanita border skirmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576314" start="29131" end="29192" title="1974 attack on the Japanese Embassy in Kuwait" label="Palestinian militants occupied the Japanese embassy in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q333954" start="29286" end="29303" title="Japanese Red Army" label="Japanese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474504" start="29411" end="29436" title="Laju incident" label="&amp;quot;Laju&amp;quot; incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="29515" end="29519" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="29753" end="29768" title="aircraft hijacking" label="plane hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794766" start="29993" end="30020" title="Kuwait Investment Authority" label="Kuwait Investment Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="30047" end="30068" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="30144" end="30167" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273657" start="30173" end="30190" title="Kuwait University" label="Kuwait University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30270" end="30286" title="Kuwait#Theatre" label="theatre industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="30389" end="30408" title="Freedom of press" label="freest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702220" start="30496" end="30504" title="Al Arabi Magazine" label="Al Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165183" start="30726" end="30737" title="Ahmed Matar" label="Ahmed Matar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="30770" end="30791" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="30882" end="30911" title="Westernization" label="liberal and Western attitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="30980" end="30985" title="hijab" label="hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="32658" end="32673" title="economic crisis" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564130" start="32684" end="32717" title="Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash" label="Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q615231" start="32722" end="32743" title="1980s oil glut" label="decrease in oil price"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="32757" end="32770" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410564" start="32828" end="32859" title="1983–1988 Kuwait terror attacks" label="various pro-Iran terror attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q217194" start="32935" end="32945" title="Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah" label="Emir Jaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q119089921" start="32963" end="32988" title="1985 Kuwait City bombings" label="1985 Kuwait City bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="33777" end="33791" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862138" start="33799" end="33816" title="Basra Vilayet" label="province of Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q291639" start="33915" end="33930" title="House of Sabah" label="Al Sabah family"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="33948" end="33960" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="34342" end="34346" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="34764" end="34783" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="35082" end="35096" title="Directional drilling" label="slant-drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q617285" start="35132" end="35149" title="Rumaila oil field" label="Rumaila oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q842407" start="35744" end="35752" title="Umm Qasr" label="Umm Qasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q934433" start="35855" end="35869" title="demobilization" label="demobilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067046" start="36618" end="36631" title="Farzad Bazoft" label="Farzad Bazoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="36686" end="36698" title="Observer (newspaper)" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q575187" start="36906" end="36934" title="Israeli-occupied territories" label="Israeli-occupied territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="36988" end="36992" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="37243" end="37247" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="37322" end="37336" title="slant drilling" label="slant drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q617285" start="37344" end="37357" title="Rumaila field" label="Rumaila field"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="37525" end="37528" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="37629" end="37641" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="37829" end="37849" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="38005" end="38010" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="38144" end="38155" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="38576" end="38593" title="aerial refuelling" label="aerial refuelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="38683" end="38689" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="38754" end="38767" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q460207" start="38892" end="38905" title="April Glaspie" label="April Glaspie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837622" start="38911" end="38932" title="United States Ambassador to Iraq" label="US Ambassador to Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="39337" end="39378" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="invasion of Kuwait and annexation by Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="39420" end="39431" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q710775" start="39556" end="39572" title="Alaa Hussein Ali" label="Alaa Hussein Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q868942" start="39608" end="39645" title="Republic of Kuwait" label="Provisional Government of Free Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="40080" end="40097" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="40273" end="40290" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="40380" end="40411" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="40464" end="40472" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="40800" end="40809" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="40862" end="40871" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548370" start="41273" end="41288" title="Lakeview Gusher" label="Lakeview Gusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15611742" start="41451" end="41465" title="Military of Iraq" label="Iraqi military"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="41509" end="41523" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="41834" end="41844" title="Land mines" label="Land mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="42525" end="42529" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839252" start="42825" end="42853" title="petroleum-degrading bacteria" label="petroleum-degrading bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077024" start="43312" end="43320" title="Al Jahra" label="Al Jahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q498786" start="43370" end="43385" title="Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint STARS" label="E-8 Joint STARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q192443" start="43583" end="43587" title="A-10" label="A-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q994728" start="44128" end="44145" title="Nayirah testimony" label="Nayirah testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986402" start="44199" end="44232" title="Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission" label="Congressional Human Rights Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="44459" end="44476" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q291639" start="44587" end="44595" title="House of Al Sabah" label="Al-Ṣabaḥ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227094" start="44632" end="44655" title="Saud bin Nasir Al-Sabah" label="Saud bin Nasir Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122765" start="44779" end="44805" title="Citizens for a Free Kuwait" label="Citizens for a Free Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269655" start="44885" end="44904" title="Hill &amp;amp; Knowlton" label="Hill &amp;amp; Knowlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12217491" start="44913" end="44931" title="Kuwaiti government" label="Kuwaiti government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551488" start="45030" end="45049" title="atrocity propaganda" label="atrocity propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45188" end="45197" title="Incubator (neonatal)#Incubator" label="incubator"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="45313" end="45334" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="45346" end="45349" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="45471" end="45477" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719914" start="45904" end="45923" title="Presidency of George H. W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="46144" end="46170" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Iraqi occupation of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604863" start="46613" end="46637" title="Demographics of Kuwait" label="Kuwait&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584232" start="46699" end="46717" title="Jordanian people" label="Jordanian citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="46905" end="46936" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 687" label="Security Council Resolution 687"/>
<link wikidata="Q877358" start="47164" end="47192" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution" label="Security Council Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121829" start="47193" end="47196" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 773" label="773"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513583" start="47208" end="47211" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 833" label="833"/>
<link wikidata="Q291639" start="47238" end="47246" title="House of Sabah" label="Al Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460058" start="48090" end="48093" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 678" label="678"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490334" start="48282" end="48285" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 660" label="660"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460058" start="48503" end="48506" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 678" label="678"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="48708" end="48724" title="invasion of Iraq" label="invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="48792" end="48798" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q313661" start="49231" end="49247" title="Saad Al-Salim Al-Sabah" label="Saad Al-Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q57555" start="49401" end="49415" title="Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Sabah Al-Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q641805" start="49584" end="49598" title="Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Nawaf Al-Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q334718" start="49637" end="49655" title="Nasser Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah" label="Nasser Al-Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q863577" start="49713" end="49745" title="Ahmed Al-Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah" label="Ahmed Al-Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q334718" start="50166" end="50193" title="Nasser Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah" label="Nasser Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164155" start="50198" end="50215" title="Jassem Al-Kharafi" label="Jassem Al-Kharafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703334" start="50320" end="50328" title="Al-Watan (Kuwait)" label="Al-Watan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20067627" start="50371" end="50385" title="David S. Cohen (attorney)" label="David S. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883181" start="50392" end="50464" title="Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence" label="Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610633" start="50557" end="50581" title="Kuwait and state-sponsored terrorism" label="Kuwait funding terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610633" start="50823" end="50858" title="Kuwait and state-sponsored terrorism" label="biggest source of terrorism funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="50877" end="50881" title="ISIS" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="50886" end="50894" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770770" start="50951" end="50965" title="media blackout" label="media blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q28714464" start="51398" end="51410" title="Fintas Group" label="Fintas Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20281004" start="51510" end="51536" title="2015 Kuwait mosque bombing" label="suicide bombing took place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="51576" end="51612" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332286" start="52372" end="52379" title="forgery" label="forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="52501" end="52532" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676590" start="52627" end="52642" title="Fahad Al Rajaan" label="Fahad Al Rajaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852103" start="52926" end="52958" title="Khaled Al Jarrah Al Sabah" label="Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah Al Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12247753" start="53011" end="53048" title="Nasser Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah" label="Sheikh Nasser Sabah Al Ahmed Al Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250691" start="53270" end="53287" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Kuwait" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106158" start="53429" end="53451" title="S&amp;amp;P Global Ratings" label="S&amp;amp;P Global Ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="53565" end="53589" title="United States Department of Justice" label="US Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q536118" start="53599" end="53615" title="asset forfeiture" label="asset forfeiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050634" start="53630" end="53656" title="The Mountain Beverly Hills" label="The Mountain Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q641805" start="54082" end="54114" title="Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12243161" start="54264" end="54297" title="Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q57894" start="55008" end="55049" title="Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah" label="Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592497" start="55189" end="55194" title="Graft (politics)" label="graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332286" start="55484" end="55491" title="forgery" label="forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12243161" start="55600" end="55633" title="Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q641805" start="55686" end="55718" title="Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="55737" end="55748" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="55751" end="55757" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903026" start="55760" end="55783" title="Timeline of Kuwait City" label="Timeline of Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908938" start="55786" end="55811" title="List of museums in Kuwait" label="List of museums in Kuwait"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16686" wikidata="Q62438" url="?curid=16686" title="Geography of Kuwait">
<text>Kuwait is a country in West Asia, bordering the Persian Gulf, between Iraq and Saudi Arabia. Kuwait is located at the far northwestern corner of the Persian Gulf. Kuwait is 17,820 square kilometres in size. At its most distant points, it is about north to south, and east to west. Kuwait has 10 islands. Kuwait&#x27;s area consists mostly of desert.

==Boundaries and geographic features==

As previously mentioned, Kuwait borders the Persian Gulf with of coast. Within its territory are ten islands, two of which, Bubiyan (the largest) and Warbah, are strategically important.

Kuwait&#x27;s most prominent geographic feature is Kuwait Bay (Jun al Kuwayt), which indents the shoreline for about forty kilometers, providing natural protection for the port of Kuwait, and accounts for nearly one third of the country&#x27;s shoreline.

To the north and northwest, there is the historically contested border between Kuwait and Iraq. Although the Iraqi government, which had first asserted a claim to rule Kuwait in 1938, recognized the borders with Kuwait in 1963 (based on agreements made earlier in the century), it continued to press Kuwait for control over Bubiyan and Warbah islands through the 1960s and 1970s.

To the south and southwest, Kuwait shares a 250-km border with Saudi Arabia. The boundary between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia was set by the Treaty of Al Uqayr in 1922, which also established the Saudi–Kuwaiti neutral zone of 5,700 square kilometers between the two nations. In 1966, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia agreed to divide the neutral zone; the partitioning agreement making each country responsible for administration in its portion was signed in December 1969. The resources in the area, now known as the Divided Zone, are not affected by the agreement. The oil from onshore and offshore fields continues to be shared equally between the two countries.

In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait and, shortly thereafter, formally incorporated the entire country into Iraq. Under United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolution 687, after the restoration of Kuwaiti sovereignty in 1991, a UN commission undertook formal demarcation of the borders on the basis of those agreed to in 1963. The boundary was demarcated in 1992. Iraq initially refused to accept the commission&#x27;s findings but ultimately accepted them in November 1994.

==Climate==
Kuwait has an arid climate. Rainfall in the nation varies from a year. Actual rainfall has ranged from a year to as much as . In summer, average daily high temperatures range from ; the highest ever temperature recorded in Kuwait was at Mitribah on 21 July 2016 which is the highest recorded temperature in Asia and also the third highest in the world. The summers are relentlessly long, punctuated mainly by dramatic dust storms in June and July when northwesterly winds cover the cities in sand. In late summer, which is more humid, there are occasional sharp, brief thunderstorms.

By November summer is over, and colder winter weather sets in, dropping temperatures to as low as at night; daytime temperatures are in the upper 20s °C (upper 70s to low 80s °F). Frost rarely occurs; rain is more common and falls mostly in the spring.

Kuwait&#x27;s winter is colder than in other Persian Gulf countries, such as Bahrain, Qatar or United Arab Emirates. Kuwait experiences colder weather because it is situated farther north, and because of cold winds blowing from upper Iraq and Iran.

==Nature reserves==
At present, there are five protected areas in Kuwait recognized by the IUCN. In response to Kuwait becoming the 169th signatory of the Ramsar Convention, Bubiyan Island&#x27;s Mubarak al-Kabeer reserve was designated as the country&#x27;s first Wetland of International Importance. The 50,948 ha reserve consists of small lagoons and shallow salt marshes and is important as a stop-over for migrating birds on two migration routes. The reserve is home to the world&#x27;s largest breeding colony of crab-plover.

==Biodiversity==

Currently, 444 species of birds have been recorded in Kuwait, 18 species of which breed in the country. Due to its location at the head of the Persian Gulf near the mouth of the Tigris–Euphrates river, Kuwait is situated at the crossroads of many major bird migration routes and between two and three million birds pass each year. Kuwait&#x27;s marine and littoral ecosystems contain the bulk of the country&#x27;s biodiversity heritage. The marshes in northern Kuwait and Jahra have become increasingly important as a refuge for passage migrants.

Twenty eight species of mammal are found in Kuwait; animals such as gerboa, desert rabbits and hedgehogs are common in the desert. Among the endangered mammalian species are the red fox and wild cat. Forty reptile species have been recorded although none are endemic to Kuwait.

Kuwait, Oman and Yemen are the only locations where the endangered smoothtooth blacktip shark is confirmed as occurring.

Kuwaiti islands are important breeding areas for four species of tern and the socotra cormorant. Kubbar Island has been recognised an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports a breeding colony of white-cheeked terns.

== Geology and aquifers ==

The land was formed in a recent geologic era. In the south, limestone rises in a long, north-oriented dome that lies beneath the surface. It is within and below this formation that the principal oil fields, Kuwait&#x27;s most important natural resource, are located. In the west and north, layers of sand, gravel, silt, and clay overlie the limestone to a depth of more than 210 meters. The upper portions of these beds are part of a mass of sediment deposited by a great wadi whose most recent channel was the Wadi al Batin, the broad shallow valley forming the western boundary of the country.

On the western side of the Al Rawdatayn geological formation, a freshwater aquifer was discovered in 1960 and became Kuwait&#x27;s principal water source. The supply is insufficient to support extensive irrigation, but it is tapped to supplement the distilled water supply that fills most of the country&#x27;s needs. The only other exploited aquifer lies in the permeable zone in the top of the limestone of the Ash Shuaybah field south and east of the city of Kuwait. Unlike water from the Al Rawdatayn aquifer, water from the Ash Shuaybah aquifer is brackish. Millions of liters a day of this water are pumped for commercial and household purposes.

==Water and marshes==

Kuwait is part of the Tigris–Euphrates river system basin. Several Tigris–Euphrates confluences form parts of the Kuwait–Iraq border. Bubiyan Island is part of the Shatt al-Arab delta. Kuwait is partially part of the Mesopotamian Marshes. Kuwait does not currently have any permanent rivers within its territory. However, Kuwait does have several wadis, the most notable of which is Wadi al-Batin which forms the border between Kuwait and Iraq. Kuwait also has several river-like marine channels around Bubiyan Island, most notably Khawr Abd Allah which is now an estuary, but once was the point where the Shatt al-Arab emptied into the Persian Gulf. Khawr Abd Allah is located in southern Iraq and northern Kuwait, the Iraq-Kuwait border divides the lower portion of the estuary, but adjacent to the port of Umm Qasr the estuary becomes wholly Iraqi. It forms the northeast coastline of Bubiyan Island and the north coastline of Warbah Island.

Kuwait relies on water desalination as a primary source of fresh water for drinking and domestic purposes. There are currently more than six desalination plants. Kuwait was the first country in the world to use desalination to supply water for large-scale domestic use. The history of desalination in Kuwait dates back to 1951 when the first distillation plant was commissioned.

Kuwait&#x27;s fresh water resources are limited to groundwater, desalinated seawater, and treated wastewater effluents. There are three major municipal wastewater treatment plants. Most water demand is currently satisfied through seawater desalination plants. Sewage disposal is handled by a national sewage network that covers 98% of facilities in the country.

== Human geography ==
The bulk of the Kuwaiti population lives in the coastal capital of the city of Kuwait. Smaller populations inhabit the nearby city of Al Jahrah, smaller desert and coastal towns, and, prior to the Persian Gulf War, some of the several nearby gulf islands, notably Faylakah.

== Area boundaries ==
; Area:
:* Total: 17,818 km²
:* Land: 17,818 km²
:* Water: 0 km²
; Area—comparative:
: Slightly smaller than Fiji
; Land boundaries:
:* Total: 475 km
:* Border countries: Iraq 254 km, Saudi Arabia 221 km
; Coastline:
: 499 km
; Maritime claims:
; Exclusive Economic Zone: 
:* Territorial sea: 
; Elevation extremes:
:* Lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
:* Highest prominence: Mutla Ridge 142 m
:* Highest point: unnamed site without prominence in the Jahra Governorate at 291 m

==Resources and land use==
; Natural resources:
: Petroleum, fish, shrimp, natural gas
; Land use
:* Arable land: 0.6%
:* Permanent crops: 0.3%
:* Permanent pasture: 7.6%
:* Forest: 0.4%
:* Other: 91.1% (2011)
; Irrigated land:
: 86 km² (2007)
; Total renewable water resources:
: 0.02 km3 (2011)
; Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):
:* Total: 0.91 km3/yr (47%/2%/51%)
:* Per capita: 441.2 m3/yr (2005)

==Environmental concerns==

; Natural hazards:
: Sudden cloudbursts are common from October to April – they bring heavy rain which can damage roads and houses; sandstorms and dust storms occur throughout the year, but are most common between March and August
; Environment—current issues:
: Limited natural fresh water resources; some of world&#x27;s largest and most sophisticated desalination facilities provide much of the water; air and water pollution; desertification
; Environment—international agreements:
:* Party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea

==References==
Attribution:</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="0" end="6" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="23" end="32" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="48" end="60" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="70" end="74" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="79" end="91" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="342" end="348" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="435" end="447" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="515" end="522" title="Bubiyan" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285416" start="541" end="547" title="Warbah Island" label="Warbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879647" start="642" end="655" title="Kuwait Bay" label="Jun al Kuwayt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088785" start="899" end="929" title="Iraq–Kuwait border" label="border between Kuwait and Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088715" start="1297" end="1337" title="Kuwait–Saudi Arabia border" label="boundary between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94635" start="1353" end="1371" title="Treaty of Al Uqayr" label="Treaty of Al Uqayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q74091" start="1408" end="1434" title="Saudi–Kuwaiti neutral zone" label="Saudi–Kuwaiti neutral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="1886" end="1905" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Iraq invaded Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="1989" end="2040" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 687" label="United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolution 687"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="2372" end="2384" title="arid climate" label="arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="2514" end="2526" title="temperatures" label="temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882358" start="2595" end="2603" title="Mitribah" label="Mitribah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="2776" end="2786" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="3242" end="3254" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="3406" end="3411" title="winds" label="winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3431" end="3435" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3440" end="3444" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="3494" end="3509" title="protected areas" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="3538" end="3542" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595469" start="3579" end="3594" title="List of parties to the Ramsar Convention" label="169th signatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="3602" end="3619" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="3621" end="3635" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="3809" end="3821" title="Saltmarsh" label="salt marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213836" start="3966" end="3977" title="crab-plover" label="crab-plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607703" start="4009" end="4029" title="List of birds of Kuwait" label="444 species of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="4176" end="4198" title="Tigris–Euphrates river system" label="Tigris–Euphrates river"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="4642" end="4650" title="hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="4725" end="4732" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="4737" end="4745" title="wild cat" label="wild cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529944" start="4893" end="4919" title="smoothtooth blacktip shark" label="smoothtooth blacktip shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="5013" end="5017" title="tern" label="tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q632399" start="5026" end="5043" title="socotra cormorant" label="socotra cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q944666" start="5045" end="5058" title="Kubbar Island" label="Kubbar Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="5082" end="5101" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="5111" end="5133" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368963" start="5156" end="5171" title="bird colony" label="breeding colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q921533" start="5175" end="5193" title="white-cheeked tern" label="white-cheeked tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="5285" end="5294" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457676" start="5420" end="5430" title="Oil reserves in Kuwait" label="oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="5525" end="5529" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="5531" end="5537" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="5539" end="5543" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="5549" end="5553" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="5667" end="5675" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187971" start="5697" end="5701" title="wadi" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904604" start="5736" end="5749" title="Wadi al-Batin" label="Wadi al Batin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647999" start="5849" end="5861" title="Al Rawdatayn" label="Al Rawdatayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="5897" end="5904" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6235" end="6247" title="Ash Shuaybah" label="Ash Shuaybah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="6520" end="6549" title="Tigris–Euphrates river system" label="Tigris–Euphrates river system"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="6582" end="6592" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="6632" end="6646" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="6662" end="6675" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Shatt al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290315" start="6715" end="6735" title="Mesopotamian Marshes" label="Mesopotamian Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636644" start="6845" end="6849" title="List of wadis of Kuwait" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904604" start="6881" end="6894" title="Wadi al-Batin" label="Wadi al-Batin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118315" start="7030" end="7045" title="Khawr Abd Allah" label="Khawr Abd Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="7062" end="7069" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="7104" end="7117" title="Shatt al-Arab" label="Shatt al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088785" start="7218" end="7236" title="Iraq-Kuwait border" label="Iraq-Kuwait border"/>
<link wikidata="Q842407" start="7307" end="7315" title="Umm Qasr" label="Umm Qasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q285416" start="7428" end="7441" title="Warbah Island" label="Warbah Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q190873" start="7467" end="7479" title="desalination" label="desalination"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="8280" end="8294" title="Kuwait City" label="city of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077024" start="8343" end="8351" title="Al Jahra" label="Al Jahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="8406" end="8422" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392962" start="8473" end="8481" title="Failaka Island" label="Faylakah"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="8615" end="8619" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="8677" end="8681" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="8690" end="8702" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="8753" end="8776" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="8839" end="8851" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116111" start="8879" end="8890" title="Mutla Ridge" label="Mutla Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q405701" start="8954" end="8971" title="Jahra Governorate" label="Jahra Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="9049" end="9055" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="9867" end="9882" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="9936" end="9948" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="9950" end="9964" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="9966" end="9995" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="9997" end="10012" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="10014" end="10032" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="10034" end="10060" title="Environmental Modification Convention" label="Environmental Modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="10062" end="10078" title="Hazardous Wastes" label="Hazardous Wastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="10080" end="10094" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16687" wikidata="Q2604863" url="?curid=16687" title="Demographics of Kuwait">
<text>This is a demography of the population of Kuwait ().

Expatriates account for around 60% of Kuwait&#x27;s total population, with Kuwaitis constituting 38%-42% of the total population. The government and some Kuwaiti citizens consider the proportion of expatriates (which has been relatively stable since the mid-1970s) to be a problem, and in 2016 the number of deportations increased.

==Population size and structure==


Source:
The biggest population difficulty in Kuwait involves the Bedoon, stateless people. According to Human Rights Watch in 1995, Kuwait has produced 300,000 stateless Bedoon. Kuwait has the largest number of stateless people in the entire region. The Bedoon issue in Kuwait is largely sectarian.

According to recent statistics provided by the Central Statistics Bureau, as of January 2024, Kuwait&#x27;s population reached 4.91 million, an increase of 119,700 from the previous year&#x27;s 4.79 million. The number of Kuwaiti citizens rose by 28,700 to reach a total of 1.545 million. Specifically, the number of male citizens increased to 758,700, and female citizens reached 787,000. Concurrently, the expatriate population also increased by 90,990, totaling 3.36 million. Amongst the expatriates, the male population reached 2.26 million and the female population 1.1 million.

=== Structure of the population ===

Structure of the population (Estimates) (1.01.2020):
Source:
===Governorates===

Kuwait consists of six 6 governorates: Hawalli, Asimah, Farwaniyah, Jahra, Ahmadi and Mubarak Al-Kabeer. Most people in Kuwait live in the governorates of Hawalli, Asimah, and Farwaniyah.

==Vital statistics==
;UN estimates


===Registered births and deaths===



=== Life expectancy ===

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

== Ethnic groups ==
===By Continent===

Source:
===By nationality===

The following is a firm containing estimations from countries&#x27; embassies:
Kuwaiti 41.4%, Arab expat 21.4%, Asian (mostly South Asian) 35.3%, African 1%, other 0.7% (includes European, North American, South American, and Australian) (2018 est.) 

==Languages==
*Arabic (official)
*English (lingua franca, spoken widely) 
*Minority languages include,
**Tagalog
**Gulf Pidgin Arabic (lingua franca)
**Hindi
**Persian
**Bengali
**Urdu
**French
**Malayalam
**Pashto
**Turkish
**Armenian
**Kurdish

==Religion==
*Muslim (official) 74.6%
*Christian 18.2% 
*Other and Unspecified 7.2% 

==See also==
* Religion in Kuwait
* Expatriates in Kuwait

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="42" end="48" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="54" end="64" title="Expatriate" label="Expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="362" end="374" title="deportations" label="deportations"/>
<link wikidata="Q857026" start="488" end="494" title="Bedoon" label="Bedoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="711" end="720" title="sectarian" label="sectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798622" start="1451" end="1462" title="governorate" label="governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q747432" start="1465" end="1472" title="Hawalli Governorate" label="Hawalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046645" start="1474" end="1480" title="Al Asimah Governorate (Kuwait)" label="Asimah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072757" start="1482" end="1492" title="Al Farwaniyah Governorate" label="Farwaniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q405701" start="1494" end="1499" title="Al Jahra Governorate" label="Jahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q552354" start="1501" end="1507" title="Al Ahmadi Governorate" label="Ahmadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913370" start="1512" end="1529" title="Mubarak Al-Kabeer Governorate" label="Mubarak Al-Kabeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604863" start="1915" end="1922" title="Kuwaitis" label="Kuwaiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1930" end="1940" title="Arabs" label="Arab expat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="1948" end="1953" title="Asians" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="1962" end="1972" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="1982" end="1989" title="African diaspora" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="2015" end="2023" title="Europeans" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2025" end="2039" title="North Americans" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2041" end="2055" title="South Americans" label="South American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="2061" end="2071" title="Australians" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2102" end="2108" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2121" end="2128" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="2192" end="2199" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647440" start="2202" end="2220" title="Gulf Pidgin Arabic" label="Gulf Pidgin Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="2239" end="2244" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2247" end="2254" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="2257" end="2264" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="2267" end="2271" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2274" end="2280" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="2283" end="2292" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="2295" end="2301" title="Pashto" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="2304" end="2311" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="2314" end="2322" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="2325" end="2332" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081559" start="2348" end="2354" title="Islam in Kuwait" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q837729" start="2373" end="2382" title="Christianity in Kuwait" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117783" start="2391" end="2412" title="Religion in Kuwait" label="Other and Unspecified"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117783" start="2435" end="2453" title="Religion in Kuwait" label="Religion in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067288" start="2456" end="2477" title="Expatriates in Kuwait" label="Expatriates in Kuwait"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16688" wikidata="Q12217491" url="?curid=16688" title="Government of Kuwait">
<text>Kuwait is an emirate. The Emir of Kuwait, a hereditary monarch from the Al Sabah ruling family appoints the prime minister (who is always a royal) and other members of government, as well as members of judicial, police and financial institutions. 

==Executive branch==
The Constitution of Kuwait was approved and promulgated on 17 November 1962. 

===Government===

The prime minister chooses the cabinet of ministers, which form the government. The prime minister is a member of the ruling family and is appointed by the Emir.

===Emir===
Current Emir: Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah &lt;br&gt;
Current Crown Prince: Sabah Al-Khalid Al-Sabah

==Judicial branch==

The judiciary in Kuwait is not independent of the government, the Emir appoints all the judges and many judges are foreign nationals from Egypt. In each administrative district of Kuwait, there is a Summary Court (also called Courts of First Instance which are composed of one or more divisions, like a Traffic Court or an Administrative Court); then there is Court of Appeals; Cassation Court, and lastly - a Constitutional Court which interprets the constitution and deals with disputes related to the constitutionality of laws. Kuwait has a civil law legal system.

==Legislative branch==
;Emir
Legislative power is exercised by the Emir. He issues laws and policies via decrees. 

;Former legislature
The National Assembly was formerly the legislature, established in 1963. Its predecessor, the 1938 National Assembly was formally dissolved in 1939 after &quot;one member, Sulaiman al-Adasani, in possession of a letter, signed by other Assembly members, addressed to Iraq&#x27;s King Ghazi, requesting Kuwait&#x27;s immediate incorporation into Iraq&quot;. This demand came after the merchant members of the Assembly attempted to extract oil money from Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, a suggestion refused by him and upon which he instigated a crackdown which arrested the Assembly members in 1939. The National Assembly had up to 50 MPs. 

==Gulf War==
During the 1990-1991 Gulf War, Saddam Hussein attempted to make Kuwait the 19th province of Iraq (known as Kuwait Governorate). During the Iraqi occupation, Ali Hassan al-Majid became the governor and took over what was left of the original government.

==VIP Flight==
The State of Kuwait operates several VIP jets used mainly by the Emir of Kuwait:

* 1 Airbus A319-100 ACJ
* 1 Airbus A320-200
* 2 Airbus A340-500
* 1 Boeing 737-900ER
* 1 Boeing 747-8 
* 4 Gulfstream Aerospace 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="0" end="6" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q189898" start="13" end="20" title="emirate" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q291639" start="72" end="94" title="House of Sabah" label="Al Sabah ruling family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035020" start="108" end="122" title="Prime Minister of Kuwait" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015525" start="157" end="178" title="Cabinet of Kuwait" label="members of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925347" start="202" end="210" title="Legal system of Kuwait" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164201" start="274" end="296" title="Constitution of Kuwait" label="Constitution of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q12243161" start="555" end="588" title="Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12219691" start="622" end="646" title="Sabah Al-Khalid Al-Sabah" label="Sabah Al-Khalid Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="807" end="812" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="1213" end="1222" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1413" end="1424" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q400907" start="1827" end="1850" title="Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2052" end="2066" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448838" start="2128" end="2146" title="Kuwait Governorate" label="Kuwait Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214955" start="2178" end="2197" title="Ali Hassan al-Majid" label="Ali Hassan al-Majid"/>
<link wikidata="Q246932" start="2355" end="2369" title="Emir of Kuwait" label="Emir of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317803" start="2376" end="2387" title="Airbus A319" label="Airbus A319"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="2400" end="2411" title="Airbus A320" label="Airbus A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="2420" end="2431" title="Airbus A340" label="Airbus A340"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="2440" end="2456" title="Boeing 737-900ER" label="Boeing 737-900ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q8791" start="2461" end="2473" title="Boeing 747-8" label="Boeing 747-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554299" start="2479" end="2499" title="Gulfstream Aerospace" label="Gulfstream Aerospace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16689" wikidata="Q62251" url="?curid=16689" title="Economy of Kuwait">
<text>Kuwait has a petroleum-based economy that is classified as emerging and high-income. By various per-capita measures of economic output, Kuwait is one of the wealthiest countries in the world.

==Energy==
===Petroleum and natural gas ===

In 1934, the Emir of Kuwait granted an oil concession to the Kuwait Oil Co. (KOC), jointly owned by the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (later British Petroleum Company) and Gulf Oil Corporation In 1976, the Kuwaiti Government nationalized KOC.

The Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC), an integrated international oil company, is the parent company of the government&#x27;s operations in the petroleum sector, and includes Kuwait Oil Company, which produced oil and gas; Kuwait National Petroleum Co., refining and domestic sales; Petrochemical Industries Co., producing ammonia and urea; Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration Co., with several concessions in developing countries; Kuwait Oil Tanker Co.; and Santa Fe International Corp. The latter, purchased outright in 1982, gives KPC a worldwide presence in the petroleum industry.

KPC also has purchased from Gulf Oil Co. refineries and associated service stations in the Benelux nations and Scandinavia, as well as storage facilities and a network of service stations in Italy. In 1987, KPC bought a 19% share in British Petroleum, which was later reduced to 10%. KPC markets its products in Europe under the brand Q8 and is interested in the markets of the United States and Japan.

Kuwait has about of recoverable oil reserves. Estimated capacity, before the war, was about . During the Iraqi occupation, Kuwait&#x27;s oil-producing capacity was reduced to practically nothing. However, tremendous recovery and improvements have been made since. Oil production was by the end of 1992, and pre-war capacity was restored in 1993. Kuwait&#x27;s production capacity is estimated to be . Kuwait plans to increase its capacity to by 2005..

As part of Kuwait Vision 2035, Kuwait aims to position itself as a global hub for the petrochemical industry. Al Zour Refinery is the largest refinery in the Middle East. Al Zour Refinery is a Kuwait-China cooperation project under the Belt and Road Initiative.

===Renewable energy===
As part of Kuwait Vision 2035, Kuwait inaugurated its largest renewable energy park, Shagaya Renewable Energy Park, which includes concentrated solar power, solar photovoltaic, and wind power plants. The park consists of four phases with a target capacity of 4,000 MW. It is set to be one of the largest renewable energy parks in the world.

==Steel manufacturing==
Steel manufacturing is Kuwait&#x27;s second biggest industry. United Steel Industrial Company (KWT Steel) is Kuwait&#x27;s main steel manufacturing company, the company caters to all of Kuwait&#x27;s domestic market demands (particularly construction). Kuwait is self-sufficient in steel.

==Agriculture==
In 2016, Kuwait&#x27;s food self-sufficiency ratio was 49.5% in vegetables, 38.7% in meat, 12.4% in diary, 24.9% in fruits, and 0.4% in cereals. 8.5% of Kuwait&#x27;s entire territory consists of agricultural land, while arable land covers 0.6% of Kuwait&#x27;s entire territory. Historically, Jahra was a predominantly agricultural area. There are currently various farms in Jahra.

In 2017, agriculture (including fisheries) accounted for almost 0.4 percent of the gross domestic product. Around 4 percent of the economically active population works in agriculture, almost all foreigners. The majority of farm owners are investors. The total agricultural land covered 1,521 km2 in 2014.

The agriculture industry is hampered by the limited water and arable land. The government has experimented in growing food through hydroponics and carefully managed farms. However, most of the soil which was suitable for farming in south central Kuwait was destroyed when Iraqi troops set fire to oil wells in the area and created vast &quot;oil lakes&quot;. Fish and shrimp are plentiful in territorial waters, and largescale commercial fishing has been undertaken locally and in the Indian Ocean.

==Finance==
Kuwait has a leading position in the financial industry in the GCC. The Emir has promoted the idea that Kuwait should focus its energies, in terms of economic development, on the financial industry.

The historical preeminence of Kuwait (among the Gulf monarchies) in finance dates back to the founding of the National Bank of Kuwait in 1952. The bank was the first local publicly traded corporation in the Gulf. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, an alternative stock market, trading in shares of Gulf companies, emerged in Kuwait, the Souk Al-Manakh. At its peak, its market capitalization was the third highest in the world, behind only the U.S. and Japan, and ahead of the UK and France.

Kuwait has a large wealth-management industry. Kuwaiti investment companies administer more assets than those of any other GCC country, save the much larger Saudi Arabia. The Kuwait Financial Centre, in a rough calculation, estimated that Kuwaiti firms accounted for over one-third of the total assets under management in the GCC.

The relative strength of Kuwait in the financial industry extends to its stock market. For many years, the total valuation of all companies listed on the Kuwaiti exchange far exceeded the value of those on any other GCC bourse, except Saudi Arabia. In 2011, financial and banking companies made up more than half of the market capitalization of the Kuwaiti bourse; among all the Gulf states, the market capitalization of Kuwaiti financial-sector firms was, in total, behind only that of Saudi Arabia. In recent years, Kuwaiti investment companies have invested large percentages of their assets abroad, and their foreign assets have become substantially larger than their domestic assets.

Kuwait is a major source of foreign economic assistance to other states through the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, an autonomous state institution created in 1961 on the pattern of Western and international development agencies. Over the years aid was annually provided to Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, as well as the Palestine Liberation Organization. In 1974, the fund&#x27;s lending mandate was expanded to include all developing countries in the world.

===Reserve funds===

The Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) is Kuwait&#x27;s sovereign wealth fund specializing in foreign investment. The KIA is the world&#x27;s oldest sovereign wealth fund. Since 1953, the Kuwaiti government has directed investments into Europe, United States and Asia Pacific. In 2021, the holdings were valued at around $700 billion in assets. It was the 3rd largest sovereign wealth fund in the world.

The KIA manages two funds: the General Reserve Fund (GRF) and Future Generations Fund (FGF). The GRF is the main treasurer for the government. It receives all state revenues and all national expenditures are paid out of this fund. The KIA does not disclose its financial assets in public, but it is estimated that the KIA has $410 billion in assets as of February 2014.

The KIA was the main source of capital for the Kuwaiti government during the Gulf War. The Kuwaiti government relied on the KIA to pay for coalition expenses and postwar reconstruction. The KIA was worth $100 billion prior to 1990, KIA funds were depleted to $40–$50 billion after the Gulf War.

In July 2023, Kuwait plans to create a new sovereign fund, Ciyada, in partnership with the Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA). While the value of the fund has not been specified, the KIA, which currently manages over $800 billion in assets, will play a significant role in studying and implementing the proposed fund. The aim is to develop the local economy, attract foreign investment, and finance major projects to promote economic diversification in Kuwait.

;Future Generations Fund
The Future Generations Fund (FGF) was created in 1976 by transferring 50% from the general reserve fund at that time. The FGF is a saving funds for future generations. 25% of all state revenues are annually transferred to the fund.

All of the FGF is invested abroad, with an estimated 75% invested in the US and Europe and the rest in emerging markets, mainly China and India.

==Health==

Kuwait has a state-funded healthcare system, which provides treatment without charge to Kuwaiti nationals. There are outpatient clinics in every residential area in Kuwait. A public insurance scheme exists to provide reduced cost healthcare to expatriates. Private healthcare providers also run medical facilities in the country, available to members of their insurance schemes. As part of Kuwait Vision 2035, many new hospitals have opened. In the years leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, Kuwait invested in its health care system at a rate that was proportionally higher than most other GCC countries. As a result, the public hospital sector significantly increased its capacity. Kuwait currently has 20 public hospitals. The new Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Hospital is considered the largest hospital in the Middle East. Kuwait also has 16 private hospitals.

==Entrepreneurship==
In the past five years, there has been a significant rise in entrepreneurship and small business creation in Kuwait. The informal sector is also on the rise, mainly due to the popularity of Instagram businesses. In 2020, Kuwait ranked fourth in the MENA region in startup funding after the UAE, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.

Many Kuwaiti entrepreneurs use the Instagram-based business model.

==Tourism==

In 2020, Kuwait&#x27;s domestic travel and tourism spending reached $6.1 billion (up from $1.6 billion in 2019) with family tourism a rapidly growing segment. The WTTC named Kuwait as one of the world&#x27;s fastest-growing countries in travel and tourism GDP in 2019, with 11.6% year-on-year growth. In 2016, the tourism industry generated nearly $500 million in revenue. In 2015, tourism accounted for 1.5 percent of the GDP.

In 2023, there was a rise in the spending of Kuwaiti citizens on tourism and travel, recorded to be 4.39 billion dinars, marking an increase of 9.2% from the 4 billion dinars recorded in 2022. The surge in tourism expenditures is largely attributable to the introduction of new travel destinations, expanded offerings from airlines catering to family travel, and an increase in interest in events like the Riyadh Season and other festivities. The first quarter of 2023 saw the highest spending (1.36 billion dinars), followed by the second (1.01 billion dinars), third (1.15 billion dinars), and the fourth (870 million dinars), making it the year with the highest spending on travel by Kuwaiti citizens since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, spending by foreign tourists in Kuwait increased by approximately 60%, reaching 533.3 million dinars by the end of 2023, up from 332.6 million dinars in 2022.

The Amiri Diwan recently inaugurated the new Kuwait National Cultural District (KNCD), which comprises Sheikh Abdullah Al Salem Cultural Centre, Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre, Al Shaheed Park, and Al Salam Palace. With a capital cost of more than US$1 billion, the project is one of the largest cultural investments in the world. In November 2016, the Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre opened. It is the largest cultural centre and opera house in the Middle East. The Kuwait National Cultural District is a member of the Global Cultural Districts Network. The annual &quot;Hala Febrayer&quot; festival attracts tourists from neighboring GCC countries, and includes a variety of events including music concerts, parades, and carnivals. The festival is a month-long commemoration of the liberation of Kuwait, and runs from 1 to 28 February. Liberation Day itself is celebrated on 26 February.

==Science and technology==
According to the United States Patent and Trademark Office, Kuwait registered 448 patents as of 31 December 2015, In the early to mid 2010s, Kuwait registered the largest number of scientific publications and patents per capita regionally. The Kuwaiti government has implemented various programs to foster innovation resulting in patent rights. The WIPO Global Innovation Index found that Kuwait ranks 71st over 139 (for its innovation efficiency ratio (which shows how much innovation output a country is getting for its inputs).

Kuwait was the first country in the region to implement 5G technology. Kuwait is among the world&#x27;s leading countries in 5G penetration. The Chinese company Huawei has a $1.7 billion investment license in Kuwait to develop the country&#x27;s ICT sector in line with the Kuwait Vision 2035 strategy.

===Space===

Kuwait has an emerging space industry driven by the private sector.

;Kuwait&#x27;s first satellite 
Kuwait&#x27;s Orbital Space in collaboration with the Space Challenges Program and EnduroSat introduced an international initiative called &quot;Code in Space&quot;. The initiative allows students from around the world to send and execute their own code in space. The code is transmitted from a satellite ground station to a cubesat (nanosatellite) orbiting Earth above sea level. The code is then executed by the satellite&#x27;s onboard computer and tested under real space environment conditions. The nanosatellite is called &quot;QMR-KWT&quot; (Arabic: قمر الكويت) which means &quot;Moon of Kuwait&quot;, translated from Arabic.

QMR-KWT launched to space on 30 June 2021 on SpaceX Falcon 9 Block 5 rocket and was part of the payload of a satellite carrier called ION SCV Dauntless David by D-Orbit. It was deployed into its final orbit (Sun-synchronous orbit) on 16 July 2021. QMR-KWT is Kuwait&#x27;s first satellite.

;Um Alaish 4
Seven years after the launch of the world&#x27;s first communications satellite, Telstar 1, Kuwait in October 1969 inaugurated the first satellite ground station in the Middle East, &quot;Um Alaish&quot;. The Um Alaish satellite station complex housed several satellite ground stations including Um Alaish 1 (1969), Um Alaish 2 (1977), and Um Alaish 3 (1981). It provided satellite communication services in Kuwait until 1990 when it was destroyed by the Iraqi armed forces during the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. In 2019, Kuwait&#x27;s Orbital Space established an amateur satellite ground station to provide free access to signals from satellites in orbit passing over Kuwait. The station was named Um Alaish 4 to continue the legacy of &quot;Um Alaish&quot; satellite station. Um Alaish 4 is member of FUNcube distributed ground station network and the Satellite Networked Open Ground Station project (SatNOGS).

;Kuwait Space Rocket

The Kuwait Space Rocket (KSR) is a Kuwaiti project to build and launch the first suborbital liquid bi-propellant rocket in Arabia. The project is divided into two phases with two separate vehicles: an initial testing phase with KSR-1 as a test vehicle capable of reaching an altitude of and a more expansive suborbital test phase with the KSR-2 planned to fly to an altitude of .

;TSCK experiment in space
Kuwait&#x27;s Orbital Space in collaboration with the Kuwait Scientific Center (TSCK) introduced for the first time in Kuwait the opportunity for students to send a science experiment to space. The objectives of this initiative was to allow students to learn about (a) how science space missions are done; (b) microgravity (weightlessness) environment; (c) how to do science like a real scientist. This opportunity was made possible through Orbital Space agreement with DreamUp PBC and Nanoracks LLC, which are collaborating with NASA under a Space Act Agreement. The students&#x27; experiment was named &quot;Kuwait’s Experiment: E.coli Consuming Carbon Dioxide to Combat Climate Change&quot;. The experiment was launched on SpaceX CRS-21 (SpX-21) spaceflight to the International Space Station (ISS) on 6 December 2020. Astronauts Shannon Walker (member of the ISS Expedition 64) conducted the experiment on behalf of the students.

;National satellite project
In July 2021, Kuwait University announced that it is launching a national satellite project as part of state-led efforts to pioneer the country&#x27;s sustainable space sector.

==Transport==

Kuwait has a modern network of highways. Roadways extended , of which is paved. There are more than 2 million passenger cars, and 500,000 commercial taxis, buses, and trucks in use. On major highways the maximum speed is . Since there is no railway system in the country, most people travel by automobiles.

The country&#x27;s public transportation network consists almost entirely of bus routes. The state owned Kuwait Public Transportation Company was established in 1962. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait as well as longer distance services to other Gulf states. The main private bus company is CityBus, which operates about 20 routes across the country. Another private bus company, Kuwait Gulf Link Public Transport Services, was started in 2006. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait and longer distance services to neighbouring Arab countries.

There are two airports in Kuwait. Kuwait International Airport serves as the principal hub for international air travel. State-owned Kuwait Airways is the largest airline in the country. A portion of the airport complex is designated as Al Mubarak Air Base, which contains the headquarters of the Kuwait Air Force, as well as the Kuwait Air Force Museum. In 2004, the first private airline of Kuwait, Jazeera Airways, was launched. In 2005, the second private airline, Wataniya Airways was founded.

Kuwait has one of the largest shipping industries in the region. The Kuwait Ports Public Authority manages and operates ports across Kuwait. The country&#x27;s principal commercial seaports are Shuwaikh and Shuaiba which handled combined cargo of 753,334 TEU in 2006. Mina Al-Ahmadi, the largest port in the country, handles most of Kuwait&#x27;s oil exports. Mubarak Al Kabeer Port in Bubiyan Island is currently under construction. The port is expected to handle 2 million TEU when operations start.

== Macro-economic ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1995–2024.
In 2019, Kuwait&#x27;s main export products were mineral fuels including oil (89.1% of total exports), aircraft and spacecraft (4.3%), organic chemicals (3.2%), plastics (1.2%), iron and steel (0.2%), gems and precious metals (0.1%), machinery including computers (0.1%), aluminum (0.1%), copper (0.1%), and salt, sulphur, stone and cement (0.1%). Kuwait was the world&#x27;s biggest exporter of sulfonated, nitrated and nitrosated hydrocarbons in 2019. Kuwait was ranked 63rd out of 157 countries in the 2019 Economic Complexity Index (ECI). Iraq was Kuwait&#x27;s leading export market in 2019 and food/agricultural products accounted for 94.2% of total export commodities.

According to data from the Civil Service Commission (CSC), the level of joblessness amongst the Kuwaiti population continues to rise annually as of 2024. This is predominately due to a surplus of graduates in fields that lack demand within the workforce, as well as a discrepancy between labor market requirements and the skills obtained through certain specializations. Additional issues contributing to the unemployment rate include a lack of emphasis on the private sector and insufficient coordination among related authorities. Until substantial changes are made regarding the quality of educational outputs, the number of graduates in less required fields is likely to keep rising, further exacerbating unemployment issues. Statistics from the Central Statistics Bureau as of November 19, 2023 indicate that there are 8,727 unemployed Kuwaitis, including 4,177 males (approximately 48 percent) and 4,550 females (approximately 52 percent).

According to recent statistics released by the Central Statistics Bureau, the population of Kuwait rose to 4.91 million on January 1, 2024 — an increase of 119,700 from 2024&#x27;s 4.79 million population. The number of Kuwaiti citizens increased by 28,700, totaling 1.545 million, an increase from the 1.517 million figure from the start of 2023. Notably, the number of male citizens reached 758,700 and female citizens rose to 787,000 in January 2024. Additionally, the expatriate population witnessed a rise by 90,990, reaching 3.36 million, among which the male expatriates accounted for 2.26 million and female expatriates stood at 1.1 million in the same period.

==See also==
* Energy in Kuwait
* Telecommunications in Kuwait
* List of companies of Kuwait

==References==
==External links==
* Kuwait Investment Authority
* Kuwait Investment Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="0" end="6" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="59" end="67" title="Developing country" label="emerging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="72" end="83" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="136" end="142" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113538" start="299" end="319" title="Kuwait Oil Co." label="Kuwait Oil Co. (KOC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q267380" start="342" end="367" title="Anglo-Iranian Oil Company" label="Anglo-Persian Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="375" end="400" title="BP" label="British Petroleum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296860" start="406" end="426" title="Gulf Oil Corporation" label="Gulf Oil Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634762" start="482" end="510" title="Kuwait Petroleum Corporation" label="Kuwait Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634762" start="1403" end="1405" title="Kuwait Petroleum Corporation" label="Q8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705016" start="2035" end="2051" title="Al Zour Refinery" label="Al Zour Refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="2161" end="2185" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="3350" end="3372" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="3704" end="3715" title="hydroponics" label="hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202642" start="4000" end="4018" title="commercial fishing" label="commercial fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="4058" end="4070" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045072" start="4395" end="4418" title="National Bank of Kuwait" label="National Bank of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564130" start="4622" end="4636" title="Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash" label="Souk Al-Manakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4729" end="4733" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4738" end="4743" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4762" end="4764" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4769" end="4775" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166585" start="5884" end="5925" title="Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development" label="Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794766" start="6291" end="6318" title="Kuwait Investment Authority" label="Kuwait Investment Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="6342" end="6363" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="6549" end="6561" title="Asia Pacific" label="Asia Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6642" end="6653" title="Sovereign wealth fund#Largest sovereign wealth funds" label="3rd largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="7139" end="7147" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8157" end="8163" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948923" start="8261" end="8278" title="Healthcare in Kuwait" label="healthcare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q54887723" start="8625" end="8643" title="Kuwait Vision 2035" label="Kuwait Vision 2035"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="8708" end="8716" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="9176" end="9192" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="9236" end="9251" title="informal sector" label="informal sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040504" start="9679" end="9683" title="World Travel and Tourism Council" label="WTTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="9772" end="9775" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="9939" end="9942" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="10351" end="10357" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10675" end="10692" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746756" start="10868" end="10879" title="Amiri Diwan of Kuwait" label="Amiri Diwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087351" start="10909" end="10942" title="Kuwait National Cultural District" label="Kuwait National Cultural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049808" start="10967" end="11007" title="Sheikh Abdullah Al Salem Cultural Centre" label="Sheikh Abdullah Al Salem Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28715708" start="11009" end="11046" title="Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre" label="Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049812" start="11048" end="11063" title="Al Shaheed Park" label="Al Shaheed Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074552" start="11069" end="11084" title="Al Salam Palace (Kuwait)" label="Al Salam Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28715708" start="11224" end="11261" title="Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre" label="Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19366414" start="11397" end="11430" title="Global Cultural Districts Network" label="Global Cultural Districts Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541036" start="11661" end="11681" title="liberation of Kuwait" label="liberation of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q964507" start="11715" end="11729" title="Liberation Day" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="11812" end="11853" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="11877" end="11884" title="patents" label="patents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="12149" end="12172" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="12383" end="12385" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="12488" end="12494" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="12696" end="12710" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q102126460" start="12828" end="12837" title="EnduroSat" label="EnduroSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="13070" end="13077" title="CubeSat" label="cubesat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580082" start="13079" end="13092" title="Small satellite" label="nanosatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="13424" end="13430" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450215" start="13431" end="13447" title="Falcon 9 Block 5" label="Falcon 9 Block 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="13587" end="13608" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q751132" start="13764" end="13773" title="Telstar 1" label="Telstar 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="14505" end="14519" title="ground station" label="ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084815" start="14585" end="14592" title="SatNOGS" label="SatNOGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q85136343" start="14622" end="14641" title="Kuwait Space Rocket" label="Kuwait Space Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="14699" end="14709" title="suborbital spaceflight" label="suborbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="14710" end="14737" title="Liquid-propellant rocket" label="liquid bi-propellant rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="14741" end="14747" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705750" start="14857" end="14869" title="test article (aerospace)" label="test vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448876" start="15079" end="15103" title="Kuwait Scientific Center" label="Kuwait Scientific Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="15335" end="15347" title="Micro-g environment" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23759445" start="15495" end="15502" title="DreamUp" label="DreamUp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963965" start="15511" end="15520" title="NanoRacks" label="Nanoracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="15555" end="15559" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802439" start="15751" end="15764" title="SpaceX CRS-21" label="SpaceX CRS-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="15793" end="15820" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q240708" start="15858" end="15872" title="Shannon Walker" label="Shannon Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q91661003" start="15892" end="15905" title="Expedition 64" label="Expedition 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="16212" end="16219" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q527157" start="17074" end="17102" title="Kuwait International Airport" label="Kuwait International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q860389" start="17173" end="17187" title="Kuwait Airways" label="Kuwait Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737238" start="17337" end="17353" title="Kuwait Air Force" label="Kuwait Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064048" start="17441" end="17456" title="Jazeera Airways" label="Jazeera Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060465" start="17509" end="17525" title="Wataniya Airways" label="Wataniya Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161471" start="17734" end="17742" title="Shuwaikh" label="Shuwaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930829" start="17900" end="17922" title="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port" label="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="17926" end="17940" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="18015" end="18018" title="Twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="TEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333445" start="18643" end="18668" title="Economic Complexity Index" label="Economic Complexity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="18676" end="18680" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377113" start="20442" end="20458" title="Energy in Kuwait" label="Energy in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695966" start="20461" end="20489" title="Telecommunications in Kuwait" label="Telecommunications in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612433" start="20492" end="20519" title="List of companies of Kuwait" label="List of companies of Kuwait"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16690" wikidata="Q7695966" url="?curid=16690" title="Telecommunications in Kuwait">
<text>Telecommunications in Kuwait provides information about the telephone, Internet, radio, and television infrastructure in Kuwait.

==Infrastructure==

===Telephones===
Telephones - main lines in use:
514,700 (2011), 510,300 (2005)

Telephones - mobile cellular:
4.9 million (2011), 2.7 million (2007)

Telephone system:
*&quot;general assessment:&quot; the quality of service is excellent
*&quot;domestic:&quot; new telephone exchanges provide a large capacity for new subscribers; trunk traffic is carried by microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, open-wire and fiber-optic cable; a cellular telephone system operates throughout Kuwait, and the country is well supplied with pay telephones. 
*&quot;international:&quot; linked to international submarine cable Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe (FLAG); linked to Bahrain, Qatar, UAE via the Fiber-Optic Gulf (FOG) cable; coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia; satellite earth stations - 6 (3 Intelsat - 1 Atlantic Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean, 1 Inmarsat - Atlantic Ocean, and 2 Arabsat) 
*&quot;country code:&quot; 965

===Broadcast media===
Radio broadcast stations:
AM 6, FM 11, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios:
1.175 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations:
13 (plus several satellite channels) (1997)

Televisions:
875,000 (1997)

===Internet===
Internet Service Providers (ISPs):
5 (2011)
Which are: Fasttelco, Gulfnet, KEMS, Mada, and Qualitynet

Internet users:
1,925,956 or 74.2% of the population (2011), 700,000 (2005)

Top-level domain: .kw

==See also==
* Telephone numbers in Kuwait
* Television in Kuwait
* Wataniya Telecom

==References==
==External links==
* Nokia to upgrade Kuwaiti network, &quot;BBC News&quot;, 29 May 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7695966" start="0" end="28" title="Telecommunications in Kuwait" label="Telecommunications in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="121" end="127" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q641659" start="759" end="792" title="Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe" label="Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="912" end="924" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="958" end="966" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="1008" end="1016" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q624426" start="1041" end="1048" title="Arabsat" label="Arabsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1494" end="1510" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42672" start="1512" end="1515" title=".kw" label=".kw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696596" start="1532" end="1559" title="Telephone numbers in Kuwait" label="Telephone numbers in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697032" start="1562" end="1582" title="Television in Kuwait" label="Television in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067960" start="1585" end="1601" title="Wataniya Telecom" label="Wataniya Telecom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16691" wikidata="Q988960" url="?curid=16691" title="Transport in Kuwait">
<text>As a small country, local transport in [[Kuwait]] is largely road-based with one car for every 2.25 people. Bus services make up Kuwait&#x27;s entire public transport network. There are seven airports in Kuwait, the largest of which and solely allocated for civil use is Kuwait International Airport. The Gulf Railway is currently under planning in Kuwait. Kuwait has several maritime ports along the coast of the Persian Gulf, the largest port is Mubarak Al Kabeer Port which is currently under construction.

During the First Gulf War, a lot of Kuwait&#x27;s infrastructure was damaged or destroyed.

== Road transport==

As a nation with one car per 2.25 people, Kuwait relies heavily on its road network for transportation. The total length of paved and unpaved roads was 6,524 km in 2009. Traffic congestion is common throughout the day, particularly in Kuwait City.

The country&#x27;s public transport network consists entirely of bus routes. The state-owned Kuwait Public Transportation Company was established in 1962. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait. The main private bus company is CityBus, which operates about 28 routes across the country. Another private bus company, Kuwait Gulf Link Public Transport Services, was started in 2006. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait and longer distance services to neighbouring Arab countries.

== Ports and harbors ==

Kuwait lies on the Persian Gulf and ports include: Ash Shu&#x27;aybah, Ash Shuwaykh, Kuwait, Mina&#x27; &#x27;Abd Allah, Mina&#x27; al Ahmadi, Mina&#x27; Su&#x27;ud, and Mubarak Al Kabeer Port.

===Mubarak Al Kabeer Port===

Under China&#x27;s Belt and Road Initiative, the Mubarak Al Kabeer Port is part of the first phase of the Silk City project. As of 2021, the Mubarak Al Kabeer Port is currently under construction. In September 2020, it was reported that the port is 53% complete. In March 2021, it was announced that Kuwait and Pakistan will develop linkages between Gwadar Port and Mubarak Al Kabeer Port. In April 2021, the port&#x27;s first phase was completed (4 berths). As part of Mubarak Al Kabeer Port&#x27;s development, Bubiyan Island will contain power plants and substations. A 5,000-megawatt power plant has already been built in Subiya, the Subiya power plant is the largest power plant in Kuwait. Mubarak Al Kabeer Port is among Kuwait&#x27;s largest infrastructure projects in 2021. There is a current road project connecting Mubarak Al Kabeer Port&#x27;s first phase to the existing road network in Bubiyan Island. Mubarak Al Kabeer Port&#x27;s fire stations are currently under development. The port is set to be environmentally sustainable.

=== Merchant marine===
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
38 ships (1000 GT or over) 2,294,233 GT/3,730,776 DWT 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;ships by type:&quot;
bulk carrier 2, cargo 1, container 6, liquefied gas 5, livestock carrier 4, petroleum tanker 20 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;foreign-owned:&quot; 1 (Iran 1) 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;registered in other countries:&quot;29 (Bahrain 3, Comoros 1, Liberia 1, Libya 1, Panama 2, Qatar 7, Saudi Arabia 6, UAE 8) (2005)

== Airports ==

===Overview===
There are seven airports, the largest of which and solely allocated for civil use is Kuwait International Airport. Kuwait International Airport recently inaugurated two new terminals to cater to Kuwait-based airlines. Moreover, the largest Kuwait International Airport terminal (Terminal 2) is currently under construction and will expand the airport&#x27;s overall capacity by 25–50 million passengers per year. The new terminal is environmentally sustainable. It is one of the world&#x27;s largest environment friendly airport projects.

=== Airports - with paved runways ===
*Total: 4
*over 3,047 m: 1
*2,438 to 3,047 m: 2 
*1,524 to 2,437 m: 1

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
*Total: 3
*1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
*under 914 m: 2 (2005)

=== Heliports ===
*12 (2023)

=== Kuwait-based Airlines ===

This is a list of airlines currently operating in Kuwait.

== Railways ==
===Gulf Railway===
Kuwait City will form one terminus of the Gulf Railway, a railway network which will run from Kuwait to Oman, via cities across the Persian Gulf. As of 2021, the Gulf Railway project is currently under construction in Kuwait.

Mubarak Al Kabeer Port in Bubiyan Island is part of the Gulf Railway.

===Metro===

The Kuwait Metropolitan Rapid Transit System Project was a planned four-line metro network covering 160 km with 69 stations. The project was meant to solve the increasing congestion to the country&#x27;s roads. The project was eventually cancelled in 2023, citing financial burden.

== See also ==

* Kuwait
* Jazeera Airways
* Wataniya Airways

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q988960" start="20" end="49" title="Transport in Kuwait" label="local transport in [[Kuwait]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q527157" start="271" end="299" title="Kuwait International Airport" label="Kuwait International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120749" start="305" end="317" title="Gulf Railway" label="Gulf Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="414" end="426" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930829" start="448" end="470" title="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port" label="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="794" end="812" title="Traffic congestion" label="Traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1399" end="1411" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930829" start="1550" end="1572" title="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port" label="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="1624" end="1648" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930829" start="1654" end="1676" title="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port" label="Mubarak Al Kabeer Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883371" start="1711" end="1720" title="Madinat al-Hareer" label="Silk City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122132" start="1955" end="1966" title="Gwadar Port" label="Gwadar Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="2118" end="2132" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12189346" start="2231" end="2237" title="Subiya, Kuwait" label="Subiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195942" start="2550" end="2562" title="fire station" label="fire station"/>
<link wikidata="Q527157" start="3203" end="3231" title="Kuwait International Airport" label="Kuwait International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q527157" start="3233" end="3261" title="Kuwait International Airport" label="Kuwait International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3283" end="3300" title="Kuwait International Airport#Terminals" label="two new terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205350" start="3313" end="3334" title="List of airlines of Kuwait" label="Kuwait-based airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="4016" end="4027" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120749" start="4058" end="4070" title="Gulf Railway" label="Gulf Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="4120" end="4124" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="4148" end="4160" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="4628" end="4634" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064048" start="4637" end="4652" title="Jazeera Airways" label="Jazeera Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060465" start="4655" end="4671" title="Wataniya Airways" label="Wataniya Airways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16692" wikidata="Q1058977" url="?curid=16692" title="Kuwait Armed Forces">
<text>The Kuwait Armed Forces () are the military forces of the State of Kuwait. They consist of the Kuwait Air Force, the Kuwait Army, the Kuwait Navy &amp; the Kuwait National Guard. The governing bodies are the Kuwait Ministry of Defense, the Kuwait Ministry of Interior, and the Kuwait Fire Service Directorate. The Emir of Kuwait is the commander-in-chief of all defense forces while the Crown Prince is the deputy commander.

The early military structured organization which first dealt with security and the military following the engagements of Kuwait Army&#x27;s infantry and cavalry protecting the three mounted defensive walls (third defensive wall mounted in 1920) of Kuwait prior and following to The Great War, was the Directorate of Public Security Force, formed during the Interwar period and mainly after World War II. The Directorate of Public Security Force already included the partnership integration of the Kuwait Army and Directorate of Police as independent forces following the formation of the first cabinet on June 17, 1962, after the independence. In 1953, the Kuwait Army split from the Directorate of Public Security Force; the latter merged with the Directorate of Police in 1959, giving formation to the newly established Kuwait Ministry of Interior. The Ministry of Interior includes the Kuwait Coast Guard and has several military commanders, designated by government protocol as assistant ministers undersecretaries, each reporting to the Minister of Interior who is designated by protocol as Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait.

Upon splitting from the Directorate of Public Security Force in 1953, the Kuwait Army acted as the de facto command leadership of the available armed forces since establishment. The Kuwait Army was created in 1949, thirteen years before the ministry and partly mainly at the time composed almost entirely of land force components with the Kuwait Air Force being created in 1953. With the creation of the Kuwait Armed Forces in 1963, the Kuwait Ministry of Defense eventually became and is the governing body of the Kuwait Armed Forces, which includes the Kuwait Land Force, the Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade, the Kuwait Military Police Authority, the Kuwait Emiri Guard Authority, the Kuwait Air Force, the Kuwait Naval Force, the Kuwait Military Fire Service Directorate and others. Each armed force at disposition of the respective combat commander, reports to the Chief of General Staff of the Kuwait Armed Forces who later reports to the Minister of Defense, designated also by protocol as Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait.

The Kuwait National Guard, however, is an independent combat institution from the Ministry of Defense and Interior and acts independently under the guidance, discretion and disposition of the respective leadership, supporting the Military of the State of Kuwait as needed and required. The Kuwait Fire Service Directorate, is also an independent public fire fighting body with military ranks and ribbons identifications.

== Organization ==
The three main military arms of Kuwait are the Kuwait Land Force, the Kuwait Air Force, and the Kuwait Naval Force, which includes the Kuwait Commando Marine Units. In addition, there are other independent and ancillary military formations. The independent formations include the Kuwait Emiri Guard, which is an independent combat force dating back to the eighteenth century (as the Rulers own Guards); and the 25th Commando Brigade, an independent commando combat brigade. Ancillary formations include the Kuwait Military Police and the Kuwait Military Fire Service Directorate.

The Kuwait National Guard, considered a combat formation, is independent of the Kuwait Armed Forces (and the Kuwait Ministry of Interior, which maintains several formations of its own, including the Kuwait Land Border Force and the Kuwait Coast Guard) and is the main internal and border protection security force.

According to the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies, in 2007, the Kuwait Land Force had around 11,000 personnel, the Kuwait Air Force 2,500, and the Kuwait Navy 10 patrol and coastal craft, and there were 23,000 reservists for all services not including uniformed men and women of the Ministry of Interior and military of the Fire Service Directorate. There were 6,600 paramilitary Kuwait National Guard forces. It was considered that, although the Military of the State of Kuwait remained small per speculated policies and analysis, training and military readiness were taken seriously and were effective at the brigade and squadron level. The combat operational doctrine is different amongst the various combat forces forming and is highly dependent on operational capabilities and general manning formations within sizes and types of equipment packing.

== History ==
In 1950 Emir Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah ordered the capabilities of the Armed Forces to be developed to deal with external threats. Accordingly, Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah was appointed Commander General of the Kuwait Public Security Force, the newly designated Kuwait Army and the initial forming of the Armed services.

In 1951 the Bren Gun entered into service with the Kuwait Public Security Department, followed in 1952 by the Daimler Armoured Car, both primarily with the Army (future land force).

In 1953 the border and security force was named the Kuwait Army and split from the Directorate of Public Security Force, and the latter merged with the Directorate of Police to form the preliminaries of the Ministry of Interior. Members of the previous forces became members either of the army or merged with police forces and the Directorate of Public Security Force within the Interior Ministry. The Kuwait Army was headed by Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah who had recently returned from military training in the United Kingdom and reported to Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah.

In 1953 Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah established the first Kuwait Flying Club. The flying club was part of the Civil Aviation Directorate and graduated the first batch of Kuwaiti pilots in 1954; these later attended advanced training in the United Kingdom.

In 1954, Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah was appointed Deputy head commander of the Kuwait Army, reporting to Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah. During that same year, Saleh Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah returned from the United Kingdom and was assigned as commanding officer at headquarters. Also in 1954 eight Auster aircraft entered into service with the Kuwait Flying Club for purposes of preliminary training.

In 1956, the Kuwait Army officially moved to headquarters and was equipped with artillery for the first time. Also during the same year, a new training center was established for the Kuwait Army.

=== Demolition of Kuwait City 3rd Defensive Wall, and formation of the Kuwait Armed Forces ===

The Kuwait Army split from the Directorate of Public Security Force in 1953; subsequently, the latter merged with Directorate of Police to form Directorate of Public Security and Police in 1959; following the demolition of the third defensive wall of Kuwait in 1957 through a ministerial decree for the expansion of Kuwait City; which later formed the Kuwait Ministry of Interior including the Kuwait Police. The Army was the first branch of what became the Armed Forces formed mainly of land force components. In the same year, the Army signed on the procurement of the Centurion tank, and two de Havilland DH.104 Dove monoplanes entered into service in the newly formed Air Force.

In 1958 Kuwaiti officers were sent to the Military Academies in Egypt and Iraq to train, and the Kuwait Army underwent its first alert following the coup of Abdul Karim Qasim. In 1959 the Kuwait Army set up its first mechanized combat brigade, the Kuwait 6th Mechanized Brigade, known later as the Kuwait 6th Liberation Mechanized Brigade, following the liberation of Kuwait during the Gulf War.

=== Operation Vantage 1961 ===

After 62 years as a British protectorate, Kuwait declared independence in 1961. Iraq immediately claimed that Kuwait was actually an Iraqi province, and threatened to invade to implement the claim. Britain flew troops into the newly independent country to forestall Iraq, an operation called Operation Vantage.

In 1961, Field Marshal Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah, the Commander General of the Army was followed by the leadership of Brigadier General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah and his deputy Colonel Saleh Mohammed Al-Sabah who stepped in to take part in Operation Vantage along with the already active Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade as the Army was put on their second alert phase.
Also during the same year, the Kuwait Flying Club was separated from the Civilian Aviation Directorate and the Kuwait Air Force was officially enacted. Also in 1961, the Universal Carrier was retired from the Kuwait Army.
Over the following years and through combat experiences; Kuwait built a small effective military force including a land force, navy, air force, national guard, existing police force and fire service directorate.

In 1962 the Kuwait Army activated both the Kuwait 35th Shaheed Armored Brigade and the Kuwait 15th Mubarak Armored Brigade which were considered the second and third functioning armored brigades in service.

During that same year, the Kuwait Army held the first military parade in recognition of the independence of Kuwait, and the BAC Jet Provost entered into service with the Kuwaiti Air Force. Also in 1962, the Kuwait Police became an integral component of the Kuwait Ministry of Interior.

=== Establishment of the General Chief of Staff Headquarters (1963) ===

In 1963, an organizational Amiri Decree was issued, enacting officially Chief of General Staff Headquarters of the Kuwait Armed Forces.

Similarly, an Amiri Decree was issued to appoint Major General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah to the position of Chief of General Staff of the newly formed Kuwait Armed Forces. During the same year, the subsonic British Hawker Hunter jet aircraft and the de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou transport aircraft entered into service with the Kuwait Air Force.

In 1965 Brigadier General Saleh Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah was appointed as the first Deputy Chief of General Staff of the Kuwait Armed Forces.

=== Six-Day War (1967) and War of Attrition (1967–1970) ===

In 1966, the headquarters of the Kuwait Military Hospital was opened. In 1967, the Chief of General Staff Major General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah appointed his deputy Brigadier General Saleh Mohammed Al-Sabah as acting commander of a hand-picked brigade from the Kuwait Armed Forces, mainly the elite of the Kuwait Army. Attached also to the elite brigade was Sheikh Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah as acting commander by delegation of the 2nd Commando Battalion of the Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade. In 1967 several Arab nations were at war with the State of Israel in the Six-Day War. Kuwait did not openly participate, but a contingent from the Army took part in fighting in the central sector; Kuwaiti participation was too small to have any significant impact; nevertheless, going from the principle of Arab solidarity, the various combat operational unit assets of the Kuwait Army exercised their principle of solidarity and completed their mission. The assembled Yarmouk Brigade participated on the Egyptian Front, the first Kuwaiti military unit to fight outside the territory of Kuwait.

On June 6, 1967, the Kuwait National Guard was established under the leadership of and guidance of Sheikh Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah. On July 1, the War of Attrition against the State of Israel commenced while the Yarmouk brigade was engaged on the Egyptian Front. In 1968, Kuwaiti military authorities established the Kuwait Military Academy.

In 1969, the Kuwait Armed Forces placed the English Electric Lightning supersonic jet fighter aircraft and the Bell 206 and Bell 204/205 (mainly the 205) helicopters into service with the Kuwaiti Air Force.

In 1970, the Kuwait Armed Forces suffered seventeen fatalities in fighting against Israeli forces in Egypt. One man was killed in April and sixteen more were killed in June. During the same year, the Kuwait Air Force placed BAC Strikemaster light attack jets into service and the following year took delivery of Lockheed C-130 Hercules transport aircraft.

In 1972, the Kuwait Army introduced the Vickers MBT main battle tank series, and the Kuwait Armed Forces trained Egyptian pilots and technicians through the Kuwait Air Force on the English Electric Lightning.

=== Double-fronted wars: 1973 Samita border skirmish and October War ===
In 1973, the Kuwait Armed Forces entered into their third alert phase with the beginning of the 1973 Samita border skirmish which led to a significant change in the operational capabilities of the Armed Forces.

Also in 1973, the leadership of the Armed Forces found itself battle readying on two fronts. While components of the Armed Forces were readying to fight following the skirmish on the Kuwaiti border, Kuwait sent a token force to participate on the West Bank of the Jordan River alongside the Iraqi Armed Forces on the Egyptian and Syrian fronts during the 1973 October War against the State of Israel (also known as the Yom Kippur war), being especially heavily combat engaged on the Syrian front. As in 1967, Kuwaiti participation was too small to have any significant impact; nevertheless as in 1967, the various combat operational unit assets forming, exercised their Arab principle of solidarity and completed their mission. During 1973 the Kuwait Armed Forces officially enacted the Kuwait Naval Armed Service; mainly the Kuwait Navy.

In 1973 the leadership of the Armed Forces led a double fronted war with and against the same forming Arab belligerent for the State of Kuwait. The leadership led the Kuwait Armed Forces brigades through their combat commanders engaged on both Syrian and Egyptian fronts during the war against Israel with and alongside the Iraqi Armed Forces while simultaneously part leading and engaging the remainder of the Kuwaiti forces on the Kuwaiti border due to the effects of the 1973 Sanita combat engagement.

One year later in 1974 and as a result of unpredictable conflicting crises, authorities enacted a new plan to expand the Kuwait Armed Forces even further. During the same year, Kuwait Armed Forces introduced the Aérospatiale Gazelle and Puma series helicopters to the Kuwait Air Force.

=== State of Kuwait Embassy protection and general support to Halt the Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) ===

With the outbreak of the Lebanese Civil War in 1975, units of the Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade were sent to Lebanon to protect mainly the State of Kuwait Embassy mission in Beirut. On another hand, a United Nations multinational peace deterrence force was formed by the United Kingdom, United States, France and Italy. The United Kingdom&#x27;s contingents of the Multinational Force in Lebanon included Her Majesty&#x27;s 1st The Queen&#x27;s Dragoon Guards. United States formations featured contingents of the U.S. Navy including the United States Marine Corps, Air Force and Army. France&#x27;s components included the French Air Force, French Army, French Navy including Aéronavale and French Regular and Foreign paratrooper regiments, companies, units including the 1st Parachute Hussard Regiment, the 17th Parachute Engineer Regiment, the 35th Parachute Artillery Regiment, the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment, others along with the 1st Foreign Regiment, the 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment and the 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment of the French Foreign Legion. The Multinational Force in Lebanon also included Italian paratroopers from the Folgore Brigade, infantry units from the Bersaglieri regiments and Italian Marines of the San Marco Battalion.

In the parallel diplomatical couloir of the United Nations peace initiative force and mainly at the level of leading Arab international diplomacy and humanitarianism; the State of Kuwait support participated in bringing the Lebanese Civil War to a halt (1975–1990).

A mission for this purpose was led by Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, then Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait, during the reign of Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.

During 1975, Kuwait defense authorities enacted the establishment of the first Kuwait naval base. During the same year, Kuwait Armed Forces signed on the delivery of the MIM-23 Hawk surface-to-air missile system and merged the Air Defense component to the Kuwait Air Force. The de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou was retired from service.

In 1976, the Kuwait Armed Forces took delivery of Dassault Mirage F1s to be operated by the Kuwait Air Force. During the same year, the Kuwait Air Force retired the Bell 206 and Bell 204/205 from service.

In 1977, the Kuwait Armed Forces initiated the first drill training with the United States Armed Forces. During the same year, authorities enacted the Ahmed Al Jaber Air Base, officially opened in 1979, and Ali Al Salem Air Base, officially opened in 1980. During the year of 1977, the Kuwait Armed Forces retired several equipment operated by the Air Force and Army and gained one new operating equipment. The English Electric Lightning and Hawker Hunter were retired by the Kuwait Air Force and Douglas A-4 Skyhawks were introduced; while the Centurion Tanks were given to Somalia by the Army, as deliveries of Chieftain MBT started to arrive.

=== Creation of the Kuwait Naval Force (1978) ===

In 1978, the Kuwait Navy was created and designated as the sea-based component of the Kuwait Armed Forces. During the same period, the Kuwait Army entered into service the M113 armored personnel carrier, the 9K52 Luna-M short-range artillery rocket system and the M109 howitzer.

=== Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988) ===

In 1980, the Iran–Iraq War broke out and the Kuwait Armed Forces entered into their fourth alert phase. During the same year, the Kuwait Armed Forces signed on the procurement of naval warships for the Kuwait Navy.

=== First joint Kuwait-Saudi Arabian air drills (1983) ===

In 1983, the Kuwait Armed Forces carried out the first air joint training with the Royal Saudi Air Force using Douglas A-4 Skyhawks.

In 1984, the Kuwait Armed Forces enter the short-range tactical surface-to-air missile system 9K33 Osa in service to be operated by the Kuwait Air Force. During the same year, the ordered naval warships arrived and were directly commissioned by the Kuwait Naval Force.

=== Official enacting of the Land Force of the Kuwait Armed Forces (1988) ===

In 1988, the Kuwait Land Force was officially designated as the land component of the Kuwait Armed Forces. The Kuwait Armed Forces were removed from their alert phase with the ending of the Iran-Iraq War. The eight-year fourth alert phase was the longest in the Armed Forces&#x27; history. With the ending of the Iran-Iraq War, the Kuwait Army adopted the BMP-2 infantry combat vehicle.

In 1989, the Kuwait Armed Forces signed on the delivery of F/A-18 Hornets and launched the opening of the new Kuwaiti Military Hospital.

=== Iraqi invasion and aftermath (1990) ===

On 2 August 1990, Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait. The larger Iraqi army brushed aside resistance by the 20,000-strong Kuwait Armed Forces with heavy casualties; after two days, Kuwait had been fully conquered. There were some instances of especially heroic resistance, particularly by combat aircraft pilots. Kuwaiti Forces, principally the Kuwait 35th Shaheed (Martyr) Armored Brigade of the Kuwait Army, engaged in the Battle of the Bridges near Al Jahra under Colonel Salem Masoud Al-Sorour, and the Kuwait Emiri Guards were engaged in the Battle of Dasman Palace with the Emir&#x27;s half-brother Sheikh Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.

Iraqi forces seized most of the heavy military equipment of the Kuwaiti military and used it against the coalition forces. This included the entire navy, which was sunk by coalition forces; tanks and armoured personnel carriers were also seized. While the Iraqis were required to return seized equipment after their defeat, most of it was damaged beyond repair. Only the air force escaped destruction, as many of its aircraft had escaped to Saudi Arabia.

=== Gulf War and Operation Desert Storm (1990–1991) ===

In the same year, Kuwait was part of a U.S.-led military coalition formed in response to the invasion which expelled Iraq from Kuwait in what became known as the Gulf War or First Persian Gulf War. Operation Desert Storm was launched by the coalition. Douglas A-4 Skyhawks of the Kuwait Air Force destroyed several Iraqi Naval ships trying to infiltrate into Bubiyan Island. The Kuwait Armed Forces commissioned and entered into service the M-84 battle tank during the attack on Iraqi forces in Saudi Arabia.

After the four-week air campaign, coalition forces launched the ground offensive. They quickly penetrated deep into Iraq, with the Legion taking the Al Salman Airport, meeting little resistance. The war ended after a hundred hours of fighting on the ground, which resulted in very light casualties for the Legion.

==== Aftermath ====
U.S. President George H. W. Bush condemned the invasion and led efforts to drive out the Iraqi forces. Authorized by the United Nations Security Council, an American-led coalition of 34 nations led by Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. fought the Gulf War to liberate Kuwait. Following several weeks of aerial bombardment, a U.S.-led United Nations (UN) coalition began a ground assault on 23 February 1991 that completely removed Iraqi forces from Kuwait in four days. After liberation, the UN, under Security Council Resolution 687, demarcated the Iraq-Kuwait boundary on the basis of the 1932 and the 1963 agreements between the two states. In November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait, which had been further spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 773 (1992) and 833 (1993).

There was an exodus of Palestinian from Kuwait during and after the Gulf War. During the Iraqi occupation more than 200,000 Palestinians fled Kuwait due to harassment, intimidation by Iraqi security forces, and being dismissed from their employment due to Iraqi influence. After the Gulf War, the Kuwaiti authorities forcibly pressured nearly 200,000 Palestinians to leave Kuwait in 1991. This was in response to the alignment of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and the PLO with Iraqi dictator and invader of Kuwait Saddam Hussein.
The Palestinians who fled Kuwait were Jordanians naturalized citizens.

After the liberation, Kuwait became a close military partner of the United States, Britain and France.

Kuwait entered into a ten-year defense cooperation agreement with the United States in September 1991, and later with the United Kingdom and France. The defense cooperation with the United States, the United Kingdom and France is done at the training level in the foreign country and the joint military exercise level on Kuwaiti soil.

The agreement with the United States also includes port access, military equipment storage, and joint training and exercises. The agreement did not officially provide for the stationing of United States service personnel in Kuwait, as the 1,500 US personnel remaining after the Gulf War were scheduled to leave within a few months.

In 1992, the Kuwait Armed Forces initiated joint structuring of its various Armed Forces. In the same year, F/A-18 Hornet aircraft were delivered and entered official service with the Kuwaiti Air Force.

=== October 1994 crisis with Iraq ===

In 1994, the Kuwait Armed Forces entered their fifth alert phase with the beginning of the Iraq disarmament crisis in October, and the Kuwait Air Force signed on the delivery of Starburst missile systems.

In 1995, the Desert Warrior tracked armoured vehicle and the BM-30 Smerch System entered into service with the Kuwait Army.

In 1996, the M1A2 Abrams main battle tank and the BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicle entered Kuwaiti service. During the same year, the Mubarak al-Abdullah Joint Command and Staff College (), named in memory of Lieutenant General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah (1934–1987), opened.

=== Operation Desert Strike (1996) ===

Following Operation Desert Strike in 1996, Kuwait agreed to a United States Battalion Task Force to be permanently stationed in Kuwait. These US Army Intrinsic Action (later called Operation Desert Spring on 1 October 1999) rotations and US Marine Corps EAGER MACE rotations conducted combined training with the Kuwait Land Forces and other coalition partners. In addition, US Special Operations Forces conducted Iris Gold rotations to train and assist other Kuwaiti military units.

In 1997, the Kuwait Armed Forces entered into service the MIM-104 Patriot surface-to-air missile (SAM) system with the Kuwait Air Force.

=== Operation Desert Fox (1998) ===

In 1998, the Kuwait Armed Forces made an organizational change in command between the Chief of General Staff and his various assistants through the chains of command. During the same year, the Kuwait Armed Forces enter into their sixth alert phase with the December 1998 bombing of Iraq (code-named Operation Desert Fox) between the United States, the United Kingdom and Iraq.

=== 50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Army (1999) ===

In 1999, during the reign of Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the General Staff Headquarters of the Kuwait Army commemorated the 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee of the Kuwait Armed Forces under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait, and the directives of the Chief of the General Staff. Newly ordered armored Naval warships were received and directly commissioned by the Kuwait Navy and Coast Guard.

=== Global War on Terror (2001–present) ===
After the War on Terror began with military campaigns following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, Kuwait was declared one of fifteen major non-NATO allies of the United States by US President George W. Bush.

During the Iraq War, the Military of Kuwait played an important role in supporting the logistical operations of the United States Armed Forces engaged in military operations in Iraq.

=== 50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Air Force (2003) ===
In May 2003, the Kuwait Air Force commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait.

=== 50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Emiri Guard (2011) ===

In June 2011, the Kuwait Emiri Guard commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, and the Emir of Kuwait.

===50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Naval Force (2011) ===
In November 2011, the Kuwait Naval Force commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait.

=== 2015 intervention in Yemen ===
The Military of Kuwait went on alert as a result of the 2015 Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen by a coalition of forces of Arab countries including Kuwait, which contributed aircraft of the Kuwaiti Air Force. The military, National Guard, Kuwait Police, and Fire Service Directorate activated defense plans to strengthen internal security measures. Defense measures also included intensifying security around oil installations in Kuwait and abroad.

=== 50th Anniversary of the Kuwait National Guard (2017) ===

In June 2017, the Kuwait National Guard commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait, and directives of Sheikh Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah.

== Ranks of the Military of Kuwait ==
== Order of battle ==

=== Kuwait Naval Force ===
The Kuwait Navy Force is the main sea deterring force with naval warships sailors. The navy includes the Kuwait Marine Corps and units of the Kuwait Commando Marine Units.

=== Kuwait Air Force ===

According to Jane&#x27;s World&#x27;s Air Forces the operational doctrine of the Kuwaiti Air Force is to provide air support to ground forces as part of a coalition, rather than alone. It is made up of 2,500 people organized into two fighter/ground attack squadrons, two fixed-wing transport squadrons, two helicopter squadrons, a utility squadron and a training/attack helicopter squadron. Although comparatively small in size, it is well equipped and trained, with Kuwaiti pilots averaging 210 flying hours per year. It does not constitute any offensive threat, but can support ground forces in defensive operations.

===Kuwait Land Force===

The Kuwait Land Force consists of active-duty personnel organized into three armored brigades, two mechanized infantry brigades, a mechanized reconnaissance brigade, an artillery brigade, a combat engineering brigade, a reserve brigade, and various other commands. The brigades are small by western standards, roughly the equivalent of small regiments or large battalions. They are &quot;cadre forces&quot;, kept up to 80 percent of full strength, with the balance made up of reserves in case of war.
Although the threat from Iraq was replaced by the War on Terror, forces structure has remained largely unchanged since 2000.

=== Kuwait Emiri Guard ===

The Kuwait Emiri Guard is an independent combat authority in the Kuwait Armed Forces.

=== Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade ===

The 25th Commando Brigade is an independent commando combat brigade part of the Kuwait Armed Forces.

=== Kuwait Commando Marine Units ===

The Kuwait Commando Marine Units are independent commando combat units part of the Kuwait Navy in the Kuwait Armed Forces.

=== Kuwait Military Police ===

The Kuwaiti Military Police is an independent combat authority in the Kuwait Armed Forces.

=== Kuwait National Guard ===

The Kuwait National Guard, considered a combat institution, is an independent body from the Kuwait Armed Forces and is a main internal and border combating security force.

=== Kuwait Ministry of Interior ===

The Kuwaiti Ministry of Interior is the governing body of the Kuwait Police, considered an institution, is an independent corps from the Kuwait Armed Forces and is an internal, coastal and border security force with combating and non-combatant elements.

=== Kuwait Land Border Force ===

The Kuwait Land Border Force of the interior is a border component of the Kuwait Police.

=== Kuwait Coast Guard ===

The Kuwait Coast Guard is a sea-based component of the Kuwait Police.

=== Kuwait Military Fire Service Directorate ===

The Kuwait military fire service are the military firefighters of the Kuwait Armed Forces.

=== Kuwait Fire Service Directorate ===

The Kuwait Fire Service Directorate are the public firefighters with military ranks and ribbon identifications.

== Relationship with the United States Armed Forces ==
An analysis of the U.S.-Kuwaiti strategic relationship after the Iraqi invasion was published in 2007 by the U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute.

=== Forces ===
The United States of America has thousands of troops stationed in Kuwait as part of a defence agreement. The largest part is the US Army Central Command (ARCENT), part of the United States Central Command (USCENTCOM).

Active US Forces facilities:
* Ali Al Salem Air Base
* Camp Arifjan
* Camp Buehring
* Camp Fox
* Camp Patriot
* Camp Spearhead
* Camp Virginia
* Camp Wolf
* Abdullah Al-Mubarak Air Base
* Kuwait Naval Base
* Udairi Range
* Ahmad al-Jaber Air Base
Inactive US Forces facilities:
* Camp Doha
* Camp Moreell
* Camp Navistar
* Camp New York
* Failaka Island
* Mina Al Ahmad

=== Equipment ===
The United States has provided military and defence technical assistance to Kuwait from both Foreign Military Sales (FMS) and commercial sources, with all transactions made by direct cash sale. The US Office of Military Cooperation in Kuwait is attached to the American Embassy and manages the FMS program. US military sales to Kuwait total US$5.5 billion since 2004. Principal US military systems purchased by the Kuwait Defence Forces are the Patriot missile system, F-18 Hornet fighters, and the M1A2 Main Battle Tank.

== See also ==
* House of Sabah
* National Assembly of Kuwait
* Politics of Kuwait
* Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen
* Saudi-led intervention in Bahrain

== Notes ==
== References and links ==

* UNIKOM 
* CIA World Factbook 
* Summary of Kuwait military power Summary of Kuwaiti military 
* Kuwaiti Military at Global security 
* Anscombe, Frederick F. (1997). &quot;The Ottoman Gulf: The Creation of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar&quot;. New York City: Columbia University Press. . Retrieved 23 September 2010.
* Slot, B. J. (2005). &quot;Mubarak Al-Sabah : Founder of Modern Kuwait 1896–1915&quot;. London: Arabian Publishing Ltd. . Retrieved 23 September 2010.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1058977" start="4" end="23" title="Kuwait Armed Forces" label="Kuwait Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="58" end="73" title="Kuwait" label="State of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737238" start="95" end="111" title="Kuwait Air Force" label="Kuwait Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="117" end="128" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079743" start="134" end="145" title="Kuwait Naval Force" label="Kuwait Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186290" start="156" end="177" title="Kuwait National Guard" label="Kuwait National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257919" start="208" end="234" title="Ministry of Defense (Kuwait)" label="Kuwait Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="240" end="267" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Kuwait Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q246932" start="314" end="328" title="Emir of Kuwait" label="Emir of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="336" end="354" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="566" end="574" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="579" end="586" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="616" end="630" title="defensive wall" label="defensive wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="704" end="717" title="The Great War" label="The Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="727" end="763" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Directorate of Public Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="783" end="798" title="Interwar period" label="Interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="816" end="828" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="1083" end="1094" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448870" start="1175" end="1196" title="Kuwait Police" label="Directorate of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="1248" end="1275" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Kuwait Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015525" start="1522" end="1528" title="Cabinet of Kuwait" label="Deputy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035020" start="1529" end="1566" title="List of Prime Ministers of Kuwait" label="Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257919" start="2006" end="2032" title="Ministry of Defense (Kuwait)" label="Kuwait Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="2124" end="2141" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait Land Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067796" start="2147" end="2175" title="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade" label="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737238" start="2253" end="2269" title="Kuwait Air Force" label="Kuwait Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079743" start="2275" end="2293" title="Kuwait Naval Force" label="Kuwait Naval Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903817" start="2435" end="2457" title="Chief of the General Staff (Kuwait)" label="Chief of General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q833938" start="2550" end="2558" title="Protocol (diplomacy)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="2591" end="2606" title="State of Kuwait" label="State of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="3499" end="3507" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="3977" end="4022" title="International Institute for Strategic Studies" label="International Institute for Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183167" start="4855" end="4881" title="Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah" label="Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q388730" start="4996" end="5012" title="Mubarak Al-Sabah" label="Mubarak Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q482428" start="5175" end="5183" title="Bren Gun" label="Bren Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209891" start="5273" end="5293" title="Daimler Armoured Car" label="Daimler Armoured Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="5429" end="5465" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Directorate of Public Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448870" start="5498" end="5519" title="Kuwait Police" label="Directorate of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="5553" end="5573" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011939" start="5774" end="5808" title="Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6162" end="6176" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q780756" start="6477" end="6483" title="Auster Aircraft" label="Auster"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="6661" end="6670" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="6878" end="6889" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="7226" end="7253" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Kuwait Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q504320" start="7445" end="7459" title="Centurion tank" label="Centurion tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q921436" start="7469" end="7493" title="de Havilland DH.104 Dove" label="de Havilland DH.104 Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q299732" start="7715" end="7732" title="Abdul Karim Qasim" label="Abdul Karim Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="7856" end="7896" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait 6th Liberation Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="7944" end="7952" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117991" start="8279" end="8296" title="Operation Vantage" label="Operation Vantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="8417" end="8434" title="Brigadier General" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="8485" end="8492" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067796" start="8596" end="8624" title="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade" label="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q662078" start="8844" end="8861" title="Universal Carrier" label="Universal Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="9152" end="9187" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait 35th Shaheed Armored Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="9196" end="9231" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait 15th Mubarak Armored Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155557" start="9441" end="9456" title="BAC Jet Provost" label="BAC Jet Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064142" start="9574" end="9601" title="Ministry of Interior (Kuwait)" label="Kuwait Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746758" start="9704" end="9716" title="Amiri Decree" label="Amiri Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="9863" end="9876" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="10038" end="10051" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q285004" start="10073" end="10106" title="de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou" label="de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617724" start="10751" end="10783" title="Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="10829" end="10837" title="Commando" label="Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067796" start="10855" end="10883" title="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade" label="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="10935" end="10950" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="10958" end="10969" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="11192" end="11196" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="11287" end="11296" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186290" start="11502" end="11523" title="Kuwait National Guard" label="Kuwait National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165701" start="11587" end="11608" title="Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah" label="Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q322607" start="11625" end="11641" title="War of Attrition" label="War of Attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q19381" start="11865" end="11891" title="English Electric Lightning" label="English Electric Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q660969" start="11932" end="11940" title="Bell 206" label="Bell 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428191" start="11945" end="11953" title="Bell 204" label="Bell 204"/>
<link wikidata="Q795369" start="12253" end="12269" title="BAC Strikemaster" label="BAC Strikemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="12341" end="12364" title="Lockheed C-130 Hercules" label="Lockheed C-130 Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522128" start="12426" end="12437" title="Vickers MBT" label="Vickers MBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="12508" end="12514" title="pilot (aircraft)" label="pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043309" start="12765" end="12792" title="1973 Samita border skirmish" label="1973 Samita border skirmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15611742" start="13172" end="13190" title="Iraqi Armed Forces" label="Iraqi Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="13236" end="13252" title="1973 October War" label="1973 October War"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="13265" end="13280" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="13551" end="13555" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="13556" end="13565" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q650711" start="13931" end="13937" title="combat" label="combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q794595" start="14439" end="14459" title="Aérospatiale Gazelle" label="Aérospatiale Gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="14646" end="14664" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067796" start="14687" end="14715" title="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade" label="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="14729" end="14736" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="14759" end="14774" title="State of Kuwait" label="State of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257922" start="14775" end="14782" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Kuwait)" label="Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="14783" end="14790" title="Diplomatic mission" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="14794" end="14800" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14891" end="14905" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14907" end="14920" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14922" end="14928" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="14933" end="14938" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655595" start="14985" end="15015" title="Multinational Force in Lebanon" label="Multinational Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="15025" end="15043" title="British Armed Forces" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q209091" start="15044" end="15079" title="1st The Queen&amp;#x27;s Dragoon Guards" label="1st The Queen&amp;#x27;s Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="15134" end="15143" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="15158" end="15184" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="15186" end="15195" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="15200" end="15204" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="15244" end="15260" title="French Air Force" label="French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="15262" end="15273" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="15275" end="15286" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q738367" start="15297" end="15307" title="French Naval Aviation" label="Aéronavale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243157" start="15312" end="15360" title="List of French paratrooper units" label="French Regular and Foreign paratrooper regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243157" start="15362" end="15371" title="List of French paratrooper units" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243157" start="15373" end="15378" title="List of French paratrooper units" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q845961" start="15393" end="15423" title="1st Parachute Hussard Regiment" label="1st Parachute Hussard Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809678" start="15429" end="15461" title="17th Parachute Engineer Regiment" label="17th Parachute Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816330" start="15467" end="15500" title="35th Parachute Artillery Regiment" label="35th Parachute Artillery Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222907" start="15506" end="15536" title="2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment" label="2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243157" start="15538" end="15544" title="List of French paratrooper units" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576634" start="15560" end="15580" title="1st Foreign Regiment" label="1st Foreign Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q168385" start="15586" end="15614" title="1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment" label="1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703367" start="15623" end="15652" title="2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment" label="2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="15660" end="15681" title="French Foreign Legion" label="French Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q452866" start="15762" end="15777" title="Folgore Brigade" label="Folgore Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="15779" end="15787" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q827218" start="15803" end="15814" title="Bersaglieri" label="Bersaglieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11962277" start="15829" end="15844" title="San Marco Marine Brigade" label="Italian Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q203246" start="15852" end="15871" title="San Marco Regiment" label="San Marco Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="15991" end="15995" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="16024" end="16039" title="humanitarianism" label="humanitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="16143" end="16150" title="Diplomatic mission" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q57555" start="16186" end="16218" title="Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257922" start="16225" end="16275" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Kuwait)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q246932" start="16297" end="16311" title="Emir of Kuwait" label="Emir of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q217194" start="16320" end="16352" title="Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q482414" start="16525" end="16536" title="MIM-23 Hawk" label="MIM-23 Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q319361" start="16744" end="16762" title="Dassault Mirage F1" label="Dassault Mirage F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737238" start="16786" end="16802" title="Kuwait Air Force" label="Kuwait Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="16977" end="17003" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19381" start="17311" end="17337" title="English Electric Lightning" label="English Electric Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="17342" end="17355" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q334759" start="17397" end="17416" title="Douglas A-4 Skyhawk" label="Douglas A-4 Skyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="17455" end="17459" title="Tank" label="Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="17475" end="17482" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462407" start="17770" end="17774" title="M113" label="M113"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815362" start="17806" end="17817" title="9K52 Luna-M" label="9K52 Luna-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q170296" start="17862" end="17875" title="M109 howitzer" label="M109 howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="17926" end="17939" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414724" start="18272" end="18293" title="Royal Saudi Air Force" label="Royal Saudi Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q694993" start="18417" end="18425" title="9K33 Osa" label="9K33 Osa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="18685" end="18702" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait Land Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q160357" start="19028" end="19033" title="BMP-2" label="BMP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="19119" end="19132" title="F/A-18 Hornet" label="F/A-18 Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="19274" end="19288" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="invaded Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872876" start="19661" end="19682" title="Battle of the Bridges" label="Battle of the Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077024" start="19688" end="19696" title="Al Jahra" label="Al Jahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870849" start="19783" end="19806" title="Battle of Dasman Palace" label="Battle of Dasman Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617724" start="19848" end="19880" title="Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="20594" end="20616" title="Operation Desert Storm" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q746774" start="20837" end="20841" title="M-84" label="M-84"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20926" end="20938" title="Gulf War#Air campaign" label="air campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="21022" end="21026" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="21256" end="21273" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="21362" end="21393" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q310188" start="21442" end="21465" title="Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr." label="Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="21732" end="21763" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 687" label="Security Council Resolution 687"/>
<link wikidata="Q877358" start="21991" end="22019" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution" label="Security Council Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121829" start="22020" end="22023" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 773" label="773"/>
<link wikidata="Q123906912" start="22061" end="22094" title="Palestinian exodus from Kuwait (Gulf War)" label="exodus of Palestinian from Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="22497" end="22510" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="22519" end="22522" title="PLO" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="22565" end="22579" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584232" start="22619" end="22629" title="Jordanian people" label="Jordanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433190" start="23760" end="23783" title="Iraq disarmament crisis" label="Iraq disarmament crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888541" start="23847" end="23856" title="Starburst surface-to-air missile" label="Starburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q589212" start="23895" end="23927" title="Warrior tracked armoured vehicle" label="Warrior tracked armoured vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787445" start="23936" end="23948" title="BM-30 Smerch" label="BM-30 Smerch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="24013" end="24024" title="M1A2 Abrams" label="M1A2 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q796368" start="24050" end="24055" title="BMP-3" label="BMP-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12236170" start="24133" end="24184" title="Mubarak al-Abdullah Joint Command and Staff College" label="Mubarak al-Abdullah Joint Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="24208" end="24226" title="Lieutenant General" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781133" start="24334" end="24357" title="Cruise missile strikes on Iraq (1996)" label="Operation Desert Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="24505" end="24528" title="Operation Desert Spring" label="Operation Desert Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="24698" end="24726" title="United States special operations forces" label="US Special Operations Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24737" end="24746" title="Iris Gold" label="Iris Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q339025" start="24866" end="24881" title="MIM-104 Patriot" label="MIM-104 Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="24882" end="24904" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327861" start="25240" end="25269" title="December 1998 bombing of Iraq" label="December 1998 bombing of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q217194" start="25449" end="25481" title="Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah" label="Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903817" start="25487" end="25513" title="Chief of the General Staff (Kuwait)" label="General Staff Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448938" start="25521" end="25532" title="Kuwait Army" label="Kuwait Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948446" start="25567" end="25581" title="Golden jubilee" label="Golden jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="25637" end="25655" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q246932" start="25661" end="25675" title="Emir of Kuwait" label="Emir of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903817" start="25703" end="25729" title="Chief of the General Staff (Kuwait)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="25899" end="25912" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="25957" end="25992" title="September 11 attacks" label="11 September 2001 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="26050" end="26071" title="Major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="26109" end="26123" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="26137" end="26145" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="26242" end="26268" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737238" start="26383" end="26399" title="Kuwait Air Force" label="Kuwait Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948446" start="26652" end="26666" title="Golden jubilee" label="Golden jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="26695" end="26713" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q246932" start="26723" end="26737" title="Emir of Kuwait" label="Emir of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079743" start="26819" end="26837" title="Kuwait Naval Force" label="Kuwait Naval Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="27054" end="27093" title="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen" label="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186290" start="27222" end="27236" title="Kuwait National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186290" start="27529" end="27550" title="Kuwait National Guard" label="Kuwait National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948446" start="27587" end="27601" title="Golden jubilee" label="Golden jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="27630" end="27648" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q246932" start="27654" end="27668" title="Emir of Kuwait" label="Emir of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165701" start="27695" end="27716" title="Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah" label="Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="27956" end="27964" title="Commando" label="Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340702" start="28019" end="28054" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Information Group" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s World&amp;#x27;s Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="29202" end="29215" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067796" start="29435" end="29456" title="Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade" label="25th Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="29475" end="29483" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079743" start="29654" end="29665" title="Kuwait Navy" label="Kuwait Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186290" start="29854" end="29875" title="Kuwait National Guard" label="Kuwait National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="31240" end="31269" title="United States Central Command" label="United States Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115518" start="31315" end="31336" title="Ali Al Salem Air Base" label="Ali Al Salem Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689870" start="31339" end="31351" title="Camp Arifjan" label="Camp Arifjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027027" start="31354" end="31367" title="Camp Buehring" label="Camp Buehring"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967997" start="31370" end="31378" title="Camp Fox" label="Camp Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448859" start="31381" end="31393" title="Camp Patriot" label="Camp Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851290" start="31413" end="31426" title="Camp Virginia" label="Camp Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q527157" start="31441" end="31469" title="Abdullah Al-Mubarak Air Base" label="Abdullah Al-Mubarak Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448859" start="31472" end="31489" title="Kuwait Naval Base" label="Kuwait Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582023" start="31507" end="31530" title="Ahmad al-Jaber Air Base" label="Ahmad al-Jaber Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q201806" start="31564" end="31573" title="Camp Doha" label="Camp Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027455" start="31607" end="31620" title="Camp New York" label="Camp New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392962" start="31623" end="31637" title="Failaka Island" label="Failaka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q842161" start="31766" end="31788" title="Foreign Military Sales" label="Foreign Military Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q468512" start="31934" end="31950" title="List of diplomatic missions of the United States" label="American Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="32142" end="32153" title="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet" label="F-18 Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="32172" end="32193" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1A2 Main Battle Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q291639" start="32213" end="32227" title="House of Sabah" label="House of Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139228" start="32230" end="32257" title="National Assembly (Kuwait)" label="National Assembly of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155457" start="32260" end="32278" title="Politics of Kuwait" label="Politics of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="32281" end="32320" title="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen" label="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23550326" start="32323" end="32356" title="Saudi-led intervention in Bahrain" label="Saudi-led intervention in Bahrain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16693" wikidata="Q5468503" url="?curid=16693" title="Foreign relations of Kuwait">
<text>Since its independence in 1961, Kuwait has maintained strong international relations with most countries, especially nations within the Arab world. Its vast oil reserves give it a prominent voice at the global economic forums and organizations like the OPEC. Kuwait is also a major ally of ASEAN, a regional ally of China, and a major non-NATO ally.

==International disputes==
In November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1992), and 883 (1993); this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah Island islands; ownership of Qaruh and Umm al Maradim islands are disputed by Saudi Arabia. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia continue to negatotiate a joint maritime boundary with Iran; no maritime boundary exists with Iraq in the Persian Gulf.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Kuwait maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
=== Africa ===
=== Americas ===
=== Asia ===
Kuwait, is a member of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, which includes, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman. These countries, have solid, and unbreakable bilateral relations. Citizens of these countries, may enter other GCC, country with their national ID. GCC citizens are allowed to reside at any other GCC, nation an unlimited period of time. They also follow the same economic plan, and give each other military, and Intelligence support. They also have similar, educational, social, plans. The GCC countries, discuss their foreign policies, as they try to maintain similar foreign policies. These six monarchies are also known as the oil-rich countries of the Middle East.
=== Europe ===
==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Kuwait
* List of diplomatic missions of Kuwait
* Iran-Arab Relations (Kuwait)
* Visa requirements for Kuwaiti citizens

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="32" end="38" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468503" start="61" end="84" title="Foreign relations of Kuwait" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="136" end="146" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="253" end="257" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="290" end="295" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="316" end="321" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="335" end="348" title="Major non-NATO ally" label="non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="515" end="518" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 687" label="687"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121829" start="527" end="530" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 773" label="773"/>
<link wikidata="Q781268" start="606" end="613" title="Bubiyan Island" label="Bubiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285416" start="618" end="631" title="Warbah Island" label="Warbah Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="773" end="790" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="1053" end="1104" title="Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf" label="Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="1122" end="1134" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="1136" end="1143" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="1145" end="1150" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="1156" end="1176" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="1182" end="1186" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1744" end="1755" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616419" start="1787" end="1824" title="List of diplomatic missions in Kuwait" label="List of diplomatic missions in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633923" start="1827" end="1864" title="List of diplomatic missions of Kuwait" label="List of diplomatic missions of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1867" end="1895" title="Iran-Arab relations#Kuwait" label="Iran-Arab Relations (Kuwait)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935479" start="1898" end="1936" title="Visa requirements for Kuwaiti citizens" label="Visa requirements for Kuwaiti citizens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16695" wikidata="Q641698" url="?curid=16695" title="History of Kyrgyzstan">
<text>The history of the Kyrgyz people and the land now called Kyrgyzstan goes back more than 3,000 years. Although geographically isolated by its mountainous location, it had an important role as part of the historical Silk Road trade route. Turkic nomads, who trace their ancestry to many Turkic states such as the First and Second Turkic Khaganates, have inhabited the country throughout its history. In the 13th century, Kyrgyzstan was conquered by the Mongols; subsequently it regained independence but was invaded by Kalmyks, Manchus, and Uzbeks. In 1876, it became part of the Russian Empire, remaining in the USSR as the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic after the Russian Revolution. Following Mikhael Gorbachev&#x27;s democratic reforms in the USSR, in 1990 pro-independence candidate Askar Akayev was elected president of the SSR. On 31 August 1991, Kyrgyzstan declared independence from Moscow, and a democratic government was subsequently established.

==Early history==
Stone implements found in the Tian Shan mountains indicate the presence of early humans in what is now Kyrgyzstan as many as 200,000 to 300,000 years ago. The first written records of a civilization in the area occupied by Kyrgyzstan appear in Chinese chronicles beginning about 2000 BC.

==Origins of the Kyrgyz people==

The Yenisei Kirghiz lived in the upper Yenisey River valley, central Siberia. Chinese sources of the 2nd century BC and Muslim sources of the 7th–12th centuries AD describe the Kyrgyz as red-haired with fair complexion and green (blue) eyes. First appearing in Chinese &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; as Gekun or Jiankun (鬲昆 or 隔昆), and later as part of the Tiele tribes, they came under the rule of the Göktürks and Uyghurs.
The early Kyrgyz state reached its greatest expansion after defeating the Uyghur Khaganate in 840 AD. Then Kyrgyz quickly moved as far as the Tian Shan range and maintained their dominance over this territory for about 200 years. In the 12th century, however, the Kyrgyz domination had shrunk to the Altay Range and the Sayan Mountains as a result of the rising Mongol expansion. With the rise of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century, the Kyrgyz migrated south. Plano Carpin, an envoy of the Papal states, and William Rubruck, an envoy of France, all wrote about their life under the Mongols. Various Turkic peoples ruled them until 1685, when they came under the control of the Oirats (Dzungars).

63% of the modern Kyrgyz men carry Haplogroup R1a1 (Y-DNA), comparable to the prevalence of the haplogroup among the Tajiks (64%).

==Early medieval times==

The first Turks to form a state in the territory of Central Asia (including Kyrgyzstan) were Göktürks or Kök-Türks. Known in medieval Chinese sources as Tujue (突厥 tú jué), the Göktürks under the leadership of Bumin/Tuman Khan/Khaghan (d. 552) of Ashina tribe or dynasty and his sons established the first known Turkic state in 551 in the general area of territory that had earlier been occupied by the Xiongnu, and expanded rapidly to rule wide territories in Central Asia. The Göktürks split into two rival Khanates, of which the western one disintegrated in 744.

The first kingdom to emerge from the Göktürk Khaganate was the Buddhist Uyghur Empire that flourished in the territory encompassing most of Central Asia from 744 to 840.

After the Uyghur empire disintegrated, a branch of the Uyghurs migrated to oasis settlements in the Tarim Basin and Gansu, such as Gaochang (Karakhoja) and Hami City (Kumul), and set up a confederation of decentralized Buddhist states called Kara-Khoja. Others, mainly closely related to the Uyghurs (the Karluks), occupying the western Tarim Basin, Ferghana Valley, Jungaria and parts of modern Kazakhstan bordering the Muslim Turco-Tajik Khwarazm Sultanate, converted to Islam no later than the 10th century and built a federation with Muslim institutions called Kara-Khanlik, whose princely dynasties are called Karakhanids by most historians. Its capital, Balasagun flourished as a cultural and economic centre.

The Islamized Karluk princely clan, the Balasagunlu Ashinalar (or the Karakhanids) gravitated toward the Persian Islamic cultural zone after their political autonomy and suzerainty over Central Asia was secured during the 9–10th century.

As they became increasingly Persianized they settled in the more Indo-Iranian sedentary centers such as Kashgaria, and became detached from the nomadic traditions of fellow Karluks, many of whom retained cultural elements of the Uyghur Khanate.

The principality was significantly weakened by the early 12th century and the territory of modern Kyrgyzstan was conquered by the Mongolic Khitan people. The Kara-Khitan Khanate (; 1124–1218), also known as Western Liao, was established by Yelü Dashi (耶律大石) who led around 100,000 Khitan remnants after escaping the Jurchen conquest of their native country, the Khitan dynasty.

The Khitay conquest of Central Asia can thus be seen as an internecine struggle within the Karluk nomadic tribe, played out as dynastic conflict between the conquering Buddhist Khitay elites and the defending Kara-Khanid princes. This conflict resulted in the subjugation of the latter by the former and in the subjugation of the Muslim Karluks by their kin.

==Mongol domination==
The Mongol invasion of Central Asia in the 13th century devastated the territory of Kyrgyzstan, costing its people their independence and written language. The son of Genghis Khan, Juche, conquered the Kyrgyz tribes of the Yenisey region, who by this time had become disunited. At the same time, the area of present-day Kyrgyzstan was an essential link in the Silk Road, as attested by several Church of the East gravestones. For the next 200 years, the Kyrgyz remained under the Golden Horde, Chagatai Khanate and the Oirats as well as Dzungars that succeeded that regime. Freedom was regained in 1510, but Kyrgyz tribes were overrun in the seventeenth century by the Kalmyks, in the mid-eighteenth century by the Manchus, and in the early nineteenth century by the Uzbeks.

The Mongol Empire (1206-1294/1368) was the largest contiguous empire and the second-largest empire overall in world history. It emerged from the unification of Mongol and Turkic tribes in modern-day Mongolia, and grew through invasion, after Genghis Khan had been proclaimed ruler of all Mongols in 1206. The Mongol Empire began to split following the succession war in 1260–1264, with the Golden Horde and the Chagatai Khanate being de facto independent and refusing to accept Kublai Khan (1260–1294) as Khagan. By Kublai&#x27;s death, the Mongol Empire had already fractured into four separate khanates or empires, each pursuing its interests and objectives. The kagans of the Yuan dynasty assumed the role of Chinese emperors and fixed their capital at Khanbaliq (modern-day Beijing) from the old Mongol capital Karakorum. Although other khanates accepted them as their titular suzerains and sent tributes and some support after the peace treaty in 1304, the three western khanates were virtually independent and continued developing as sovereign states. 

Eventually the Mongol rule in China fell in 1368 and was replaced by the Ming dynasty though the Genghisid Borjigin dynasty survived in Mongolia until the 17th century. Temujin, the son of a Mongol chieftain, who suffered a difficult childhood, united the nomadic, previously ever-rivaling Mongol-Turkic tribes under his rule through political manipulation and military might. In 1203–1205, the Mongols under Temujin destroyed all the remaining rival tribes (Kereyd, Merkits) and brought them under his sway. In 1206, Temujin was crowned as the Kagan of the Yekhe Mongol Ulus (Great Mongol Nation) at a Kurultai (general assembly) and assumed the title &quot;Chingis Khan&quot; (or more commonly known as &quot;Genghis Khan&quot; probably meaning Universal ruler) instead of the old tribal tities such as Gur Khan or Tayang Khan. This event essentially marked the start of the Mongol Empire under the leadership of Genghis Khan (1206–1227). Genghis Khan appointed his loyal friends as the heads of army units and households. He also divided his nation into (each with 10 people), (100), (1000) and (10,000) of decimal organization. 

Genghis Khan rewarded those loyal to him and placed them in high positions. He proclaimed new law of the empire Yassa and codified everything related to the nomads&#x27; everyday life and political affairs at the time. For example, he forbade hunting animals during breeding time, selling women, stealing other&#x27;s properties, and fighting between the Mongols by his law. He quickly came into conflict with the Jin dynasty of the Jurchens and the Western Xia of the Tanguts in northern China. Under the provocation of the Muslim Khwarezmid Empire, he moved into Central Asia as well, devastating Transoxiana and eastern Persia, and then raiding into Kievan Rus&#x27; and the Caucasus. Before his death, Genghis divided his empire among his sons and immediate family, but as custom made clear, it remained the joint property of the entire imperial family who, along with the Mongol aristocracy, constituted the ruling class. 

In 1207 Kyrgyz possessions on the Yenisei, in Tuva and Altai were entered into part of Mongol Empire. But in 1273–1293 Kyrgyz rulers restored their independence after repeated rebellions Kyrgyz tribes against Mongols power in 1217, 1218, 1273–1280. In 1218 the east Turkestan and Semirechie were conquered by Mongols. His third son, Ugedei, inherited Genghis Khan&#x27;s empire. The designated Great Khan personally controlled the lands east of Lake Balkhash as far as Mongolia. Tolui, the youngest, the keeper of the hearth, was granted the northern Mongolian homeland. Chagatai, the second son, received Transoxania, between the Amur-Darya and Syr-Darya rivers in modern Uzbekistan, and the area around Kashgar. He made his capital at Almalik near Kulja in northwestern China. Apart from problems of lineage and inheritance, the Mongol Empire was endangered by the great cultural and ethnic divide between the Mongols themselves and their mostly Islamic Turkic subjects. * In 1269, during the common meeting of khans of Chagatai and Ugedei uluses, Khaidu (1269- 1301) was officially chosen to be a Khan. His lands extended from Altai to Amur-Darya, including the territory of what is now Kyrgyzstan and Eastern Turkestan (an extensive region of central Asia between Siberia in the north and Tibet, India, Afghanistan, and Iran in the south: formerły divided into West (Russian) Turkestan (also called Soviet Central Asia), comprising present-day Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan and the South part of Kazakhstan, and East Turkestan consisting of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (Chinese).
==Timurids and Uzbeks==
The Kyrgyz in the north were never totally subjugated by Timurlane. However, his conquests and influence had a unifying role in the southern region. In the 15th century, a tribe of Uzbeks, originally from the Golden horde, arrived in this region.

==First Statehood==
During the 19th century, the Northern Kyrgyz tribes were in a confederation ruled by one khan, the first khan, Ormon Khan, initiated the formation of a state called the Kara-Kyrgyz Khanate, governing the Kyrgyz people independently from their former overlord, the Kokands. 

After Ormon&#x27;s death, the khanate was ruled by his son Umetaaly. In a hostile situation against the expanding Russian Empire, the khanate was annexed in 1867.

==Russian Empire: 1876–1917==

In 1775, Atake Tynay Biy Uulu, one of the leaders of Sarybagysh tribe, established first diplomatic ties with the Russian Empire by sending his envoys to Catherine the Great in Saint Petersburg. In the early 19th century, the territory of Kyrgyzstan came under the control of the Khanate of Kokand, but the territory was occupied and formally annexed by the Russian Empire in 1876. The Russian takeover instigated numerous revolts against tsarist authority, and many Kyrgyz opted to move into the Pamir Mountains and into Afghanistan. The suppression of the 1916 rebellion in Central Asia, triggered by the Russian imposition of the military draft on the Kyrgyz and other Central Asian peoples, caused many Kyrgyz to flee to China.

==The Soviet Era: 1917–1991==
Soviet power was initially established in the region in 1918, and in 1924, the Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast was created within the Russian SFSR. (The term Kara-Kyrgyz was used until the mid-1920s by the Russians to distinguish them from the Kazakhs, who were also referred to as Kyrgyz.) In 1926, it became the Kirghiz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. On December 5, 1936, the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was established as a Union Republic of the USSR.

During the 1920s, Kyrgyzstan saw considerable cultural, educational, and social change. Economic and social development also was notable. Literacy increased, and a standard literary language was introduced. The Kyrgyz language belongs to the Kipchak Turkic group of languages. In 1924, an Arabic-based Kyrgyz alphabet was introduced, which was replaced by Latin script in 1928. In 1941 Cyrillic script was adopted. Many aspects of the Kyrgyz national culture were retained despite suppression of nationalist activity under Joseph Stalin, who controlled the Soviet Union from the late 1920s until 1953.

Modern Kyrgyz religious affiliation is eclectically Muslim for a majority of the population. Typical Kyrgyz families vary in their devotion to Islam.

Russian and Kyrgyz cultures differ about family, religious identity, and social structure. Kyrgyzstan is a country in transition. The current social dilemma is one that has emerged from the controlling body mainly relying on classic Russian ethnicities, to Kyrgyz or Turkic ethnic groups shaping and forming the infrastructure of Kyrgyzstan. This has resulted in a measurable degree of instability and chaos associated with a social transition.

The ancestral Kyrgyz social structure was dominated by nomadic traditions, governing political philosophies, and socialization. As classical Russian ethnic groups were injected into the Soviet Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the urbanization process began and was mainly authored by the Russian communities placed within the Soviet Republic, mostly by policies created by the communist party. It is unclear why these policies were created; it is only clear that they forced Russians of certain descent to populate the Republic.

===Perestroika and Glasnost. Towards independence: 1985–1991===

On 11 March 1985 Mikhail Gorbachev was chosen by the Politburo as the new General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev immediately launched his new liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika, although they had little immediate impact on the political climate in Kyrgyzstan. On 2 November 1985 Gorbachev replaced Turdakun Usubaliyev the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kirghizia, who had been in power for 24 years, with Absamat Masaliyev. The republic&#x27;s press was permitted to adopt a more liberal stance and to establish a new publication, &quot;Literaturny Kyrgyzstan&quot;, by the Union of Writers. Unofficial political groups were forbidden, but several groups that emerged in 1989 to deal with an acute housing crisis were permitted to function.

Gorbachev&#x27;s policy of separating Party and State began to impact at the Soviet Republic level in early 1991 when each SSR held competitive elections to their respective legislative Supreme Soviets, shortly after the CPSU had given up its &#x27;leading role&#x27;. This meant that real local power moved from the position of Communist Party Leader to that of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, the official Head of State of the SSR. Between January and April 1990, each of the Communist Party leaders of the five states of Soviet Central Asia assumed the position of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet in their respective SSRs without any difficulty from the still weak opposition forces in the region.

In Kirghizia the 1990 elections were held on 25 February, with a second round on 7 April. As the Communists were the only political party contesting the elections it is not surprising that they received 90% of the vote. Absamat Masaliyev the Communist leader was voted by the new Parliament as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Kirghizia on 10 April 1990.

However events quickly began to slip from the Communists control. On 1 May 1990 the opposition groups held their first big demonstration in Frunze in competition with the officially sanctioned May Day celebrations, and on 25–26 May 1990 the opposition groups formed the Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement as a bloc of several anti-Communist political parties, movements and nongovernment organizations. Then on 4 June 1990, ethnic tensions between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz surfaced in an area of the Osh Region where Uzbeks form a majority of the population. Violent confrontations ensued, and a state of emergency and curfew were introduced. Order was not restored until August 1990.

The Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement swiftly developed into a significant political force with growing support in parliament. On 27 October 1990 in an upset victory, Askar Akayev, the president of the Kyrgyz Academy of Sciences and reformist Communist Party member, was elected to the newly created presidency defeating Communist Party leader Absamat Masaliyev. Kirghizia was the only one of the five states of Soviet Central Asia that voted their established Communist leadership out of power in 1990.

===Priority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new Treaty===

On 15 December 1990, the Supreme Soviet voted to change the republic&#x27;s name to the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. In January 1991, Akayev introduced new government structures and appointed a government consisting mainly of younger, reform-oriented politicians. On 5 February 1991, the capital&#x27;s name, Frunze, was changed to Bishkek.

Despite these moves toward independence, economic realities seemed to work against secession from the Soviet Union In a referendum on the preservation of the USSR, in March 1991, 88.7% of the voters approved a proposal to remain part of the union as a &quot;renewed federation.&quot;

=== Soviet coup attempt, the Transition Period and the end of the Soviet Union ===

On August 19, 1991, when the State Emergency Committee assumed power in Moscow, there was an attempt to depose Akayev in Kyrgyzstan. After the coup collapsed the following week, Akayev and Vice President German Kuznetsov announced their resignations from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), and the entire politburo and secretariat resigned. This was followed by the Supreme Soviet vote declaring independence from the Soviet Union on 31 August 1991, becoming the first of the five Republics of Soviet Central Asia to break away.

==Independence and the Akayev presidency: 1991–2005==
Kyrgyz was announced as the state language in September 1991. In October 1991, Akayev ran unopposed and was elected President of the new independent republic by direct ballot, receiving 95% of the votes cast. 

On 18 October 1991, in the St. George Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace Mikhail Gorbachev and the leaders of eight Union republics (excluding Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan) signed the Treaty on the Economic Community. According to the text, even before the disintegration of the Soviet Union and regardless of the fate of the Soviet Union, an economic community is being created by independent states in order to form a single market and conduct a coordinated economic policy as an essential condition for overcoming the crisis, preserving a single currency and free movement of goods and services. The treaty was signed by the heads of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and the president of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Mikhail Gorbachev, but was not ratified and implemented.

=== Independent country and the Commonwealth ===
Post-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.

On December 21, 1991, Kyrgyzstan formally entered the new Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).

As in many former Soviet republics, after Kyrgyzstan regained independence in August 1991 many individuals, organizations, and political parties sought to reestablish (and, to a certain extent, to create from scratch) a Kyrgyz national cultural identity; often one that included a backlash against Russians.

In 1993, allegations of corruption against Akayev&#x27;s closest political associates blossomed into a major scandal. One of those accused of improprieties was Prime Minister Tursunbek Chyngyshev, who was dismissed for ethical reasons in December. Following Chyngyshev&#x27;s dismissal, Akayev dismissed the government and called upon the last communist premier, Apas Djumagulov, to form a new one. In January 1994, Akayev initiated a referendum asking for a renewed mandate to complete his term of office. He received 96.2% of the vote.

A new constitution was passed by the parliament in May 1993 and the Republic of Kyrgyzstan was renamed the Kyrgyz Republic. In 1994, however, the parliament failed to produce a quorum for its last scheduled session prior to the expiration of its term in February 1995. President Akayev was widely accused of having manipulated a boycott by a majority of the parliamentarians. Akayev, in turn, asserted that the communists had caused a political crisis by preventing the legislature from fulfilling its role. Akayev scheduled an October 1994 referendum, overwhelmingly approved by voters, which proposed two amendments to the constitution—one that would allow the constitution to be amended by means of a referendum, and the other creating a new bicameral parliament called the &quot;Jogorku Kenesh&quot;.

Elections for the two legislative chambers—a 35-seat full-time assembly and a 70-seat part-time assembly—were held in February 1995 after campaigns considered remarkably free and open by most international observers, although the election-day proceedings were marred by widespread irregularities. Independent candidates won most of the seats, suggesting that personalities prevailed over ideologies. The new parliament convened its initial session in March 1995. One of its first orders of business was the approval of the precise constitutional language on the role of the legislature.

On December 24, 1995, President Akayev was reelected for another 5-year term with wide support (75% of vote) over two opposing candidates. He used government resources and state-owned media to carry out his campaign. Three (out of six) candidates were de-registered shortly before the election.

A February 1996 referendum—in violation of the constitution and the law on referendums—amended the constitution to give President Akayev more power. Although the changes gave the president the power to dissolve parliament, it also more clearly defined the parliament&#x27;s powers. Since that time, the parliament has demonstrated real independence from the executive branch.

An October 1998 referendum approved constitutional changes, including increasing the number of deputies in the lower house, reducing the number of deputies in the upper house, providing for 25% of lower house deputies to be elected by party lists, rolling back parliamentary immunity, introducing private property, prohibiting adoption of laws restricting freedom of speech and mass media, and reforming the state budget.

Two rounds of parliamentary elections were held on February 20, 2000, and March 12, 2000. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the elections failed to comply with commitments to free and fair elections and hence were invalid. Questionable judicial proceedings against opposition candidates and parties limited the choice of candidates available to Kyrgyz voters, while state-controlled media only reported favorably on official candidates. Government officials put pressure on independent media outlets that favored the opposition. The presidential election that followed later in 2000 also was marred by irregularities and was not declared free and fair by international observers. In December 2001, through a constitutional amendment, the Russian language was given official status.

The OSCE found that the parliamentary elections held on 27 February and 13 March 2005 failed to comply with commitments to free and fair elections; however, there were improvements over the 2000 elections, notably the use of indelible ink, transparent ballot boxes, and generally good access by election observers.

==Tulip Revolution: 2005==

Sporadic protests against perceived manipulation and fraud during the elections of February 27, 2005, erupted into widespread calls for the government to resign, which started in the southern provinces. On March 24, 15,000 pro-opposition demonstrators in Bishkek called for the resignation of the President and his regime. Protesters seized the main government building, and Akayev hurriedly fled the country, first to neighboring Kazakhstan and then to Moscow. Initially refusing to resign and denouncing the events as a coup, he subsequently resigned his office on April 4.

== Bakiyev presidency: 2005–2010 ==
Kurmanbek Bakiyev won the 10 July ballot for the presidential election with 89% of the vote with a 53% turnout. Bakiyev&#x27;s term in office was marred by the murder of several prominent politicians, prison riots, economic ills and battles for control of lucrative businesses. In 2006, Bakiyev faced a political crisis as thousands of people participated in a series of protests in Bishkek. He was accused of not following through with his promises to limit presidential power, give more authority to parliament and the prime minister, and eradicate corruption and crime. Bakiyev claimed that the opposition was plotting a coup against him.

In April 2007, the opposition held protests demanding Bakiyev&#x27;s resignation, with a large protest beginning on April 11 in Bishkek. Bakiyev signed constitutional amendments to reduce his own power on April 10, but the protest went ahead, with protesters saying that they would remain until he resigned. Clashes broke out between protesters and police on April 19, after which the protests ended.

Bakiyev was re-elected in the 2009 presidential election. After the re-election in 2009, some people in Kyrgyzstan said that he would now deal with political and economic reform. Others were skeptical. The Eurasian Daily Monitor wrote on September 10 that his style resembled other leaders such as Vladimir Putin and Nursultan Nazarbayev. However, he lacked resources and Kyrgyz people were anxious about the risk of renewed power shortages and blackouts like in the winter 2008–2009.

During the winter of 2010 Kyrgyzstan has suffered from rolling blackouts and cutoffs occurring regularly while energy prices have risen.

==Revolution 2010==
The arrest of an opposition figure on 6 April 2010 in the town of Talas led opposition supporters to protest. The protestors took control of a governmental building, demanding a new government. Riot police were sent from Bishkek, and managed to temporarily regain control of the building. Later the same day several more opposition figures were arrested, while the government claimed to have regained control of the situation. The following day, however, hundreds of opposition supporters gathered in Bishkek and marched on the government headquarters. Security personnel attempted to disperse the protestors with the use of stun grenades and live rounds, at the cost of dozens of lives. The protests continued, however, resulting in the flight of President Bakiyev to his southern stronghold of Jalal-Abad, and the freeing later the same day of the arrested opposition figures. A new government was formed under opposition leader Roza Otunbayeva, while Bakiyev remained for several days in southern Kyrgyzstan, before fleeing to Belarus, where he was given asylum by President Lukashenko. The new interim government held consultations on a new constitution, intended to increase the powers of the parliament and reduce those of the president. A referendum was held on the resulting document on 27 June 2010, and was approved by over 90% of voters, with a turnout of 72%. Elections were subsequently held on 10 October 2010. These elections resulted in five parties reaching the 5% threshold necessary to enter parliament.

== Atambayev presidency: 2011-to 2017==
Almazbek Atambayev ran in 2011 to succeed Roza Otunbayeva as President of Kyrgyzstan. On election day, 30 October 2011, he won in a landslide, defeating Adakhan Madumarov from the Butun Kyrgyzstan party and Kamchybek Tashiev from the Ata-Zhurt party with 63% of the vote, and with about 60% of the eligible Kyrgyz population voting.
In 2011 soon after becoming president, Atambayev travelled to Turkey and signed an agreement with the Turkish President agreeing to increase trade from $300 million in 2011 to $1 billion by 2015, with Turkey also agreeing to attract Turkish investment to Kyrgyzstan to the amount of $450 million within the next few years.

Atambayev has repeatedly presented himself as a pro-Russian politician. He positively supports Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s Membership of the Russian led Eurasian Customs Union and secured the withdrawal of the American military base from the country in 2014. He has spoken of the need for closer economic relations with Russia, which temporarily employs about 500,000 citizens of Kyrgyzstan; however, he also expressed his wish to achieve greater economic and energy independence from it.

== Jeenbekov presidency: 2017–2020==

Sooronbay Jeenbekov was sworn in as president on 24 November 2017 at the Ala Archa State Residence. In the hours since assuming office, he made his first decree to confer the title of Hero of the Kyrgyz Republic to his predecessor. The following May, he conducted his first foreign visit after assuming the presidency was to Russia where he met with Vladimir Putin. In April 2018, Jeenbekov fired Prime Minister Sapar Isakov and his entire government following a vote of no confidence from Supreme Council.

In his first year, Jeenbekov participated in 30 international meetings, where he signed a total of 77 bilateral agreements and 414 multilateral documents. That same year, he ordered the foreign ministry to establish diplomatic relations with four foreign countries. The draft of a new co-operation agreement with the United States is currently being reconciled.

Since Jeenbekov took power, he has had a somewhat adversarial relationship with former President Atambayev, who strongly backed Jeenbekov against his opponent Ömürbek Babanov during the 2017 election, even referring to comparing himself as an “older brother” to Jeenbekov when referring to their relationship. Despite this, a rift grew between the two politicians as Atambayev became more involved in politics, eventually rising to the Chairmanship of the Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan, of which Jeenbekov is a member of. While in this post, he criticized Jeenbekov for his handling many controversies and state emergencies, including the Bishkek power plant failure and his refusal to force his brother to resign from parliament. In early April 2018, Jeenbekov dismissed two high-ranking officials in the State Committee for National Security (GKNB) who are considered to be close to Atambayev, which was seen as an apparent jab at Atambayev and his former government. Jeenbekov has on many occasions accused Atambayev of indirectly trying to influence his presidency, saying in November 2018 that he has attempted to turn him into &quot;a puppet leader through some third individuals&quot; Even with the accusations, he denies any type of rivalry with the former president, saying the following month that he &quot;does not consider anyone a rival&quot;.

==October 2020 protests==

Mass protests began on 5 October 2020 in response to the parliamentary election that was perceived by protestors as unfair. In the early morning of 6 October 2020, the protesters reclaimed control of the Ala-Too Square in central Bishkek. They also managed to seize the White House and Supreme Council buildings nearby, throwing paper from windows and setting them on fire, also entering the President&#x27;s offices. A protestor died and 590 others were injured. Protestors freed former president Almazbek Atambayev and opposition politician Sadyr Japarov from prison.

On 6 October, following the protests, the electoral authorities in the country annulled the results of the parliamentary elections. Likely due to pressure from the protest, Prime Minister Kubatbek Boronov resigned, citing parliamentary deputy Myktybek Abdyldayev as the new speaker. Following the resignation of Prime Minister Boronov, former lawmaker Sadyr Japarov was appointed to replace him. Opposition parties rejected the legitimacy of Japarov&#x27;s status and instead put forward their own candidate for prime minister, Tilek Toktogaziyev. Japarov claimed that he was already the &quot;legitimate prime minister&quot; and that he was appointed by &quot;the parliament&#x27;s majority.&quot;

President Sooronbay Jeenbekov resigned on 15 October 2020, leading Japarov to declare himself as acting president. Despite the Kyrgyzstan Constitution stating that the speaker of the Supreme Council should succeed the role, Kanatbek Isaev refused to assume office, resulting in Japarov becoming the acting president.

== Japarov presidency: 2021–present ==
Sadyr Japarov resigned his post of prime minister to run for the presidency in January 2021. He successfully defeated Adakhan Madumarov in a landslide win and assumed office on 28 January 2021.

A constitutional referendum was held in Kyrgyzstan on 11 April 2021. The draft new constitution adopted by the referendum replaces the parliamentary system with a presidential one, with presidents limited to two five year terms instead of a single six-year term.

==See also==
*Dissolution of the Soviet Union
*Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate
*Kyrgyz Khanate
*History of Asia
*History of Central Asia
*History of the Soviet Union
*Leadership of Communist Kyrgyzstan
*Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic
*Politics of Kyrgyzstan
*President of Kyrgyzstan
*Prime Minister of Kyrgyzstan
*Soviet Central Asia
*Tulip Revolution
==References==

*History of Kyrgyzstan 
*Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic

==Further reading==

*Abazov, Rafiz &quot;Historical Dictionary of Kyrgyzstan&quot; Lanham, Maryland, and Oxford: The Scarecrow Press, 2004.
*KokaislL, Petr; Kokaislová, Pavla &quot;The Kyrgyz – Children of Manas&quot; Prague: Nostalgie, 2009. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="19" end="32" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz people"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="57" end="67" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="214" end="223" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="237" end="243" title="Turkic people" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="244" end="250" title="nomads" label="nomads"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146034" start="311" end="316" title="First Turkic Khaganate" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833446" start="321" end="344" title="Second Turkic Khaganate" label="Second Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="451" end="458" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="517" end="524" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="526" end="533" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="539" end="545" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="578" end="592" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="611" end="615" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="667" end="685" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="697" end="714" title="Mikhael Gorbachev" label="Mikhael Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q489893" start="789" end="801" title="Askar Akayev" label="Askar Akayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="1008" end="1017" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="1081" end="1091" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="1305" end="1320" title="Yenisei Kirghiz" label="Yenisei Kirghiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="1340" end="1353" title="Yenisey River" label="Yenisey River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="1370" end="1377" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="1576" end="1606" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="1625" end="1632" title="Jiankun" label="Jiankun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320869" start="1670" end="1675" title="Tiele people" label="Tiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="1716" end="1724" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürks"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="1729" end="1736" title="Uyghur people" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="1812" end="1828" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="1880" end="1889" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="2038" end="2043" title="Altay Mountains" label="Altay"/>
<link wikidata="Q203239" start="2058" end="2073" title="Sayan Mountains" label="Sayan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="2100" end="2106" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="2139" end="2152" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315149" start="2201" end="2213" title="Giovanni da Pian del Carpine" label="Plano Carpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="2231" end="2243" title="Papal states" label="Papal states"/>
<link wikidata="Q316083" start="2249" end="2264" title="William Rubruck" label="William Rubruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2278" end="2284" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="2340" end="2354" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="2418" end="2424" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="2426" end="2434" title="Dzungars" label="Dzungars"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="2473" end="2496" title="Haplogroup R1a1 (Y-DNA)" label="Haplogroup R1a1 (Y-DNA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="2555" end="2561" title="Tājik people" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="2689" end="2697" title="Göktürks" label="Göktürks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29001" start="2805" end="2829" title="Bumin Khan" label="Bumin/Tuman Khan/Khaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q686722" start="2842" end="2854" title="Ashina tribe" label="Ashina tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q331644" start="3104" end="3112" title="Khanates" label="Khanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="3199" end="3206" title="Göktürk" label="Göktürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="3234" end="3247" title="Uyghur Empire" label="Uyghur Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216622" start="3433" end="3444" title="Tarim Basin" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="3449" end="3454" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q877381" start="3464" end="3472" title="Gaochang" label="Gaochang"/>
<link wikidata="Q989892" start="3489" end="3498" title="Hami City" label="Hami City"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="3638" end="3645" title="Karluks" label="Karluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="3683" end="3698" title="Ferghana Valley" label="Ferghana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q284027" start="3700" end="3708" title="Jungaria" label="Jungaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="3729" end="3739" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182647" start="3773" end="3781" title="Khwarazm" label="Khwarazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="3948" end="3959" title="Karakhanids" label="Karakhanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764282" start="3993" end="4002" title="Balasagun" label="Balasagun"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="4064" end="4070" title="Karluks" label="Karluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="4120" end="4131" title="Karakhanids" label="Karakhanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170273" start="4317" end="4328" title="Persianization" label="Persianized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688526" start="4393" end="4402" title="Kashgaria" label="Kashgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="4462" end="4469" title="Karluks" label="Karluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="4665" end="4673" title="Mongols" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="4674" end="4687" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q862304" start="4693" end="4712" title="Kara-Khitan Khanate" label="Kara-Khitan Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330091" start="4775" end="4785" title="Yelü Dashi" label="Yelü Dashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="4851" end="4858" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="5244" end="5250" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q815677" start="5251" end="5258" title="Karluks" label="Karluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330335" start="5300" end="5331" title="Mongol invasion of Central Asia" label="Mongol invasion of Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="5656" end="5665" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="5690" end="5708" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="5776" end="5788" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="5790" end="5806" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="5815" end="5821" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="5833" end="5841" title="Dzungars" label="Dzungars"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="6011" end="6018" title="Manchus" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="6063" end="6069" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="6076" end="6089" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="6271" end="6279" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="6314" end="6326" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="6462" end="6474" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="6483" end="6499" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="6550" end="6561" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="6751" end="6763" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="6850" end="6857" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62677" start="6887" end="6896" title="Karakorum" label="Karakorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="7205" end="7217" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059073" start="7239" end="7255" title="Borjigin dynasty" label="Borjigin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="7301" end="7308" title="Temujin" label="Temujin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="8680" end="8691" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="8699" end="8707" title="Jurchens" label="Jurchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427" start="8716" end="8727" title="Western Xia" label="Western Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756608" start="8735" end="8742" title="Tanguts" label="Tanguts"/>
<link wikidata="Q63134381" start="8798" end="8815" title="Khwarezmid Empire" label="Khwarezmid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="8865" end="8876" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8889" end="8895" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="8919" end="8935" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="8944" end="8952" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="9229" end="9236" title="Yenisei" label="Yenisei"/>
<link wikidata="Q960" start="9241" end="9245" title="Tuva" label="Tuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="9250" end="9255" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315785" start="9461" end="9470" title="Turkestan" label="Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005407" start="9475" end="9485" title="Jetisu" label="Semirechie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519" start="9528" end="9534" title="Ugedei" label="Ugedei"/>
<link wikidata="Q134485" start="9640" end="9653" title="Lake Balkhash" label="Lake Balkhash"/>
<link wikidata="Q487543" start="9766" end="9774" title="Chagatai Khan" label="Chagatai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="9826" end="9836" title="Amur-Darya" label="Amur-Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q483159" start="9841" end="9850" title="Syr-Darya" label="Syr-Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="9868" end="9878" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="9900" end="9907" title="Kashgar" label="Kashgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627464" start="9932" end="9939" title="Almaliq, Xinjiang" label="Almalik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="10463" end="10470" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="10488" end="10493" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="10598" end="10617" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="10643" end="10655" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="10657" end="10667" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="10669" end="10679" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="10685" end="10695" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="10718" end="10728" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="10767" end="10799" title="Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region" label="Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="10892" end="10901" title="Timurlane" label="Timurlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q13172117" start="11214" end="11224" title="Ormon Khan" label="Ormon Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56314483" start="11272" end="11291" title="Kara-Kyrgyz Khanate" label="Kara-Kyrgyz Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="11307" end="11320" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz people"/>
<link wikidata="Q489890" start="11367" end="11373" title="Kokand" label="Kokand"/>
<link wikidata="Q13175294" start="11437" end="11445" title="Umetaaly" label="Umetaaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812662" start="11582" end="11602" title="Atake Tynay Biy Uulu" label="Atake Tynay Biy Uulu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11626" end="11636" title="Sarybagysh" label="Sarybagysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="11687" end="11701" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="11727" end="11746" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11750" end="11766" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q696241" start="11853" end="11870" title="Khanate of Kokand" label="Khanate of Kokand"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="11931" end="11945" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="12012" end="12016" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="12070" end="12085" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="12095" end="12106" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385941" start="12415" end="12444" title="Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast" label="Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="12468" end="12480" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8212144" start="12648" end="12692" title="Kirghiz Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic (1926–1936)" label="Kirghiz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276" start="12719" end="12752" title="Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12802" end="12806" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="12947" end="12955" title="Literacy" label="Literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="13020" end="13035" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="13098" end="13104" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q534334" start="13111" end="13126" title="Kyrgyz alphabet" label="Kyrgyz alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="13165" end="13177" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="13195" end="13203" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="13332" end="13345" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="14612" end="14629" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q842008" start="14648" end="14657" title="Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="14669" end="14729" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="14795" end="14803" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="14808" end="14819" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478718" start="14941" end="14960" title="Turdakun Usubaliyev" label="Turdakun Usubaliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154410" start="14988" end="15016" title="Communist Party of Kirghizia" label="Communist Party of Kirghizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q834792" start="15059" end="15076" title="Absamat Masaliyev" label="Absamat Masaliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="15519" end="15522" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="15920" end="15939" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452425" start="16114" end="16128" title="1990 Kyrgyzstan parliamentary election" label="1990 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q834792" start="16317" end="16334" title="Absamat Masaliyev" label="Absamat Masaliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508675" start="16391" end="16434" title="Leadership of Communist Kyrgyzstan" label="Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Kirghizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255654" start="16724" end="16754" title="Democratic Movement of Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="16898" end="16904" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q231987" start="16943" end="16953" title="Osh Region" label="Osh Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997012" start="17002" end="17024" title="Osh riots (1990)" label="Violent confrontations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255654" start="17133" end="17163" title="Democratic Movement of Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q489893" start="17293" end="17305" title="Askar Akayev" label="Askar Akayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q414147" start="17335" end="17354" title="Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q834792" start="17470" end="17487" title="Absamat Masaliyev" label="Absamat Masaliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="17538" end="17557" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="18030" end="18037" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18142" end="18154" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684508" start="18438" end="18463" title="State Emergency Committee" label="State Emergency Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="18481" end="18487" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="18552" end="18556" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731124" start="18613" end="18629" title="German Kuznetsov" label="German Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="18668" end="18703" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091606" start="18788" end="18802" title="Supreme Soviet" label="Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="18916" end="18935" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370087" start="19244" end="19287" title="The Hall of the Order of St. George" label="St. George Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="19288" end="19305" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="19411" end="19443" title="Treaty on the Economic Community (post-Soviet states)" label="Treaty on the Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="20119" end="20140" title="Post-Soviet countries" label="Post-Soviet countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q129985088" start="20155" end="20236" title="Succession, continuity and legacy of the Soviet Union" label="series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="20328" end="20362" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24693" start="20855" end="20875" title="Tursunbek Chyngyshev" label="Tursunbek Chyngyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q24653" start="21043" end="21058" title="Apas Djumagulov" label="Apas Djumagulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="21115" end="21125" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="21225" end="21237" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="23856" end="23860" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="25310" end="25320" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="25333" end="25339" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q484816" start="25492" end="25509" title="Kurmanbek Bakiyev" label="Kurmanbek Bakiyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452435" start="25518" end="25532" title="2005 Kyrgyz presidential election" label="10 July ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920604" start="25693" end="25704" title="prison riot" label="prison riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q283863" start="26567" end="26593" title="2009 Kyrgyz presidential election" label="2009 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="26835" end="26849" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="26854" end="26874" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="27977" end="27987" title="Jalal-Abad" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q485136" start="28112" end="28127" title="Roza Otunbayeva" label="Roza Otunbayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="28211" end="28218" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="28249" end="28269" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="President Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q24692" start="28745" end="28763" title="Almazbek Atambayev" label="Almazbek Atambayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q485136" start="28787" end="28802" title="Roza Otunbayeva" label="Roza Otunbayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888178" start="28834" end="28842" title="2011 Kyrgyz presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q346446" start="28898" end="28915" title="Adakhan Madumarov" label="Adakhan Madumarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q24582" start="28979" end="28988" title="Ata-Zhurt" label="Ata-Zhurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663713" start="29545" end="29567" title="Eurasian Customs Union" label="Eurasian Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810819" start="29920" end="29939" title="Sooronbay Jeenbekov" label="Sooronbay Jeenbekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q48730716" start="29944" end="29965" title="Inauguration of Sooronbay Jeenbekov" label="sworn in as president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804510" start="29993" end="30018" title="Ala Archa State Residence" label="Ala Archa State Residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145131" start="30104" end="30131" title="Hero of the Kyrgyz Republic" label="Hero of the Kyrgyz Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999227" start="30194" end="30207" title="List of international presidential trips made by Sooronbay Jeenbekov" label="foreign visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="30270" end="30284" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29865128" start="30332" end="30344" title="Sapar Isakov" label="Sapar Isakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q578193" start="30410" end="30425" title="Supreme Council (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579" start="30950" end="30965" title="Ömürbek Babanov" label="Ömürbek Babanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q24511" start="31247" end="31284" title="Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan" label="Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63346572" start="31605" end="31642" title="State Committee for National Security (Kyrgyzstan)" label="State Committee for National Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q77047144" start="32241" end="32263" title="October 2020 Kyrgyz parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066932" start="32454" end="32465" title="White House, Bishkek" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q578193" start="32470" end="32485" title="Supreme Council (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q24692" start="32682" end="32700" title="Almazbek Atambayev" label="Almazbek Atambayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="32727" end="32740" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Sadyr Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q96338578" start="32943" end="32959" title="Kubatbek Boronov" label="Kubatbek Boronov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597822" start="32998" end="33017" title="Myktybek Abdyldayev" label="Myktybek Abdyldayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="33107" end="33120" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Sadyr Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810819" start="33465" end="33484" title="Sooronbay Jeenbekov" label="Sooronbay Jeenbekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q578193" start="33638" end="33653" title="Supreme Council (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q84720784" start="33679" end="33693" title="Kanatbek Isaev" label="Kanatbek Isaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="33812" end="33825" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Sadyr Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q346446" start="33930" end="33947" title="Adakhan Madumarov" label="Adakhan Madumarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026024" start="33953" end="33966" title="2021 Kyrgyz presidential election" label="landslide win"/>
<link wikidata="Q105908362" start="34009" end="34034" title="2021 Kyrgyz constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="34142" end="34162" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="34170" end="34186" title="Presidential system" label="presidential one"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="34285" end="34316" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047076" start="34318" end="34342" title="Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate" label="Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34344" end="34358" title="Kyrgyz Khanate" label="Kyrgyz Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q627531" start="34360" end="34375" title="History of Asia" label="History of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635111" start="34377" end="34400" title="History of Central Asia" label="History of Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="34402" end="34429" title="History of the Soviet Union" label="History of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508675" start="34431" end="34465" title="Leadership of Communist Kyrgyzstan" label="Leadership of Communist Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276" start="34467" end="34500" title="Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154085" start="34502" end="34524" title="Politics of Kyrgyzstan" label="Politics of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q853036" start="34526" end="34549" title="President of Kyrgyzstan" label="President of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333371" start="34551" end="34579" title="Prime Minister of Kyrgyzstan" label="Prime Minister of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="34581" end="34600" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459162" start="34602" end="34618" title="Tulip Revolution" label="Tulip Revolution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16696" wikidata="Q1709473" url="?curid=16696" title="Geography of Kyrgyzstan">
<text>Kyrgyzstan is a landlocked nation in Central Asia, with an area of 199,951 km². The national territory extends about from east to west and from north to south.

Kyrgyzstan is bordered on the east and southeast by China, on the north by Kazakhstan, on the west by Uzbekistan, and on the south by Tajikistan. The borders with Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the Fergana Valley are rather complicated. One consequence of the Stalinist division of Central Asia into five republics is that many ethnic Kyrgyz people do not live in Kyrgyzstan. Three enclaves, legally part of the territory of Kyrgyzstan but geographically removed by several kilometers, have been established, two in Uzbekistan and one in Tajikistan.

The terrain of Kyrgyzstan is dominated by the Tian Shan and Pamir mountain systems, which together occupy about 65% of national territory. The Alay range portion of the Tian Shan system dominates the southwestern crescent of the country, and, to the east, the main Tian Shan range runs along the boundary between southern Kyrgyzstan and China before extending farther east into China&#x27;s Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s average elevation is , ranging from at Peak Jengish Chokusu to in the Fergana Valley near Osh. Almost 90% of the country lies more than above sea level.

==Topography and drainage==


The mountains of Kyrgyzstan are geologically young, so that the physical terrain is marked by sharply uplifted peaks separated by deep valleys. There is also considerable glaciation, with the largest glacier being the Engilchek Glacier. Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s 6,500 distinct glaciers are estimated to hold about of water and cover 8,048 square kilometers (5,000 square miles) or 4.2% of Kyrgyzstan. Only around the Chüy, Talas, and Fergana valleys is there relatively flat land suitable for large-scale agriculture.

Because the high peaks function as moisture catchers, Kyrgyzstan is relatively well watered by the streams that descend from them. None of the rivers of Kyrgyzstan are navigable, however. The majority are small, rapid, runoff streams. Most of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s rivers are tributaries of the Syr Darya, which has its headwaters in the western Tian Shan along the Chinese border. Another large runoff system forms the Chu (Chüy), which arises in northern Kyrgyzstan, then flows northwest and disappears into the deserts of southern Kazakhstan. Ysyk-Köl is the second largest body of water in Central Asia, after the Aral Sea, but the saline lake has been shrinking steadily, and its mineral content has been rising gradually. Kyrgyzstan has a total of about 2,000 lakes with a total surface area of , mostly located at altitudes of 3,000 to 4,000 meters. Only the largest three, however, occupy more than each. The second- and third-largest lakes, Song-Köl and Chatyr-Köl (the latter of which also is saline), are located in the Naryn River Basin.

Natural disasters have been frequent and varied. Overgrazing and deforestation of steep mountain slopes have increased the occurrence of mudslides and avalanches, which occasionally have swallowed entire villages. In August 1992, a severe earthquake left several thousand people homeless in the southwestern city of Jalal-Abad.

==Climate==

The country&#x27;s climate is influenced chiefly by the mountains, Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s position near the middle of the Eurasian landmass, and the absence of any body of water large enough to influence weather patterns. Those factors create a distinctly continental climate that has significant local variations. Although the mountains tend to collect clouds and block sunlight (reducing some narrow valleys at certain times of year to no more than three or four hours of sunlight per day), the country is generally sunny, receiving as much as 2,900 hours of sunlight per year in some areas. The same conditions also affect temperatures, which can vary significantly from place to place. In January the warmest average temperature () occurs around the southern city of Osh, and around Ysyk-Köl. The latter, which has a volume of , does not freeze in winter. Indeed, its name means &quot;hot lake&quot; in Kyrgyz. The coldest temperatures are in mountain valleys. There, readings can fall to or lower; the record is . The average temperature for July similarly varies from in the Fergana Valley, where the record high is , to a low of on the highest mountain peaks. Precipitation varies from per year in the mountains above the Fergana Valley to less than per year on the west bank of Ysyk-Köl.



== Climate change==
==Environmental issues==
Kyrgyzstan has been spared many of the enormous environmental problems faced by its Central Asian neighbors, primarily because its designated roles in the Soviet system involved neither heavy industry nor large-scale cotton production. Also, the economic downturn of the early 1990s reduced some of the more serious effects of industrial and agricultural policy. Nevertheless, Kyrgyzstan has serious problems because of inefficient use and pollution of water resources, land degradation, and improper agricultural practices. The country is prone to earthquakes, and major flooding occurs during the snow melt.

===Water resources===
The Kyrgyz Republic is the only Central Asian state where water resources are fully generated within its own territory. The water originates from the often glacier covered mountain ranges and its abundance is a vital component for agriculture and the production of hydro‐electric power. The mountainous Kyrgyz Republic is an essential &quot;water tower&quot; for irrigated arable farming on arid plain territories. In addition, the impressive glacierized mountain landscape implies a considerable potential for tourism.
Although Kyrgyzstan has abundant water running through it, its water supply is determined by a post-Soviet sharing agreement among the five Central Asian republics. As in the Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan has the right to 25% of the water that originates in its territory, but the new agreement allows Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan unlimited use of the water that flows into them from Kyrgyzstan, with no compensation for the nation at the source. Kyrgyzstan uses the entire amount to which the agreement entitles it, but utilization is skewed heavily in favor of agricultural irrigation. During the Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan shared their abundant water resources with Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan during summer, and these three nations shared oil and gas with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan in winter. According to the International Crisis Group, the skewed system that is currently in place could cause irreversible regional destabilization, and needs to be dealt with by international actors to avoid a crisis in Central Asia. In 1994 agriculture accounted for about 88% of total water consumption, compared with 8% by industry and 4% by municipal water distribution systems. According to World Bank experts, Kyrgyzstan has an adequate supply of high-quality water for future use, provided the resource is prudently managed. However, in Central Asia water problems are on the rise. The Kyrgyz Republic exports water to irrigate the neighbouring states Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. To prevent conflicts, water allocation and use, and in particular the role of agriculture as major water user, have become very important questions in the development discourse in recent years, and will continue to be in the future.

Irrigation is extremely wasteful of water because the distribution infrastructure is old and poorly maintained. In 1993 only an estimated 5% of required maintenance expenditures was allocated. , an estimated 70% of the nation&#x27;s water supply network is in need of repair or replacement. The quality of drinking water from this aging system is poorly monitored—the water management staff has been cut drastically because of inadequate funds. Further, there is no money to buy new water disinfection equipment when it is needed. Some aquifers near industrial and mining centers have been contaminated by heavy metals, oils, and sanitary wastes. In addition, many localities rely on surface sources, making users vulnerable to agricultural runoff and livestock waste, which seep gradually downward from the surface. The areas of lowest water quality are the heavily populated regions of the Chui Valley and Osh and Jalal-Abad Regions, and areas along the rivers flowing into Ysyk-Köl.

In towns, wastewater collection provides about 70% of the water supply. Although towns have biological treatment equipment, as much as 50% of such equipment is rated as ineffective. The major sources of toxic waste in the water supply are the mercury mining combine at Haidarkan; the antimony mine at Kadamzai; the Kadzyi Sai uranium mine, which ceased extraction in 1967 but which continues to leach toxic materials into nearby Ysyk Köl; the Kara-Balta Uranium Recovery Plant; the Min Kush deposit of mine tailings; and the Kyrgyz Mining and Metallurgy Plant at Orlovka.

===Land management===

The most important problems in land use are soil erosion and salinization in improperly irrigated farmland. An estimated 60% of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s land is affected by topsoil loss, and 6% by salinization, both problems with more serious long-term than short-term effects. In 1994 the size of livestock herds averaged twice the carrying capacity of pasturage land, continuing the serious overgrazing problem and consequent soil erosion that began when the herds were at their peak in the late 1980s. Uncertain land tenure and overall financial insecurity have caused many private farmers to concentrate their capital in the traditional form—livestock—thus subjecting new land to the overgrazing problem.

The inherent land shortage in Kyrgyzstan is exacerbated by the flooding of agricultural areas for hydroelectric projects. The creation of Toktogul Reservoir on the Naryn River, for example, involved the flooding of 130 km2 of fertile land. Such projects have the additional effect of constricting downstream water supply; Toktogul deprives the lower reaches of the Syr Darya in Uzbekistan and the Aral Sea Basin of substantial amounts of water. Because the Naryn Basin, where many hydroelectric projects are located, is very active seismically, flooding is also a danger should a dam be broken by an earthquake.

Environment - current issues: Nuclear waste left behind by the Soviet Union in many open-air pits in hazardous locations. Water pollution; many people get their water directly from contaminated streams and wells; as a result, water-borne diseases are prevalent; increasing soil salinity from faulty irrigation practices. Illegal hunting of very rare species such as the snow leopard and the Marco Polo sheep.

Environment - international agreements:
&quot;party to:&quot; Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

=== Aral Sea===

In response to the internationally recognized environmental crisis of the rapid desiccation of the Aral Sea, the five states sharing the Aral Sea Basin (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan) are developing a strategy to end the crisis. The World Bank and agencies of the United Nations (UN) have developed an Aral Sea Program, the first stage of which is funded by the five countries and external donors. That stage has seven areas of focus, one of which—land and water management in the upper watersheds—is of primary concern to Kyrgyzstan. Among the conditions detrimental to the Aral Sea&#x27;s environment are erosion from deforestation and overgrazing, contamination from poorly managed irrigation systems, and uncontrolled waste from mining and municipal effluents. Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) has addressed these problems as part of its first-phase priorities in cooperation with the Aral Sea Program.

===Environmental policy making===

The NEAP, adopted in 1994, is the basic blueprint for environmental protection. The plan focuses on solving a small number of critical problems, collecting reliable information to aid in that process, and integrating environmental measures with economic and social development strategy. The initial planning period is to end in 1997. The main targets of that phase are inefficient water resource management, land degradation, overexploitation of forest reserves, loss of biodiversity, and pollution from inefficient mining and refining practices.

Because of severe budget constraints, most of the funds for NEAP operations come from international sources, including official institutions such as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank and numerous international nongovernmental organizations. Implementation is guided by a committee of state ministers and by a NEAP Expert Working Group, both established in 1994 by executive order. A NEAP office in Bishkek was set up with funds from Switzerland.

The main environmental protection agency of the Kyrgyzstan government is the State Committee on Environmental Protection, still known by its Soviet-era acronym, Goskompriroda. Established by the old regime in 1988, the agency&#x27;s post-Soviet responsibilities have been described in a series of decrees beginning in 1991. In 1994 the state committee had a central office in Bishkek, one branch in each of the seven regions, and a total staff of about 150 persons. Because of poorly defined lines of responsibility, administrative conflicts often occur between local and national authorities of Goskompriroda and between Goskompriroda and a second national agency, the Hydrometeorological Administration (Gidromet), which is the main monitoring agency for air, water, and soil quality. In general, the vertical hierarchy structure, a relic of Soviet times, has led to poor coordination and duplication of effort among environmental protection agencies.

=== Specially protected areas ===

A number of protected nature areas have been designated by the government of the republic. As of the end of 2004, they included:
* Eight state nature reserves (zapovedniks), with the total area of 2,880 km²;
* Nine state nature national parks (2,760 km²);
* Ten forest, twenty-three floral, eighteen geological, and two general-purpose protected areas (zakazniks), as well as fourteen game reserves, with the total area of 3,250 km²;
* Lake Issyk Kul (so designated since 1998) and Sary-Chelek biosphere reserve (since 1978), together occupying the area of 282 km².

==Area and boundaries==

;Area:
:*total: 198,951 km²
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 85th
:*land: 191,801 km²
:*water: 8,150 km²

;Area — comparative:
:* Australia comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Tasmania
:* Canada comparative: slightly less than half the size of Newfoundland and Labrador
:* United Kingdom comparative: approximately 1 times the size of England
:* United States comparative: approximately the size of South Dakota
:* EU comparative: slightly less than the size of Italy

;Land boundaries:
:*total: 5,473 km
:*border countries: the People&#x27;s Republic of China 1,063 km, Kazakhstan 1,212 km, Tajikistan 984 km, Uzbekistan 1,314 km

;Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

;Elevation extremes:
:*lowest point: Kara-Darya 132 m
:*highest point: Peak Jengish Chokusu 7,439 m

==Resources and land use==
Terrain: peaks of Tian Shan and associated valleys and basins encompass entire nation

Natural resources: abundant hydropower; significant deposits of gold and rare earth metals; locally exploitable coal, petroleum, and natural gas; other deposits of nepheline, mercury, bismuth, lead, and zinc.

Land use:
&quot;arable land:&quot; 6.7%
&quot;permanent crops:&quot; 0.4%
&quot;permanent pasture:&quot; 48.3%
&quot;forest:&quot; 5.1%
&quot;other:&quot; 93.24% (2011)
&quot;note:&quot;
Kyrgyzstan has the world&#x27;s largest natural growth walnut forest, Arslanbob, located in Jalal-Abad Region with an enormous variety of different genetic characteristics. It is believed that most of the world&#x27;s walnut varieties derive from the original species still found here.

Irrigated land: 10,210 km² (2005)

Total renewable water resources: 23.62 km3 (2011)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="0" end="10" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="37" end="49" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="213" end="218" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="236" end="246" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="263" end="273" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="295" end="305" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="357" end="371" title="Fergana Valley" label="Fergana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="419" end="428" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="494" end="507" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="541" end="548" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="756" end="765" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="770" end="775" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q917817" start="853" end="863" title="Alay Mountains" label="Alay range"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="1101" end="1133" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q332762" start="1192" end="1212" title="Peak Jengish Chokusu" label="Peak Jengish Chokusu"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="1223" end="1237" title="Fergana Valley" label="Fergana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47282" start="1243" end="1246" title="Osh" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534118" start="1555" end="1572" title="Engilchek Glacier" label="Engilchek Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q286640" start="1747" end="1751" title="Chüy Valley" label="Chüy"/>
<link wikidata="Q745859" start="1753" end="1758" title="Talas Valley" label="Talas"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="1764" end="1771" title="Fergana Valley" label="Fergana"/>
<link wikidata="Q483159" start="2140" end="2149" title="Syr Darya" label="Syr Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q524206" start="2265" end="2275" title="Chu (river)" label="Chu (Chüy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42191" start="2391" end="2399" title="Issyk-Kul" label="Ysyk-Köl"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="2463" end="2471" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298945" start="2795" end="2803" title="Song-Köl" label="Song-Köl"/>
<link wikidata="Q864853" start="2808" end="2818" title="Chatyr-Köl" label="Chatyr-Köl"/>
<link wikidata="Q651195" start="2876" end="2893" title="Naryn (river)" label="Naryn River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="2945" end="2956" title="Overgrazing" label="Overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="2961" end="2974" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175768" start="3033" end="3041" title="mudslide" label="mudslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="3212" end="3222" title="Jalal-Abad" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="5047" end="5063" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="5721" end="5728" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="6169" end="6179" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="6348" end="6358" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="6402" end="6412" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="6414" end="6424" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="6430" end="6442" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072857" start="6560" end="6586" title="International Crisis Group" label="International Crisis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="6756" end="6768" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231987" start="8376" end="8379" title="Osh Region" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q487640" start="8384" end="8394" title="Jalal-Abad Region" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="8698" end="8705" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="8739" end="8747" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="8781" end="8788" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="8909" end="8916" title="Uranium" label="Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="9437" end="9448" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647779" start="9892" end="9900" title="Toktogul" label="Toktogul"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="10489" end="10504" title="Water pollution" label="Water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="10640" end="10653" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q30197" start="10737" end="10749" title="snow leopard" label="snow leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555464" start="10758" end="10774" title="Marco Polo sheep" label="Marco Polo sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="10839" end="10852" title="Air Pollution" label="Air Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="10854" end="10866" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="10868" end="10883" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="10885" end="10901" title="Hazardous Wastes" label="Hazardous Wastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="11053" end="11061" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="11609" end="11622" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="11627" end="11638" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="12385" end="12401" title="overexploitation" label="overexploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="12422" end="12442" title="Biodiversity loss" label="loss of biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034420" start="13739" end="13751" title="soil quality" label="soil quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="14099" end="14113" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484173" start="14116" end="14126" title="zapovednik" label="zapovednik"/>
<link wikidata="Q48796628" start="14166" end="14183" title="List of national parks of Kyrgyzstan" label="Nine state nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="14184" end="14197" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212557" start="14309" end="14317" title="zakaznik" label="zakaznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714375" start="14341" end="14353" title="game reserve" label="game reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q42191" start="14397" end="14406" title="Issyk Kul" label="Issyk Kul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408855" start="14438" end="14449" title="Sary-Chelek Nature Reserve" label="Sary-Chelek"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="14450" end="14467" title="biosphere reserve" label="biosphere reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="14753" end="14761" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="14821" end="14846" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="14912" end="14919" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="14976" end="14988" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="14992" end="14994" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="15039" end="15044" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15106" end="15137" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="15148" end="15158" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="15169" end="15179" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="15188" end="15198" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155298" start="15277" end="15287" title="Kara-Darya" label="Kara-Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q332762" start="15311" end="15331" title="Peak Jengish Chokusu" label="Peak Jengish Chokusu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="15386" end="15395" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="15483" end="15493" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="15519" end="15523" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="15567" end="15571" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="15573" end="15582" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="15588" end="15599" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q407339" start="15619" end="15628" title="nepheline" label="nepheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="15630" end="15637" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="15639" end="15646" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="15648" end="15652" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="15658" end="15662" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="15907" end="15913" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q965900" start="15922" end="15931" title="Arslanbob" label="Arslanbob"/>
<link wikidata="Q487640" start="15944" end="15961" title="Jalal-Abad Region" label="Jalal-Abad Region"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16697" wikidata="Q2468943" url="?curid=16697" title="Demographics of Kyrgyzstan">
<text>The Demographics of Kyrgyzstan is about the demographic features of the population of Kyrgyzstan, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. The name Kyrgyz, both for the people and the country, means &quot;forty tribes&quot;, a reference to the epic hero Manas who unified forty tribes against the Oirats, as symbolized by the 40-ray sun on the flag of Kyrgyzstan.

==Overview==
Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s population increased from 2.1 million to 4.8 million between the censuses of 1959 and 1999. Official estimates set the population at 6,389,500 in 2019. Of those, 34.4% are under the age of 15 and 6.2% are over the age of 65. The country is rural: only about one-third of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s population live in urban areas. The average population density is .

The nation&#x27;s largest ethnic group are the Kyrgyz, a Turkic people, which comprise 73.2% of the population (2018 census). Other ethnic groups include Russians (5.8%) concentrated in the north and Uzbeks (14.5%) living in the south. Small but noticeable minorities include Dungans (1.1%), Uyghurs (1.1%), Tajiks (0.9%), Kazakhs (0.7%) and Ukrainians (0.5%), and other smaller ethnic minorities (1.7%). Of the formerly sizable Volga German community, exiled here by Joseph Stalin from their earlier homes in the Volga German Republic, most have returned to Germany, and only a few small groups remain. A small percentage of the population are also Koreans, who are the descendants of the Koreans deported in 1937 from the Soviet Far East to Central Asia.

Kyrgyzstan has undergone a pronounced change in its ethnic composition since independence. The percentage of ethnic Kyrgyz increased from around 50% in 1979 to nearly 73% in 2018, while the percentage of Slavic ethnic groups (Russians, Ukrainians) dropped from 35% to about 6%.

The Kyrgyz have historically been semi-nomadic herders, living in round tents called yurts and tending sheep, horses and yaks. This nomadic tradition continues to function seasonally (see transhumance) as herding families return to the high mountain pasture (or &quot;jailoo&quot;) in the summer. The retention of this nomadic heritage and the freedoms that it implies continue to affect the political atmosphere in the country.
==Population size and structure==
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Data refer to annual average population.):


==Vital statistics==

===Registered births and deaths===

Statistics are taken from the United Nations Demographic Yearbook, the National Statistical Committee of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the Demographic Annual of the Kyrgyz Republic, and Demoskop Weekly.
====Current vital statistics====


===Total fertility rate===

During the Soviet era, fertility in Kyrgyzstan was high (TFR 4 or higher). After the independence there was a fast decrease to 2.4 in the beginning of the 21st century, but the TFR increased to 3 or higher as of 2010. Since 2020, there is a decrease to 2.8 in 2022.

The differences in the number of children by nationality are significant: Uzbeks (3.0 children), Tajiks (3.0 children), Turks (2.9), Kyrgyz (2.9), Dungans (2.8) Russians (1.7), Koreans (1.7), Germans (1.8), Ukrainians (2.1), Tatars (2.1), Kazakhs (2.3) and Uyghurs (2.5). The TFR for Russians, Ukrainians, Germans, and Koreans in Kyrgyzstan are considerably higher than in their home countries.

===Life expectancy===

==Ethnic groups==
According to the 2022 census, the ethnic composition of the population was as follows: Kyrgyz 77.6%, Uzbeks 14.2%, Russians 4.1%, Dungans 1.0%, Uyghurs 0.5%, other 2.7%, including Tajiks 0.9%, Kazakhs 0.4% and Turks 0.3%. Most Russians, Ukrainians, Tatars, Germans, and Koreans lived in northeast, especially around the city of Karakol. Most of the Dungans and Uyghurs are found along the Chinese border. Most of the Tajiks and Uzbeks live in and around Fergana valley. 

The emigration of non-Turkic people to Russia, Ukraine, and Germany is now negligible, in part because most of them left prior to 1999. For example, the number of Germans has fallen by over 90% between the 1989 and 2009 censuses.

The table shows the ethnic composition of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s population according to all population censuses between 1926 and 2022. Due to emigration (and low fertility rates), there has been a sharp decline in the European ethnic groups (Russians, Ukrainians, Germans) and also Tatars since independence (as captured in the 1989, 1999, 2009 and 2022 censuses).

==Languages==
Languages spoken at home in Kygyzstan according to World Values Survey in 2020:
*Kyrgyz 70.9%
*Russian 16.3%
*Uzbek 10.7%
*others 2.1% (2020)
In the capital city Bishkek; 55.6% of the population speaks Russian at home, whereas Kyrgyz is the second with 43.6% according to the same survey.

==Religion==
Sunni Islam is the predominant religious denomination in Kyrgyzstan. The country has a significant Christian minority which Russian Orthodox is the main denomination.
*Islam 90%
*Christianity 7%
*others 3% (2021)

==See also==

*Demography of Central Asia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2468943" start="4" end="30" title="Demographics of Kyrgyzstan" label="Demographics of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="44" end="55" title="demographics" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="72" end="82" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="86" end="96" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="127" end="145" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="147" end="156" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q279714" start="200" end="222" title="Religion in Kyrgyzstan" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="270" end="276" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371977" start="321" end="345" title="List of country name etymologies" label="&amp;quot;forty tribes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q690174" start="376" end="381" title="Epic of Manas" label="Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="419" end="425" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q165641" start="466" end="484" title="flag of Kyrgyzstan" label="flag of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="758" end="763" title="rural" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="851" end="869" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="902" end="914" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="923" end="929" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="933" end="939" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="1030" end="1038" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="1076" end="1082" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="1152" end="1159" title="Dungans" label="Dungans"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="1168" end="1175" title="Uyghur people" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="1184" end="1190" title="Tājik people" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="1199" end="1206" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="1218" end="1228" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q312574" start="1305" end="1317" title="Volga German" label="Volga German"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="1344" end="1357" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157261" start="1390" end="1411" title="Volga German Republic" label="Volga German Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1435" end="1442" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q711083" start="1526" end="1533" title="Koryo-saram" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q716521" start="1574" end="1582" title="Deportation of Koreans in the Soviet Union" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="1600" end="1615" title="Russian Far East" label="Soviet Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="1952" end="1957" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="1998" end="2002" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="2016" end="2021" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="2023" end="2028" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="2034" end="2037" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657754" start="2101" end="2113" title="transhumance" label="transhumance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="3141" end="3146" title="Uzbek people" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="3164" end="3169" title="Tajik people" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855515" start="3187" end="3192" title="Turks in Kyrgyzstan" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="3200" end="3206" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="3214" end="3221" title="Dungans" label="Dungans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3228" end="3236" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="3244" end="3251" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="3259" end="3266" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="3274" end="3284" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="3292" end="3298" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="3306" end="3313" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="3324" end="3330" title="Uyghur people" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="3591" end="3597" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="3605" end="3611" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3619" end="3627" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="3634" end="3641" title="Dungan people" label="Dungans"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="3648" end="3655" title="Uyghur people" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="3684" end="3690" title="Tajiks" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="3697" end="3704" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855515" start="3714" end="3719" title="Turks in Kyrgyzstan" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194452" start="3832" end="3839" title="Karakol" label="Karakol"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="3853" end="3860" title="Dungan people" label="Dungans"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="3865" end="3872" title="Uyghur people" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="3921" end="3927" title="Tājik people" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="3932" end="3938" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4015" end="4021" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="4023" end="4030" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4036" end="4043" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316242" start="4634" end="4653" title="World Values Survey" label="World Values Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="4664" end="4670" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="4678" end="4685" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="4693" end="4698" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724894" start="4706" end="4712" title="Languages of Kyrgyzstan" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="4745" end="4752" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="4785" end="4792" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="4810" end="4816" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="4886" end="4897" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="4985" end="4994" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="5010" end="5026" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976612" start="5054" end="5059" title="Islam in Kyrgyzstan" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="5065" end="5077" title="Russian Orthodox" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q279714" start="5082" end="5088" title="Religion in Kyrgyzstan" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256126" start="5115" end="5141" title="Demography of Central Asia" label="Demography of Central Asia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16698" wikidata="Q1154085" url="?curid=16698" title="Politics of Kyrgyzstan">
<text>The politics of Kyrgyzstan, officially known as the Kyrgyz Republic, takes place in the framework of a presidential system representative democratic republic, whereby the President is head of state and the Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers is head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. 

Unlike its authoritarian neighbors – Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan – Kyrgyzstan has had a more pluralistic political system since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Kyrgyzstan has swung between authoritarian and democratic forms of government. Three authoritarian presidents have been ousted from office since 2005 due to popular protests.

==Political history==
In the first years of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s full independence, President Askar Akayev appeared wholeheartedly committed to the reform process. However, despite the backing of major Western donors, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Kyrgyzstan had consequential economic difficulties from the outset. These came mainly as a result of the breakup of the Soviet trade bloc, which impeded the Republic&#x27;s smooth transfer to a free-market economy.

In 1993, allegations of corruption against Akayev&#x27;s closest political associates blossomed into a major scandal. One of those accused of improprieties was Vice President Feliks Kulov, who resigned for ethical reasons in December. Following Kulov&#x27;s resignation, Akayev dismissed the government and called upon the last communist premier, Apas Djumagulov, to form a new one. In January 1994, Akayev initiated a referendum asking for a renewed mandate to complete his term of office. He received 96.2% of the vote.

A new Constitution was passed by the Parliament in May 1993. In 1994, however, the Parliament failed to produce a quorum for its last scheduled session prior to the expiration of its term (February 1995). President Akayev was widely accused of having manipulated a boycott by a majority of the parliamentarians. Akayev, in turn, asserted that the communists had caused a political crisis by preventing the legislature from fulfilling its role. Akayev scheduled an October 1994 referendum, overwhelmingly approved by voters, that proposed two amendments to the Constitution, one that would allow the Constitution to be amended by means of a referendum, and the other creating a new bicameral parliament called the &quot;Jogorku Keņesh&quot;.

Elections for the two legislative chambers – a 35-seat full-time assembly and a 70-seat part-time assembly – were held in February 1995 after campaigns considered remarkably free and open by most international observers, although the election-day proceedings were marred by widespread irregularities. Independent candidates won most of the seats, suggesting that personalities prevailed over ideologies. The new Parliament convened its initial session in March 1995. One of its first orders of business was the approval of the precise constitutional language on the role of the legislature.

Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s independent political parties competed in the 1996 parliamentary elections. A February 1996 referendum – in violation of the Constitution and the law on referendums – amended the Constitution to give President Akayev more power. It also removed the clause that parliamentarians be directly elected by universal suffrage. Although the changes gave the President the power to dissolve Parliament, it also more clearly defined Parliament&#x27;s powers. Since that time, Parliament has demonstrated real independence from the executive branch.

An October 1998 referendum approved constitutional changes, including increasing the number of deputies in the upper house, reducing the number of deputies in the lower house, rolling back Parliamentary immunity, reforming land tender rules, and reforming the state budget.

Two rounds of Parliamentary elections were held on 20 February 2000 and 12 March 2000. With the full backing of the United States, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the elections failed to comply with commitments to free and fair elections and hence were invalid. Questionable judicial proceedings against opposition candidates and parties limited the choice of candidates available to Kyrgyz voters, while state-controlled media reported favorably on official candidates only and government officials put pressure on independent media outlets that favored the opposition.

In 2002 Azimbek Beknazarov, a leading opposition figure, was imprisoned by the local authorities, in what many believe to be politically motivated circumstances. This led to protests resulting in clashes with police forces, culminating in the death of five people in Jalal-Abad.

As May approached the authorities further extended their hold on power, imprisoning the vocal former presidential ally, Feliks Kulov, to ten years for alleged &quot;abuses of office&quot;. During the same month the entire government resigned, accepting blame for the loss of life during the protests earlier in the year. A new government led by Nikolay Tanayev was then formed.

In November the President faced yet more protests, as the opposition announced it would march on the capital and demand his resignation. The police reacted by arresting large amounts of demonstrators, further adding to international disapproval at the authoritarian nature of Akayev&#x27;s government.
By June 2003, the lower house of Parliament announced that President Akayev and two other leaders of Kyrgyzstan, from the Soviet era, would be given lifetime immunity from prosecution, raising the prospect of Akayev finally stepping down.

In 2005, following disputed results of the 2005 parliamentary elections, Kyrgyzstan was thrown into a state of political turmoil, with different parties claiming that they were the legitimate government. On 10 July 2005 interim President and opposition People&#x27;s Movement leader Kurmanbek Bakiyev won the presidential election in a landslide victory. (See: Tulip Revolution).

In 2006, Bakiyev faced a political crisis as thousands of people demonstrated in a series of protests in Bishkek. They accused him of reneging on promised constitutional reforms limiting presidential power and giving more authority to the parliament and cabinet. They also accused him of failing to eradicate corruption, crime, and poverty. Bakiyev in turn accused the opposition of plotting a coup against him. Several parliamentarians had been killed during the political unrest.

Presidential elections, originally expected in 2010, were rescheduled for 23 July 2009. President Bakiyev was widely expected to retain his mandate, while the opposition United People&#x27;s Movement (OND) announced on 20 April 2009 that it would field a single candidate – Social Democratic Party leader Almaz Atambayev. The election turnout was reported at 79.3%. As of 00:45 local time in Kyrgyzstan on 25 July 2009 (with 2058 of 2330 polling districts reporting), Bakiyev had won the election with 83.8% of the vote.

In assessing the election, the OSCE stated that Bakiyev had gained an &quot;unfair advantage&quot; and that media bias &quot;did not allow voters to make an informed choice.&quot; Additionally, they found that the election was &quot;marred by many problems and irregularities&quot;, citing ballot stuffing and problems with the counting of votes. On polling day Atambayev withdrew his candidacy claiming widespread fraud, stating &quot;due to massive, unprecedented violations, we consider these elections illegitimate and a new election should be held.&quot; An opposition rally of 1,000 people in Balykchy on election day was broken up by riot police.

The arrest of an opposition figure on 6 April 2010 in the town of Talas led opposition supporters to protest. The protestors took control of a governmental building, demanding a new government. Riot police were sent from Bishkek, and managed to temporarily regain control of the building. Later the same day several more opposition figures were arrested, while the government claimed to have regained control of the situation. The following day, however, hundreds of opposition supporters gathered in Bishkek and marched on the government headquarters. Security personnel attempted to disperse the protestors with the use of stun grenades and live rounds, at the cost of dozens of lives. The protests continued, however, resulting in the flight of President Bakiyev to his southern stronghold of Jalal-Abad, and the freeing later the same day of the arrested opposition figures. A new government was formed under opposition leader Roza Otunbayeva, while Bakiyev remained for several days in southern Kyrgyzstan, before fleeing to Belarus, where he was given asylum by President Lukashenko. The new interim government held consultations on a new constitution, intended to increase the powers of the parliament and reduce those of the president. A referendum was held on the resulting document on 27 June 2010, and was approved by over 90% of voters, with a turnout of 72%. Elections were subsequently held on 10 October 2010. These elections resulted in five parties reaching the 5% threshold necessary to enter parliament.

Presidential elections were held in 2011, resulting in the victory of Almazbek Atambayev. In 2017, he endorsed Prime minister Sooronbay Jeenbekov for president, who won that year&#x27;s presidential contest. After Atambayev retired from presidency, he began criticizing Jeenbekov and their relations worsened over time. Soon Atambayev was accused of corruption by the Jeenbekov administration. Clashes grew between security forces and Atambayev supporters, exacerbating political turmoil. Political insurgency in Kyrgyzstan amplified following controversy about the conduct of October 2020 Kyrgyz parliamentary election, where only four parties met the 7% threshold to achieve parliamentary representation, three of whom were closely aligned with the government. Opposition supporters claimed that these elections were tainted by vote buying and many other forms of irregularities. The protests resulted in en masse resignation of government officials. In October 2020, President Sooronbay Jeenbekov resigned after protests caused by irregularities in parliamentary elections on 4 October 2020. In January 2021, Sadyr Japarov was elected as the new president after winning the presidential election by landslide.

In April 2021, the majority of voters approved in the constitutional referendum a new constitution that would give new powers to the president, strengthening significantly the presidency.

==Executive branch==

|President
|Sadyr Japarov
|Mekenchil
|28 January 2021
|Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers
|Adylbek Kasymaliev
|Ar-Namys
|12 October 2021

The president is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two five-year terms. The chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers is appointed by the president and approved by the Supreme Council.

===Cabinet of Ministers===

====Akylbek Japarov Government====
Since 13 October 2021:

*Chairman of the cabinet of ministers – Akylbek Japarov
**First Deputy Chairman – Arzybek Kojoshev
**Deputy Chairman – Edil Baisalov
**Deputy Chairman – Bakyt Torobaev
**Deputy Chairman, Head of SCNS – Kamchybek Tashiev
*Minister of Foreign Affairs – Jeenbek Kulubaev
*Minister of Agriculture – Askar Janybekov
*Minister of Digital Development – Talantbek Imanov
*Minister of the Economy – Daniyar Amangeldiev
*Minister of Education and Science – Almazbek Beishenaliev
*Minister of Emergency Situations – Boobek Ajikeev
*Minister of Culture, Information and Tourism – Azamat Jamankulov
*Minister of Finance – Almaz Baketaev
*Minister of Health Care – Jarkynbek Kasymbekov
*Minister of Internal Affairs – Ulan Niyazbekov
*Minister of Justice – Ayaz Baetov
*Minister of Transport and Communication – Erkinbek Osoev
*Minister of Energy – Doskul Bekmurzaev
*Minister of Labor, Welfare and Migration – Kudaibergen Bazarbaev
*Minister of Defence – Baktybek Bekbolotov
*Minister of Natural Resources, Environment and Technical Supervision – Dinara Kutmanova

==Legislative branch==

In the Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan had a unicameral legislature which was replaced in 1995 by the bicameral Supreme Council (&quot;Joghorku Keneš&quot;). The Supreme Council consisted of the Assembly of People&#x27;s Representatives (45 seats; members were elected by popular vote from single member constituencies) and the Legislative Assembly (60 seats; 45 members of which were elected by popular vote from single member constituencies, and 15 of which were from national party lists on a proportional basis with a 5% threshold). All legislative terms were five years.

In 2005, as part of the 2005 election process and in accordance with a 2003 referendum, the Parliament again became unicameral. The Legislative Assembly (&quot;Myizam Chygaruu Jyiyny&quot;) had 75 members, elected for five-year terms from single-seat constituencies.

However, because of the political unrest, a new constitutional referendum was held on 21 October 2007 which approved a new electoral system, enlarged the parliament to 90 members and introducing party-list voting. Party-list voting is a proportional representation system of voting, where candidates are selected from central party lists rather than locally elected. Early parliamentary elections were held on 16 December 2007.

==Political parties and elections==
===2021 presidential election===
===2020 parliamentary elections===
==Political pressure groups and leaders==
* Council of Free Trade Unions
* Kyrgyz Committee on Human Rights – Ramazan Dyryldayev
* National Unity Democratic Movement
* Union of Entrepreneurs
* Central Asian Free Market Institute
* Kyrgyz Choroloru Movement

==Judicial branch==

Although the constitution provides for an independent judiciary, Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s court system is widely seen as under the influence of the prosecutor&#x27;s office. Low salaries make the bribery of judges commonplace. Most cases originate in local courts; they then can move via the appeals process to municipal or regional courts, with the Supreme Court the final court of appeals. Property and family law disputes and low-level criminal cases are heard by traditional elders&#x27; courts, which are loosely supervised by the prosecutor&#x27;s office. Economic disputes and military cases are heard in specialized courts. The constitutional amendments of 2003 expanded the scope of the Supreme Court in civil, criminal, and administrative proceedings. Many protections of Western jurisprudence are not present in Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s system, which retains many features of the Soviet system. The right to counsel and the presumption of innocence of the accused are guaranteed by law but often not practiced. There is no trial by jury. Reform legislation under consideration in 2006 would establish a jury system and bolster the independence of the judicial branch.

The Prosecutor General&#x27;s Office of Kyrgyzstan oversees the enforcement of the Kyrgyz legal system and the activities of law enforcement agencies and the sentencing of criminals in concert with the judiciary.

==Administrative divisions==
Kyrgyzstan is divided into seven Regions (oblustar, singular – oblus) and two region-level cities* (shaar):
* Batken Region (Batken)
* Bishkek*
* Chüy Region (Bishkek)
* Issyk-Kul Region (Karakol)
* Jalal-Abad Region (Jalal-Abad)
* Naryn Region (Naryn)
* Osh*
* Osh Region (Osh)
* Talas Region (Talas)
&quot;note:&quot; administrative center names in parentheses

==International organization participation==
*AsDB
*CIS
*EAPC
*EBRD
*ECO
*FAO
*IBRD
*ICAO
*ICCt (signatory)
*ICRM
*IDA
*IDB 
*IFAD
*IFC
*IFRCS
*ILO
*IMF
*INOGATE
*Interpol
*IOC
*IOM
*ISO (correspondent)
*ITU
*NAM (observer)
*OIC
*OPCW
*OSCE 
*PCA
*PFP
*SCO
*UN
*UNAMSIL
*UNCTAD (UNECE)
*United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
*UNESCO
*UNIDO
*UNMIK
*UPU
*WCO
*WFTU
*WHO
*WIPO
*WMO
*WToO
*WTO
*UNICEF

==Notes==


==External links==
*Erik Herron&#x27;s Guide to Politics in East Central Europe and Eurasia 
*Government of Kyrgyz Republic </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154085" start="4" end="26" title="Politics of Kyrgyzstan" label="politics of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="52" end="67" title="Kyrgyz Republic" label="Kyrgyz Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="103" end="122" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="123" end="148" title="representative democratic" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853036" start="171" end="180" title="President of Kyrgyzstan" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="184" end="197" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333371" start="206" end="242" title="Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers of Kyrgyzstan" label="Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="246" end="264" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="266" end="281" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="314" end="331" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="420" end="430" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="432" end="442" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="444" end="456" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="462" end="472" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="790" end="800" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q489893" start="837" end="849" title="Askar Akayev" label="Askar Akayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="975" end="1002" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1130" end="1136" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="1204" end="1215" title="Free market" label="free-market"/>
<link wikidata="Q457980" start="1401" end="1413" title="Feliks Kulov" label="Feliks Kulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q24653" start="1573" end="1588" title="Apas Djumagulov" label="Apas Djumagulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011916" start="1755" end="1767" title="Constitution of Kyrgyzstan" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="1863" end="1869" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q578193" start="2468" end="2482" title="Jogorku Keņesh" label="Jogorku Keņesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="4052" end="4104" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4543" end="4561" title="Azimbek Beknazarov" label="Azimbek Beknazarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="4802" end="4812" title="Jalal-Abad, Kyrgyzstan" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q457980" start="4935" end="4947" title="Feliks Kulov" label="Feliks Kulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q24671" start="5160" end="5175" title="Nikolay Tanayev" label="Nikolay Tanayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q384537" start="5779" end="5807" title="Kyrgyz parliamentary elections, 2005" label="2005 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165632" start="5989" end="6011" title="People&amp;#x27;s Movement of Kyrgyzstan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q484816" start="6019" end="6036" title="Kurmanbek Bakiyev" label="Kurmanbek Bakiyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452435" start="6045" end="6066" title="Kyrgyz presidential election, 2005" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="6072" end="6089" title="landslide victory" label="landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q459162" start="6097" end="6113" title="Tulip Revolution" label="Tulip Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="6222" end="6229" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q283863" start="6600" end="6622" title="Kyrgyzstani presidential election, 2009" label="Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889039" start="6770" end="6799" title="United People&amp;#x27;s Movement (Kyrgyzstan)" label="United People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q24511" start="6874" end="6897" title="Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24692" start="6905" end="6920" title="Almaz Atambayev" label="Almaz Atambayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="7412" end="7427" title="ballot stuffing" label="ballot stuffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q485136" start="8708" end="8723" title="Roza Otunbayeva" label="Roza Otunbayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="8807" end="8814" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="8845" end="8865" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="President Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q24692" start="9371" end="9389" title="Almazbek Atambayev" label="Almazbek Atambayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810819" start="9427" end="9446" title="Sooronbay Jeenbekov" label="Sooronbay Jeenbekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q77047144" start="9878" end="9920" title="October 2020 Kyrgyz parliamentary election" label="October 2020 Kyrgyz parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="10413" end="10426" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Sadyr Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026024" start="10478" end="10499" title="2021 Kyrgyz presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q105908362" start="10569" end="10594" title="2021 Kyrgyz constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q853036" start="10727" end="10736" title="President of Kyrgyzstan" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="10738" end="10751" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Sadyr Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778590" start="10753" end="10762" title="Mekenchil" label="Mekenchil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333371" start="10781" end="10817" title="Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers of Kyrgyzstan" label="Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q112703041" start="10819" end="10837" title="Adylbek Kasymaliev" label="Adylbek Kasymaliev"/>
<link wikidata="Q623457" start="10839" end="10847" title="Ar-Namys" label="Ar-Namys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333371" start="11142" end="11178" title="Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers of Kyrgyzstan" label="Chairman of the cabinet of ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060344" start="11181" end="11196" title="Akylbek Japarov" label="Akylbek Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744690" start="11260" end="11273" title="Edil Baisalov" label="Edil Baisalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q38459236" start="11294" end="11308" title="Bakyt Torobayev" label="Bakyt Torobaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q63346572" start="11336" end="11340" title="State Committee for National Security (Kyrgyzstan)" label="SCNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584976" start="11343" end="11360" title="Kamchybek Tashiev" label="Kamchybek Tashiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867013" start="11362" end="11389" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742776" start="11410" end="11433" title="Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration (Kyrgyz Republic)" label="Minister of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452372" start="11611" end="11643" title="Kyrgyzstan Emergency Situations Ministry" label="Minister of Emergency Situations"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743000" start="11662" end="11706" title="Ministry of Culture, Information and Tourism (Kyrgyz Republic)" label="Minister of Culture, Information and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294298" start="11814" end="11842" title="Ministry of the Interior (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Minister of Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="12310" end="12319" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="12512" end="12526" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052974" start="13420" end="13449" title="Kyrgyzstani parliamentary election, 2007" label="Early parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13630" end="13658" title="Council of Free Trade Unions" label="Council of Free Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375748" start="13681" end="13693" title="Human rights in Kyrgyzstan" label="Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13696" end="13714" title="Ramazan Dyryldayev" label="Ramazan Dyryldayev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13717" end="13751" title="National Unity Democratic Movement" label="National Unity Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13754" end="13776" title="Union of Entrepreneurs" label="Union of Entrepreneurs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13779" end="13814" title="Central Asian Free Market Institute" label="Central Asian Free Market Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259592" start="13817" end="13842" title="Kyrgyz Choroloru Movement" label="Kyrgyz Choroloru Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="14054" end="14061" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380446" start="15035" end="15081" title="Prosecutor General&amp;#x27;s Office of Kyrgyzstan" label="Prosecutor General&amp;#x27;s Office of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q487631" start="15384" end="15397" title="Batken Region" label="Batken Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q478031" start="15399" end="15405" title="Batken" label="Batken"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="15409" end="15416" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q486370" start="15420" end="15431" title="Chüy Region" label="Chüy Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q487413" start="15444" end="15460" title="Issyk-Kul Region" label="Issyk-Kul Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q194452" start="15462" end="15469" title="Karakol" label="Karakol"/>
<link wikidata="Q487640" start="15473" end="15490" title="Jalal-Abad Region" label="Jalal-Abad Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="15492" end="15502" title="Jalal-Abad, Kyrgyzstan" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q486375" start="15506" end="15518" title="Naryn Region" label="Naryn Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q311946" start="15520" end="15525" title="Naryn" label="Naryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47282" start="15529" end="15532" title="Osh" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q231987" start="15536" end="15546" title="Osh Region" label="Osh Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q47282" start="15548" end="15551" title="Osh" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q109838" start="15555" end="15567" title="Talas Region" label="Talas Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q643955" start="15569" end="15574" title="Talas, Kyrgyzstan" label="Talas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="15684" end="15688" title="Asian Development Bank" label="AsDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="15690" end="15693" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="15695" end="15699" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="EAPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="15701" end="15705" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q225950" start="15707" end="15710" title="Economic Cooperation Organization" label="ECO"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="15712" end="15715" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="15717" end="15721" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="15723" end="15727" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="15729" end="15733" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="15747" end="15751" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="15753" end="15756" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41230" start="15758" end="15761" title="Islamic Development Bank" label="IDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="15764" end="15768" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="15770" end="15773" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="15775" end="15780" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="15782" end="15785" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="15787" end="15790" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459896" start="15792" end="15799" title="INOGATE" label="INOGATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="15801" end="15809" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="15811" end="15814" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="15816" end="15819" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="15821" end="15824" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="15842" end="15845" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="15847" end="15850" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="15863" end="15866" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="15868" end="15872" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="15874" end="15878" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="15881" end="15884" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="15886" end="15889" title="Partnership for Peace" label="PFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="15891" end="15894" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="SCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="15900" end="15907" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="15909" end="15915" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="15972" end="15978" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="15980" end="15985" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="15987" end="15992" title="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" label="UNMIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="15994" end="15997" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="15999" end="16002" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="16004" end="16008" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="WFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="16010" end="16013" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="16015" end="16019" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="16021" end="16024" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="16026" end="16030" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="16032" end="16035" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="16037" end="16043" title="United Nations Children&amp;#x27;s Fund" label="UNICEF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16699" wikidata="Q988196" url="?curid=16699" title="Economy of Kyrgyzstan">
<text>The economy of Kyrgyzstan is heavily dependent on the agricultural sector. Cotton, tobacco, wool, and meat are the main agricultural products, although only tobacco and cotton are exported in any quantity. According to Healy Consultants, Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s economy relies heavily on the strength of industrial exports, with plentiful reserves of gold, mercury and uranium. The economy also relies heavily on remittances from foreign workers. Following independence, Kyrgyzstan was progressive in carrying out market reforms, such as an improved regulatory system and land reform. In 1998, Kyrgyzstan was the first Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) country to be accepted into the World Trade Organization. Much of the government&#x27;s stock in enterprises has been sold. Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s economic performance has been hindered by widespread corruption, low foreign investment and general regional instability. Despite those issues, Kyrgyzstan is ranked 70th (as of 2019) on the ease of doing business index.

==Finance==
In October 2012, the International reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity of Kyrgyzstan National Bank reached US$1.96 bln, 8.6% of which is in gold. In 2012, to diversify the assets of Kyrgyzstan, the basket of currencies has been expanded by means of the Chinese yuan and the Singapore dollar. In 2012, 1 billion soms are to be spent for the purchase of gold. Gold proportion in international reserves has already grown to 8.6%. The National Bank plans to increase it to 12-15% in future.

==Industries==

===Agriculture===
Agriculture remains a vital part of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s economy and a refuge for workers displaced from industry. Subsistence farming has increased in the early 2000s. After sharp reductions in the early 1990s, by the early 2000s agricultural production was approaching 1991 levels. Grain production in the lower valleys and livestock grazing on upland pastures occupy the largest share of the agricultural workforce. Farmers are shifting to grain and away from cotton and tobacco. Other important products are dairy products, hay, animal feed, potatoes, vegetables, and sugar beets. Agricultural output comes from private household plots (55 percent of the total), private farms (40 percent), and state farms (5 percent). Further expansion of the sector depends on banking reform to increase investment, and on market reform to streamline the distribution of inputs. Land reform, a controversial issue in Kyrgyzstan, has proceeded very slowly since initial legislation in 1998. The irrigation infrastructure is in poor condition. Agriculture contributes about one-third of the GDP and more than one-third of employment.

Kyrgyzstan produced in 2018:

* 1.4 million tons of potato;
* 773 thousand tons of sugar beet;
* 692 thousand tons of maize;
* 615 thousand tons of wheat;
* 429 thousand tons of barley;
* 224 thousand tons of tomato;
* 218 thousand tons of watermelon;
* 209 thousand tons of onion;
* 176 thousand tons of carrot;
* 147 thousand tons of cabbage;
* 144 thousand tons of apple;
* 119 thousand tons of cucumber;
* 116 thousand tons of vegetable;
* 101 thousand tons of bean;
* 74 thousand tons of cotton;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like apricot (25 thousand tons).

===Forestry===
Only 4 percent of Kyrgyzstan is classified as forested. All of that area is state-owned, and none is classified as available for wood supply. The main commercial product of the forests is walnuts.

===Fishing===
Kyrgyzstan does not have a significant fishing industry. In 2002 aquaculture contributed 66 percent of the country&#x27;s total output of 142 metric tons of fish, but in 2003 the aquaculture industry collapsed, producing only 12 of the country&#x27;s total of 26 metric tons.

===Mining and minerals===
In the post-Soviet era, mining has been an increasingly important economic activity. The Kumtor Gold Mine, which opened in 1997, is one of the largest gold deposits in the world. New gold mines are planned at Jerooy and Taldy–Bulak, and a major gold discovery was announced in late 2006 at Tokhtonysay. The state agency Kyrgyzaltyn owns all mines, many of which are operated as joint ventures with foreign companies. Uranium and antimony, important mineral outputs of the Soviet era, no longer are produced in significant amounts. Although between 1992 and 2003 coal output dropped from about 2.4 million tons to 411,000 tons, the government plans to increase exploitation of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s considerable remaining deposits (estimated at 2.5 billion tons) in order to reduce dependency on foreign energy sources. A particular target of this policy is the Kara–Keche deposit in northern Kyrgyzstan, whose annual output capability is estimated at between 500,000 and 1 million tons. The small domestic output of oil and natural gas does not meet national needs.

===Industry and manufacturing===
In the post-Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s industries suffered sharp reductions in productivity because the supply of raw materials and fuels was disrupted, and Soviet markets disappeared. The sector has not recovered appreciably from that reduction; if gold production is not counted, in 2005 industry contributed only 14 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP). Investment and restructuring have remained at low levels, and the electricity industry (traditionally an important part of industry&#x27;s contribution to GDP) has stagnated in recent years. Government support is moving away from the machine industries, which were a major contributor to the Soviet economy, toward clothing and textiles. Food processing accounted for 10 to 15 percent of industrial production until encountering a slump in 2004. In recent years, the glass industry has surpassed clothing and textiles in investment received and as a contributor to GDP. In the early 2000s, the construction industry has grown steadily because of large infrastructure projects such as highways and new gold mines. Housing construction, however, has lagged because of low investment.

===Energy===
More than ninety percent of electricity produced is hydroelectric and the country could produce much more of such clean energy and export to its neighbors and the region. Even though Kyrgyzstan has abundant hydro resources, only less than ten percent of its potential has been developed so far. It has limited deposits of fossil fuels and most of its natural gas imports come from Uzbekistan, with which Kyrgyzstan has had a series of imperfect barter agreements. Per capita energy consumption is high considering average income, and the government has no comprehensive plan to reduce demand. Up to 45 percent of electricity generated, especially in winter time, is diverted illegally or leaks from the distribution system. Hydroelectric plants generate some 92.5 percent of domestically consumed electricity, and three commercial thermoelectric plants are in operation. Because of its rich supply of hydroelectric power, Kyrgyzstan sends electricity to Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan in return for fossil fuels. A new hydroelectric plant on the Naryn River at Kambar–Ata would supply power to parts of China and Russia, improving Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s export situation and domestic energy supply. The plant was completed on August 30, 2010. An antiquated infrastructure and poor management make Kyrgyzstan more dependent on foreign energy in winter when water levels are low. In the early 2000s, Kyrgyzstan was exploiting only an estimated 10 percent of its hydroelectric power potential. In 2001 Kyrgyzstan had about 70,000 kilometers of power transmission lines served by about 500 substations. Kyrgyzstan would be a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation&#x27;s Asian Energy Club, which Russia proposed in 2006 to unify oil, gas, and electricity producers, consumers, and transit countries in the Central Asian region in a bloc that is self-sufficient in energy. Other members would be China, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.

Kyrgyzstan is a partner country of the EU INOGATE energy programme, which has four key topics: enhancing energy security, convergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles, supporting sustainable energy development, and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest.

The South Korean style manufactured bituminous coal called &quot;yeontan&quot; (йонтан) is gaining popularity in Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s energy industrial scene.

===Services===

Substantial post-Soviet growth in the services sector is mainly attributable to the appearance of small private enterprises. The central bank is the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic, which nominally is independent but follows government policy. Although the banking system has been reformed several times since 1991, it does not play a significant role in investment. High interest rates have discouraged borrowing. A stock market opened in 1995, but its main function is trading in government securities. Because of the Akayev regime&#x27;s economic reforms, many small trade and catering enterprises have opened in the post-Soviet era. Although Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s mountains and lakes are an attractive tourist destination, the tourism industry has grown very slowly because it has received little investment. In the early 2000s, an average of about 450,000 tourists visited annually, mainly from countries of the former Soviet Union.

==External trade==

Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s principal exports, which go overwhelmingly to other CIS countries, are nonferrous metals and minerals, woollen goods and other agricultural products, electric energy, and certain engineering goods. In turn, the Republic relies on other former Soviet states for petroleum and natural gas, ferrous metals, chemicals, most machinery, wood and paper products, some foods, and most construction materials. In 1999, Kyrgyz exports to the U.S. totaled $11.2 million, and imports from the U.S. totaled $54.2 million. In 2017, Kyrgyzstan exports were estimated to be worth $1.84 billion, while their imports were at an estimated $4.187 billion. Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s major exports include gold, cotton, wool, garments, meat, mercury, uranium, electricity, machinery, and shoes. Major imports include oil and gas, machinery and equipment, chemicals, and foodstuffs.

Reexport of China-made consumer goods to Kazakhstan and Russia, centered on Dordoy Bazaar in Bishkek, and to Uzbekistan, centered on Kara-Suu Bazaar in Osh Region, is particularly important; it is thought by some economists to be one of the country&#x27;s two largest economic activities.

The Kyrgyzstan Government has reduced expenditures, ended most price subsidies, and introduced a value added tax. Overall, the government appears committed to transferring to a free market economic system by stabilizing the economy and implementing reforms, which will encourage long-term growth. These reforms led to Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s accession to the WTO on December 20, 1998.

In August 2024, the country&#x27;s government issued an order to establish OJSC &quot;Trading Company of the Kyrgyz Republic&quot; to monitor trade flows related to local companies whose goods are not imported into the Kyrgyz Republic. 

==Investment==
The stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Kyrgyzstan was valued at $42 million in 2005 by the World Bank.

== Taxation ==
The tax regime in the Kyrgyz Republic is administered by the State Tax Service. Collected taxes reached 18.1% of GDP in 2012.

==Macro-economic trend==
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Kyrgyzstan at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund and EconStats with figures in millions of Kyrgyz Soms.

For purchasing power parity comparisons, the international dollar is exchanged at 9.40 Soms only.

Current GDP per capita of Kyrgyzstan shrank by 54% in the 1990s. Mean wages were $0.85 per man-hour in 2009 and this rate represented underemployment when compared to effective market pay. In the first half of 2012, Kyrgyz economy shrank by 5.8%. This downturn was largely due to decline in gold production at the Kumtor mine.

The budget deficit in mid-2012 was 23-billion soms and accounted for 7% of GDP while the target was to reduce it to 6%.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1992–2017.
== Other statistics ==
Investment (gross fixed):
17% of GDP (2004 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
* &quot;lowest 10%:&quot; 3.9%
* &quot;highest 10%:&quot; 23.3% (2001)

Distribution of family income - Gini index:
27.3 (2017)

Agriculture - products:
tobacco, cotton, potatoes, vegetables, grapes, fruits and berries; sheep, goats, cattle, wool, dairy products
Industrial production growth rate:
6% (2000 est.)

Electricity
* &quot;production:&quot; 11,720 GWh (2002)
* &quot;consumption:&quot; 10,210 GWh (2002)
* &quot;exports:&quot; 1,062 GWh (2002)
* &quot;imports:&quot; 375 GWh (2002)

Electricity - production by source:
* &quot;fossil fuel:&quot; 7.6%
* &quot;hydro:&quot; 92.4%
* &quot;other:&quot; 0% (2001)
* &quot;nuclear:&quot; 0%

Oil:
* &quot;production:&quot; (2001 est.)
* &quot;consumption:&quot; (2001 est.)
* &quot;exports:&quot; NA
* &quot;imports:&quot; NA

Natural gas:
* &quot;production:&quot; 16 million m3 (2001 est.)
* &quot;consumption:&quot; 2.016 billion m3 (2001 est.)
* &quot;exports:&quot; 0 m3 (2001 est.)
* &quot;imports:&quot; 2 billion m3 (2001 est.)

Current account balance:
$-87.92 million (2004 est.)

Exports - commodities:
cotton, wool, meat, tobacco; gold, mercury, uranium, natural gas, hydropower; machinery; shoes

Imports - commodities:
oil and gas, machinery and equipment, chemicals, foodstuffs

Reserves of foreign exchange &amp; gold:
$498.7 million (2004 est.)

Exchange rates:
soms per US dollar - 41.731 (2004), 43.6484 (2003), 46.9371 (2002), 48.378 (2001), 47.7038 (2000), 69.85 (2020)

==See also==

*Kyrgyzstan
*Economy of Asia

==References==
==External links==
* Minister wants bigger role for local mining firms 
* Kyrgyz-North America Trade Council, New York USA
* American Chamber of Commerce in Kyrgyz Republic, Bishkek 
* International Business Council, Bishkek 
* Bishkek Business Club
* Tariffs applied by Kyrgyzstan as provided by ITC&#x27;s Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q988196" start="4" end="25" title="Economy of Kyrgyzstan" label="economy of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="54" end="73" title="agricultural sector" label="agricultural sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="75" end="81" title="Cotton" label="Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="83" end="90" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="238" end="248" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="407" end="417" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="566" end="577" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="613" end="647" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="686" end="710" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173079" start="849" end="859" title="Corruption in Kyrgyzstan" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="986" end="1014" title="ease of doing business index" label="ease of doing business index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="1667" end="1686" title="Subsistence farming" label="Subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="1836" end="1841" title="Grain" label="Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="1878" end="1887" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="2015" end="2021" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2026" end="2033" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="2064" end="2069" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="2080" end="2083" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="2098" end="2106" title="potatoes" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="2108" end="2118" title="vegetables" label="vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="2124" end="2135" title="sugar beets" label="sugar beets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="2536" end="2546" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="2727" end="2733" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="2758" end="2768" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="2793" end="2798" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="2823" end="2828" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="2853" end="2859" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="2884" end="2890" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="2915" end="2925" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="2950" end="2955" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="2980" end="2986" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="3011" end="3018" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="3043" end="3048" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="3073" end="3081" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="3106" end="3115" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="3140" end="3144" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="3168" end="3174" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733836" start="3249" end="3256" title="apricot" label="apricot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923022" start="3897" end="3913" title="Kumtor Gold Mine" label="Kumtor Gold Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3959" end="3963" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4017" end="4023" title="Jerooy" label="Jerooy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4028" end="4039" title="Taldy–Bulak" label="Taldy–Bulak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4098" end="4109" title="Tokhtonysay" label="Tokhtonysay"/>
<link wikidata="Q988196" start="4128" end="4139" title="Kyrgyzaltyn" label="Kyrgyzaltyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="4186" end="4200" title="joint ventures" label="joint ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="4225" end="4232" title="Uranium" label="Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="4237" end="4245" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="4280" end="4290" title="Soviet era" label="Soviet era"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="4370" end="4374" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q99445786" start="4665" end="4675" title="Karakeche" label="Kara–Keche"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="7021" end="7031" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="7036" end="7046" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q651195" start="7108" end="7119" title="Naryn River" label="Naryn River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210760" start="7123" end="7133" title="Kambarata-2 Hydro Power Plant" label="Kambar–Ata"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7165" end="7170" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="7175" end="7181" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="7692" end="7725" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7733" end="7750" title="Asian Energy Club" label="Asian Energy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="7976" end="7986" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8044" end="8046" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459896" start="8047" end="8054" title="INOGATE" label="INOGATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700433" start="8110" end="8125" title="energy security" label="energy security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239166" start="8155" end="8168" title="energy market" label="energy market"/>
<link wikidata="Q535437" start="8186" end="8211" title="Internal energy market" label="EU internal energy market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="8235" end="8253" title="sustainable energy" label="sustainable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="8282" end="8292" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="8351" end="8362" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="8383" end="8398" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829165" start="9252" end="9268" title="Tourism in Kyrgyzstan" label="tourism industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="9786" end="9799" title="ferrous metal" label="ferrous metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="10210" end="10217" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297637" start="10427" end="10440" title="Dordoy Bazaar" label="Dordoy Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="10460" end="10470" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023290" start="10484" end="10492" title="Kara-Suu" label="Kara-Suu"/>
<link wikidata="Q231987" start="10503" end="10513" title="Osh Region" label="Osh Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="10738" end="10753" title="value added tax" label="value added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="10818" end="10829" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="10994" end="10997" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q131400187" start="11096" end="11151" title="OJSC &amp;quot;Trading Company of the Kyrgyz Republic&amp;quot;" label="OJSC &amp;quot;Trading Company of the Kyrgyz Republic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="11284" end="11305" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="11381" end="11391" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141362" start="11934" end="11942" title="man-hour" label="man-hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923022" start="12157" end="12163" title="Kumtor" label="Kumtor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="12591" end="12601" title="Gini index" label="Gini index"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="13949" end="13959" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184845" start="13961" end="13976" title="Economy of Asia" label="Economy of Asia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16700" wikidata="Q16000345" url="?curid=16700" title="Telecommunications in Kyrgyzstan">
<text>Telecommunications in Kyrgyzstan include fixed and mobile telephones and the Internet.

==Communications policy==

The long-term goal of the government&#x27;s information and communications technology strategy is for the telecommunications sector to contribute 5 percent to gross domestic product by 2010. The June 2006 launch of the KazSat communications satellite from Kazakhstan was expected to reduce the dependence of all the Central Asian countries on European and U.S. telecommunications satellites. Launch of a second KazSat is planned for 2009.

==Telephones==

In the early 2000s, Kyrgyzstan used international investment support to restructure its telecommunications system, which had 7.7 telephone lines per 100 inhabitants in 2002 and 1,100,000 cellular phones in use in 2007. As part of the upgrading process, the government has attempted to sell a majority interest in the state-owned telecommunications company, Kyrgyztelecom, to foreign bidders. Companies from Russia, Sweden, and Turkey have been possible buyers. However, in 2005 an estimated 100,000 applicants were waiting for telephone line installation.

* Telephone system:
** &quot;domestic:&quot; principally microwave radio relay; one cellular provider, probably limited to Bishkek region;
** &quot;international:&quot; connections with other CIS countries by landline or microwave radio relay and with other countries by leased connections with Moscow international gateway switch and by satellite; satellite earth stations - 1 Intersputnik and 1 Intelsat; connected internationally by the Trans-Asia-Europe (TAE) fiber-optic line.

==Internet==
In the early 2000s, Internet use has expanded rapidly. Between 1999 and 2005, the number of Internet subscribers increased from 3,000 to 263,000. In 2004 some 12,300 Internet hosts were in operation. The country code top level domain is .kg.

Variable upload/download speeds through xDSL are available through state telephone company Kyrgyz Telecom (up to 8 Mbit/s downlink) and private ISPs (up to 10 Mbit/s downlink). There is typically a monthly cap on the amount of data transferred, with separate caps depending on whether the data stays within Kyrgyzstan or travels beyond the border. Broadband internet access with unlimited international traffic is rarely offered by ISPs to the market at significantly higher price. This is probably due to the lack of country&#x27;s telecommunications bandwidth capacity.

ISPs provide internet access through satellite backbone communication lines linked to Russia, Germany, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. There is a major telecommunications project under construction - The Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber Optic Line, connecting Shanghai, China and Frankfurt, Germany, with the capacity of 622 Mbit/s, where Kyrgyzstan has completed its part. Completion of this project might affect broadband internet prices in Kyrgyzstan.

There are several ISPs that provide broadband internet access using different technologies such as xDSL, ISDN, Leased Line, and Ethernet. ISPs in Kyrgyzstan include Kyrgyz Telecom, Elcat, Asiainfo, Transfer Ltd, Totel, Megaline, Aknet, Intranet, Saima Telecom, My4G, Rikonet, AlaTV, ExNET, and IPSWICH.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===
Listed as engaged in selective Internet filtering in the political and social areas and as little or no evidence of filtering in the conflict/security and Internet tools areas by the OpenNet Initiative (ONI) in December 2010.

Access to the Internet in Kyrgyzstan has deteriorated as heightened political tensions have led to more frequent instances of second- and third-generation controls. The government has become more sensitive to the Internet&#x27;s influence on domestic politics and enacted laws that increase its authority to regulate the sector.

Liberalisation of the telecommunications market in Kyrgyzstan has made the Internet affordable for the majority of the population. However, Kyrgyzstan is an effectively cyberlocked country dependent on purchasing bandwidth from Kazakhstan and Russia. The increasingly authoritarian regime in Kazakhstan is shifting toward more restrictive Internet controls, which is leading to instances of &quot;upstream filtering&quot; affecting ISPs in Kyrgyzstan.

==See also==

* Media of Kyrgyzstan

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16000345" start="0" end="32" title="Telecommunications in Kyrgyzstan" label="Telecommunications in Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="221" end="239" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="274" end="296" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="371" end="381" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="591" end="601" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="758" end="773" title="cellular phones" label="cellular phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="978" end="984" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="986" end="992" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="998" end="1004" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="1195" end="1200" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="1251" end="1258" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="1337" end="1345" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1349" end="1358" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1644" end="1652" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q829281" start="1790" end="1803" title="Internet host" label="Internet host"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="1828" end="1840" title="country codes" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2440" end="2443" title="ISP" label="ISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2526" end="2532" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2534" end="2541" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2543" end="2550" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="2556" end="2566" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2684" end="2699" title="Shanghai, China" label="Shanghai, China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="2704" end="2722" title="Frankfurt, Germany" label="Frankfurt, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="2916" end="2934" title="broadband internet" label="broadband internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861440" start="3410" end="3428" title="OpenNet Initiative" label="OpenNet Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805898" start="4253" end="4272" title="Media of Kyrgyzstan" label="Media of Kyrgyzstan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16701" wikidata="Q1133367" url="?curid=16701" title="Transport in Kyrgyzstan">
<text>Transport in [[Kyrgyzstan]] is severely constrained by the country&#x27;s alpine topography. Roads have to snake up steep valleys, cross passes of altitude and more, and are subject to frequent mud slides and snow avalanches. Winter travel is close to impossible in many of the more remote and high-altitude regions. Additional problems are because many roads and railway lines built during the Soviet period are today intersected by international boundaries, requiring time-consuming border formalities to cross where they are not completely closed. The horse is still a much used transport option, especially in rural and inaccessible areas, as it does not depend on imported fuel.

== Railways ==

The Kyrgyz Railway is currently responsible for railway development and maintenance in the country. The Chüy Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the south were endpoints of the Soviet Union&#x27;s rail system in Central Asia. Following the emergence of independent post-Soviet states, the rail lines which were built without regard for administrative boundaries have been cut by borders, and traffic is therefore severely curtailed. The small bits of rail lines within Kyrgyzstan, about 370 km of broad gauge in total, have little economic value in the absence of the former bulk traffic over long distances to and from such centers as Tashkent, Almaty and the cities of Russia.

In 2022, construction began on a new 186 km extension of the existing railway from Balykchy to Karakeche, primarily meant to carry coal from mines at Karakeche to Bishkek. In June 2023, a railway between Balykchy and Bishkek was officially opened.

President Japarov announced the planned construction of a 523 km (CKU) in 2022. This project had already been proposed and stalled a number of times since the 2000s, possibly due to Russian and Kazakh opposition at the time. The CKU Railway would comprise in China, in Kyrgyzstan and in Uzbekistan. The railway, conceived as part of China&#x27;s Belt and Road Initiative, is planned to lead from Kashgar through the Torugart Pass to Jalal-Abad, and further on to the Uzbek city of Andijan. An inaugural ceremony was held in Jalal-Abad in December 2024 and construction is set to begin in July 2025.

=== Rail links with adjacent countries ===

* Kazakhstan - yes - Bishkek branch - same gauge
* Uzbekistan - yes - Osh branch - same gauge
* Tajikistan - no - same gauge
* China - no - Break of gauge /

== Highways ==
With support from the Asian Development Bank, a major road linking the north and southwest from Bishkek to Osh has recently been completed. This considerably eases communication between the two major population centers of the country—the Chüy Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the South. An offshoot of this road branches off across a 3,500 meter pass into the Talas Valley in the northwest. Plans are now being formulated to build a major road from Osh into the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

The total length of the road network in Kyrgyzstan is approximately 34,000 km. Of them, 18,810 km are public roads directly subordinated to the Ministry of Transport and Communications, and 15,190 km - other roads (village, agricultural, industrial etc.). By their status the roads of the Ministry of Transport and Communications are classified as:
* &quot;international roads:&quot; 4,163 km
* &quot;state roads:&quot; 5,678 km
* &quot;local roads:&quot; 8,969 km

By nature of surface there can be distinguished:
* &quot;hard-surfaced roads:&quot; 7,228 km (including 11 km of cement concrete roads, 4,969 km - bituminous concrete surface, 2,248 km - road-mix pavement)
* &quot;gravel roads:&quot; 9,961 km
* &quot;earth roads:&quot; 1,621 km 

Frequent bus and, more commonly, minibus service connects country&#x27;s major cities. Minibuses provide public transit in cities and between cities to neighboring villages.

The condition of the road network is generally bad, though repairs have been made recently. Usually, only the main roads of population centres are illuminated, and drain lids might be missing on both streets and sidewalks. The roads are often not plowed during winters. Fuel stations are rare outside Bishkek and Osh.

== Pipelines ==
The limitations of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s pipeline system are a major impediment to fuel distribution. In 2006 the country had 367 kilometers of natural gas pipeline and 16 kilometers of oil pipeline, after adding 167 kilometers of natural gas pipeline in 2003.

== Ports and waterways ==
Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s only port is Balykchy, a fishing town on Issyk Kul Lake. None of Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s rivers are navigable, and the country has no canals.

Water transport exists only on Issyk Kul Lake, and has drastically shrunk since the end of the Soviet Union.

== Airports ==

At the end of the Soviet period there were about 50 airports and airstrips in Kyrgyzstan, many of them built primarily to serve military purposes in this border region so close to China. Only a few of them remain in service today.

There are four airports with international flights, namely in Bishkek, Osh, Tamchy and Karakol.

* Manas International Airport near Bishkek is the main international terminal, with flights to Moscow, Tashkent, Dushanbe, Istanbul, Baku and Muscat.
* Osh Airport is the main air terminal in the south, with daily connections to Bishkek and beyond.
* Jalal-Abad Airport is linked to Bishkek by daily flights operated by Kyrgyzstan Air Company, Avia Traffic Company, Air Bishkek and Sky Bishkek on BAe-146 and Saab-340 as well as weekly flights to Aksy District and Toguz-Toro District.
* Issyk-Kul International Airport is linked to Almaty in summers by flights operated by SCAT on Yakovlev YAK-42 Bishkek, Jalal-Abad and Osh.
* Karakol International Airport is linked to Almaty in winters by flights operated by SCAT on Antonov AN-24.
* Kazarman Airport is linked to Jalal-Abad, Osh and Bishkek by flights operated by Sky Bishkek on Saab-340.
* Kerben Airport is linked to Jalal-Abad and Bishkek by flights operated by Sky Bishkek on Saab-340.
* Other airports, aerodromes and landing strips are located in Toktogul, Kanysh-Kiya, Ala-Buka, Sakaldy in Nooken District, Batken, Isfana, Kyzyl-Kiya, Naryn, Talas, Pokrovka, Cholpon-Ata, Tamga, Tokmok, Aravan and many other places.
* Other facilities built during the Soviet era are either closed down, used only occasionally or restricted to military use (e.g., Kant airbase, now a Russian air base near Bishkek).

===Airports with paved runways===
&quot;total:&quot; 21
&quot;over 3,047 m:&quot; 1 (Bishkek-Manas)
&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot; 3 (Osh, Kant and Tokmok)
&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot; 11 (Jalal-Abad, Karakol International, Kerben, Kazarman, Isfana, Batken, Naryn, Talas, Issyk-Kul International, Kyzyl-Kiya and Cholpon-Ata)
&quot;under 914 m:&quot; 6 (Tamga, Toktogul, Kanysh-Kiya, Pokrovka, Aravan and Sakaldy) (2012)

===Airports with unpaved runways (mostly disused)===
&quot;total:&quot; 29
&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot; 3
&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot; 5
&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot; 6 (Gulcha, Daroot-Korgon, Ala-Buka, At-Bashy, Suzak and Chatkal)
&quot;under 914 m:&quot; 15 (2012)

== See also ==
* Eurasian Land Bridge
* Kyrgyz Railways
* List of airports in Kyrgyzstan
* List of airlines of Kyrgyzstan
* Roads in Kyrgyzstan
* Trans-Asian Railway
* Transport in the Soviet Union
* Turkestan–Siberia Railway

== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1133367" start="0" end="27" title="Transport in Kyrgyzstan" label="Transport in [[Kyrgyzstan]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="395" end="401" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="555" end="560" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="678" end="682" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q247851" start="705" end="719" title="Kyrgyz Railway" label="Kyrgyz Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q286640" start="805" end="816" title="Chüy Valley" label="Chüy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="838" end="852" title="Fergana Valley" label="Fergana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="888" end="900" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197451" start="1208" end="1219" title="Russian gauge" label="broad gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="1347" end="1355" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="1357" end="1363" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q805876" start="1474" end="1482" title="Balykchy" label="Balykchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q99445786" start="1486" end="1495" title="Karakeche" label="Karakeche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="1554" end="1561" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="1650" end="1657" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1822" end="1829" title="Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="1834" end="1840" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1899" end="1904" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="1927" end="1937" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="1986" end="2010" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q170521" start="2036" end="2043" title="Kashgar" label="Kashgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143302" start="2056" end="2069" title="Torugart Pass" label="Torugart Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q487689" start="2073" end="2083" title="Jalal-Abad" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q487656" start="2121" end="2128" title="Andijan" label="Andijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274169" start="2286" end="2296" title="Transport in Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="2305" end="2312" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130365" start="2335" end="2345" title="Transport in Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47282" start="2354" end="2357" title="Osh" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439298" start="2380" end="2390" title="Transport in Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377007" start="2411" end="2416" title="Transport in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959245" start="2424" end="2438" title="Break of gauge" label="Break of gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="2479" end="2501" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="2553" end="2560" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47282" start="2564" end="2567" title="Osh" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q286640" start="2695" end="2706" title="Chüy Valley" label="Chüy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q486324" start="2728" end="2742" title="Fergana Valley" label="Fergana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q133056" start="2816" end="2820" title="mountain pass" label="pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q745859" start="2830" end="2842" title="Talas Valley" label="Talas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2932" end="2963" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="3006" end="3016" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711770" start="3746" end="3753" title="Marshrutka" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q805876" start="4538" end="4546" title="Balykchy" label="Balykchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42191" start="4566" end="4580" title="Issyk Kul Lake" label="Issyk Kul Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q42191" start="4693" end="4707" title="Issyk Kul Lake" label="Issyk Kul Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q32997" start="5082" end="5089" title="Manas International Airport" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448327" start="5091" end="5094" title="Osh Airport" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495879" start="5096" end="5102" title="Tamchy Airport" label="Tamchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368126" start="5107" end="5114" title="Karakol International Airport" label="Karakol"/>
<link wikidata="Q32997" start="5119" end="5146" title="Manas International Airport" label="Manas International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="5152" end="5159" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5212" end="5218" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="5220" end="5228" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9365" start="5230" end="5238" title="Dushanbe" label="Dushanbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="5240" end="5248" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="5250" end="5254" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="5259" end="5265" title="Muscat" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448327" start="5269" end="5280" title="Osh Airport" label="Osh Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125855" start="5368" end="5386" title="Jalal-Abad Airport" label="Jalal-Abad Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786701" start="5437" end="5459" title="Kyrgyzstan Air Company" label="Kyrgyzstan Air Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034638" start="5461" end="5481" title="Avia Traffic Company" label="Avia Traffic Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330155" start="5483" end="5494" title="Air Bishkek" label="Air Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049593" start="5499" end="5510" title="Sky Bishkek" label="Sky Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="5514" end="5521" title="BAe-146" label="BAe-146"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="5526" end="5534" title="Saab-340" label="Saab-340"/>
<link wikidata="Q401943" start="5564" end="5577" title="Aksy District" label="Aksy District"/>
<link wikidata="Q754798" start="5582" end="5601" title="Toguz-Toro District" label="Toguz-Toro District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495879" start="5605" end="5636" title="Tamchy Airport" label="Issyk-Kul International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q650170" start="5691" end="5695" title="SCAT (airline)" label="SCAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q505649" start="5708" end="5714" title="YAK-42" label="YAK-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368126" start="5746" end="5775" title="Karakol International Airport" label="Karakol International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q650170" start="5830" end="5834" title="SCAT (airline)" label="SCAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="5846" end="5851" title="AN-24" label="AN-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380919" start="5855" end="5871" title="Kazarman Airport" label="Kazarman Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049593" start="5936" end="5947" title="Sky Bishkek" label="Sky Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="5951" end="5959" title="Saab-340" label="Saab-340"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393700" start="5963" end="5977" title="Kerben Airport" label="Kerben Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049593" start="6037" end="6048" title="Sky Bishkek" label="Sky Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="6052" end="6060" title="Saab-340" label="Saab-340"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813696" start="6125" end="6133" title="Toktogul Airport" label="Toktogul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365896" start="6135" end="6146" title="Kanysh-Kiya Airport" label="Kanysh-Kiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838800" start="6148" end="6156" title="Ala-Buka" label="Ala-Buka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573293" start="6169" end="6184" title="Nooken District" label="Nooken District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869310" start="6186" end="6192" title="Batken Airport" label="Batken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079811" start="6194" end="6200" title="Isfana Airport" label="Isfana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452913" start="6202" end="6212" title="Kyzyl-Kiya Airport" label="Kyzyl-Kiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966527" start="6214" end="6219" title="Naryn Airport" label="Naryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678919" start="6221" end="6226" title="Talas Airport" label="Talas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544004" start="6228" end="6236" title="Pokrovka, Kyrgyzstan" label="Pokrovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104393" start="6238" end="6249" title="Cholpon-Ata Airport" label="Cholpon-Ata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681187" start="6251" end="6256" title="Tamga Airport" label="Tamga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813643" start="6258" end="6264" title="Tokmok Airport" label="Tokmok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068406" start="6266" end="6272" title="Aravan, Kyrgyzstan" label="Aravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026291" start="6427" end="6431" title="Kant, Kyrgyzstan" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q32997" start="6565" end="6578" title="Manas International Airport" label="Bishkek-Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448327" start="6613" end="6616" title="Osh Airport" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426665" start="6618" end="6622" title="Kant Air Base" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813643" start="6627" end="6633" title="Tokmok Airport" label="Tokmok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125855" start="6669" end="6679" title="Jalal-Abad Airport" label="Jalal-Abad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368126" start="6681" end="6702" title="Karakol International Airport" label="Karakol International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393700" start="6704" end="6710" title="Kerben Airport" label="Kerben"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380919" start="6712" end="6720" title="Kazarman Airport" label="Kazarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079811" start="6722" end="6728" title="Isfana Airport" label="Isfana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869310" start="6730" end="6736" title="Batken Airport" label="Batken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966527" start="6738" end="6743" title="Naryn Airport" label="Naryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678919" start="6745" end="6750" title="Talas Airport" label="Talas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495879" start="6752" end="6775" title="Tamchy Airport" label="Issyk-Kul International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452913" start="6777" end="6787" title="Kyzyl-Kiya Airport" label="Kyzyl-Kiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104393" start="6792" end="6803" title="Cholpon-Ata Airport" label="Cholpon-Ata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681187" start="6833" end="6838" title="Tamga Airport" label="Tamga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813696" start="6840" end="6848" title="Toktogul Airport" label="Toktogul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365896" start="6850" end="6861" title="Kanysh-Kiya Airport" label="Kanysh-Kiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544004" start="6863" end="6871" title="Pokrovka, Kyrgyzstan" label="Pokrovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068406" start="6873" end="6879" title="Aravan, Kyrgyzstan" label="Aravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573293" start="6884" end="6891" title="Nooken District" label="Sakaldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q683441" start="7071" end="7077" title="Gulcha" label="Gulcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633504" start="7079" end="7092" title="Daroot-Korgon" label="Daroot-Korgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838800" start="7094" end="7102" title="Ala-Buka" label="Ala-Buka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349598" start="7104" end="7112" title="At-Bashi" label="At-Bashy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445602" start="7114" end="7119" title="Suzak" label="Suzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570042" start="7124" end="7131" title="Sumsar" label="Chatkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411055" start="7186" end="7206" title="Eurasian Land Bridge" label="Eurasian Land Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q247851" start="7209" end="7224" title="Kyrgyz Railways" label="Kyrgyz Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351454" start="7227" end="7257" title="List of airports in Kyrgyzstan" label="List of airports in Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605239" start="7260" end="7290" title="List of airlines of Kyrgyzstan" label="List of airlines of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116786357" start="7293" end="7312" title="Roads in Kyrgyzstan" label="Roads in Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842463" start="7315" end="7334" title="Trans-Asian Railway" label="Trans-Asian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645915" start="7337" end="7366" title="Transport in the Soviet Union" label="Transport in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421980" start="7369" end="7394" title="Turkestan–Siberia Railway" label="Turkestan–Siberia Railway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16702" wikidata="Q840336" url="?curid=16702" title="Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic">
<text>The Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic is the national military of Kyrgyzstan. It was originally formed from the former Soviet forces of the Turkestan Military District stationed in newly independent Kyrgyzstan. It consists of the Ground Forces, the Air Force and the National Guard. Affiliated security forces to the armed forces included the Internal Troops, the State Committee for National Security and the Border Troops.

== History ==

=== Early years ===
The Armed Forces were formed on 29 May 1992 when President of the Kyrgyz SSR Askar Akayev signed a decree which effectively consolidated all the formations and units of the Soviet Army deployed in the territory of the new republic under the jurisdiction of Bishkek and not Moscow. Until 1988, these troops were part of the Central Asian Military District. 29 May is today celebrated as the Day of the Armed Forces. In 1993, the State Defense Committee was renamed to the Ministry of Defense on the basis of the headquarters of the 17th Army Corps. In 1998, the 1st Koy Tash, 2nd Osh, and 3rd Balykchinsk Infantry Brigades were created on the basis of the 8th Guards Motor Rifle Division. In August 1999, the Batken Conflict occurred in southwestern Kyrgyzstan, during which militants of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) made incursions of into Uzbek and Kyrgyz territory from their camps in Tajikistan.

=== 21st century ===
In 2006, the Air Force and Air Defense Forces were combined to form the Kyrgyz Air Force. The same year, the term of service was reduced from 18 to 12 months (1 year). In February 2014, the Armed Forces General Staff was expanded to have complete control over the military apparatus, with the ministry of defense becoming a state defense committee which plays a smaller and more administrative role. Despite this arrangement, many former military/security officials such as Taalaibek Omuraliev and Adyl Kurbanov were in favor of returning the military to its former organization.

Following the inauguration of President Sadyr Japarov in early February 2021, the Ministry of Defense was reestablished following a 7-year hiatus. After signing the new Constitution of Kyrgyzstan in May 2021, President Japarov called for reform in the military, particularly the need to &quot;organize the army according to the principle of special units, fully trained and technologically equipped to conduct military operations in mountainous conditions.&quot; He also at the same time called for the creation of &quot;people’s guards&quot;, which according to him, will provide mobilization readiness amongst the population living in border areas.

== Military units ==
=== Armed Forces of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan ===
* Сарбаздар Катары / Sarbazdar Katary () — 4 units
* Аскер Бөлүгү / Asker Bölügü () — 8 units
* Взвод / Vzvod — 32 units
* Ширкет / Shirket () — 96 units
* Табур, Батальон / Tabur, Battalion () — 540 units
* Полк / Polk — 2700 units
* Тугай, Бригада / Tugaý, Brigada — 5400 units
* Бөлүм, Дивизия / Bölüm, Diviziya — 10.000+ units
* Колоор, Корпус / Koloor, Korpus — 30.000+ units

== Special forces units list ==
=== National Guard of Kyrgyzstan===
 National Guardee of Kyrgyz Republic/NGKR &lt;br&gt; Кыргыз Республикасынын Улуттук Уланы/КРУУ
* BKT/BARS, Commandant&#x27;s Brigade «BARS», 
* ÉTAT/EDELWEISS, Mountain Rifle Brigade &quot;Edelweiss&quot;, 
* PANTHER, Special Forces Brigade &quot;Panther&quot;, 
* Guard of Honor Company, АКШ
* MANAS, Detachment &quot;Manas&quot;, 
* «GÜRZA» reconnaissance company, ГБШ

== Army ==

For much of the Soviet period, since 1967, the 8th Guards &#x27;Panfilov&#x27; Motor Rifle Division was the main military force in the country. In 1967 the division had been moved to Bishkek from the Baltic Military District, where it had previously been based. It was only disbanded in January 2003. However, in 2011 reports said the division had been reformed with its headquarters in Tokmak.
The Army of Kyrgyzstan includes the 1st Motor Rifle Brigade (Mountain) at Osh, a brigade at Koy-Tash, in the Bishkek area, the 25th Special Forces Brigade, independent battalions at Karakol and Naryn, a brigade at Balykchi, and other units.
Two Groups of Forces, the Southern, and more recently the Northern, have been active during Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s history. In 2004, the Northern Group of Forces was reported as consisting of the Balykchynsky brigade, the brigade deployed in suburb of Bishkek, separate battalions in Karakol and Naryn, and other army units.

The Army controls the Combat Training Center and Training Center &quot;Ala-Too&quot;.

== Air Force ==

Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s air arm was inherited from the central Soviet air force training school. This presented the nation a fleet of nearly 70 L-39s, dismantled MiG-21&#x27;s and several Mi-8&#x27;s and Mi-24&#x27;s. However, only a few L-39s and the helicopters are capable of flight. All Kyrgyz military aircraft are reportedly based at Kant, alongside the Russian 999th Air Base.
Because of expense and military doctrine, Kyrgyzstan has not developed its air capability; a large number of the MiG-21 interceptors that it borrowed from Russia were returned in 1993, although a number of former Soviet air bases remain available. In 1996 about 100 decommissioned MiG-21s remained in Kyrgyzstan, as of 2017 only 29 MiG-21s are in working order, in service along with ninety-six L-39 trainers and sixty-five helicopters. The air defense forces have received aid from Russia, which has sent military advisory units to establish a defense system. The Russians also help patrol Kyrgyz airspace as part of the Joint CIS Air Defence System. Presently Kyrgyzstan has twenty-six SA-2 and SA-3 surface-to-air missiles in its air defense arsenal. In 2002 the Kyrgyzstan government allowed the United States to use Manas air base for support operations in the War on terror. This agreement lasted until June 2014.

== National Guard ==
The National Guard of Kyrgyzstan was founded on December 6, 1991, and took their first oath July 20 the following year. In 2014, the Internal Troops were absorbed into the National Guard as a result of the ongoing military reforms. This would remain this way until September 2018 when they were separated once again.

== Equipment ==
== Foreign military presence and international cooperation ==
In terms of foreign presence, the U.S.-led Operation Enduring Freedom coalition used the Manas Air Base (Bishkek&#x27;s international airport) until June 2014. In response, Russia set up the 999th Air Base at Kant to counter the American military presence in the former Soviet state. Moscow is believed to have promised Bishkek $1.1 billion for modernizing its army. Agreements to this effect were reached during the visits to Bishkek by Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov in August and President Vladimir Putin in September 2012. As of fall 2023, Russia supplies various military equipment and also begins to form a joint air defense system. Since May 1992, Kyrgyzstan has been a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization. In addition, its leaders work within the framework of the Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS. Kyrgyzstan hosted the Second CIS Military Sports Games in 2017 in Balykchy. The games included various competition in shooting, fighting, etc. On 16 July 2018, the opening of the Kyrgyz-Indian Mountain Training Center took place in Balykchy at the Edelweiss Training Center, built with funds allocated by the Government of India.

The personnel of the armed forces also take part in UN peacekeeping missions. Currently, Kyrgyz forces are serving in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Sudan, East Timor, Ethiopia and Kosovo.

==Personnel==
=== Military education ===

The main military educational institutions include:
* Military Institute of the Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic
* MVD Academy of Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan has an agreement with the Russian Federation, according to which Kyrgyz soldiers are trained in military academies in Russia. The training of officers is carried out in the military educational institutions of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Republic of Turkey and the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

==== Training centers ====
The Center for Advanced Training of Officers and NCOs of the Defense Ministry was opened in early 2007. It was designed to offer one-month professional training courses. In 2005, the NCO Training School of the Combined Arms Training Center of the Armed Forces was opened at the base of the 2nd Independent Motorized Rifle Brigade. In 2013, the border guard opened classes at more than 100 secondary schools. The Edelweiss Training Center operates in the Issyk-Kul Region.

==== High schools ====
The Kyrgyz State National Military Lyceum and MVD High School are secondary schools that trains middle-tier commanders in the armed forces.

==== Kyrgyz State Medical Academy Faculty ====

The Military Faculty of Kyrgyz State Medical Academy was created in the beginning of the Second World War, specifically in October 1941 when there was a shortage of medical personnel in the medical service. Originally it was the Sanitary Department of Defence, and in 1942 it was renamed to the Department of Military and Health Training, and has since 1944 been known as the Department of Military Medical Training. It currently engages in the military training of students of medical, pediatric, dental, sanitary and pharmaceutical departments of the armed forces.

===Conscription===
Kyrgyz Armed Forces have inherited conscription from the Armed Forces of USSR. The length of conscription was reduced to 12 months from initial 18 in 2006. Today, Kyrgyz Armed Forces employ a policy of reducing the service period for university graduates to 9 months. Alternative service exists, however, it is only offered to conscripts who belong to certain religious groups.

== Affiliated security forces ==
* State Committee for National Security
* Ministry of the Interior
*Kyrgyz Frontier Force

== Notes ==
== References ==
===General references===
* CIA World Factbook, 2003 edition.
* IISS Military Balance, 2007 edition

== Further reading ==
* O&#x27;Mallery, William D., and McDErmott, Roger N., &#x27;Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s Security Tightrope,&#x27; Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Vol. 16, No. 3, September 2003, 72-111
* Martha Brill Olcott, Library of Congress Country Study Kyrgyzstan, National Security, 1996
* Henry Plater-Zyberk, Kyrgyzstan - Focusing on Security, Conflict Studies Research Centre K41, November 2003

== External links ==
* Armed Forces of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan official site 
* Armed Forces of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan official site 
* Ministry of Emergency Situation (Kyrgyzstan) official site
* Ministry of Internal Affairs (Kyrgyzstan) official site
* Kyrgyzstan military ranks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q840336" start="4" end="39" title="Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic" label="Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="68" end="78" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141043" start="142" end="169" title="Turkestan Military District" label="Turkestan Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="201" end="211" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696718" start="232" end="245" title="Kyrgyz Army" label="Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696776" start="251" end="260" title="Kyrgyz Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174018" start="269" end="283" title="National Guard (Kyrgyzstan)" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294298" start="345" end="360" title="Internal Troops of Kyrgyzstan" label="Internal Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q63346572" start="366" end="403" title="State Committee for National Security (Kyrgyzstan)" label="State Committee for National Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917019" start="412" end="425" title="State Border Guard Service of Kyrgyzstan" label="Border Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q130276" start="529" end="539" title="Kyrgyz SSR" label="Kyrgyz SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q489893" start="540" end="552" title="Askar Akayev" label="Askar Akayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="636" end="647" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="720" end="727" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="736" end="742" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438486" start="786" end="817" title="Central Asian Military District" label="Central Asian Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q48782173" start="853" end="876" title="Day of the Armed Forces (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Day of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029146" start="994" end="1009" title="17th Army Corps (Soviet Union)" label="17th Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032477" start="1118" end="1149" title="8th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="8th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079409" start="1171" end="1186" title="Batken Conflict" label="Batken Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q973179" start="1254" end="1284" title="Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan" label="Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="1362" end="1372" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696776" start="1468" end="1484" title="Kyrgyz Air Force" label="Kyrgyz Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q45228016" start="1870" end="1889" title="Taalaibek Omuraliev" label="Taalaibek Omuraliev"/>
<link wikidata="Q25597826" start="2017" end="2030" title="Sadyr Japarov" label="Sadyr Japarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011916" start="2146" end="2172" title="Constitution of Kyrgyzstan" label="Constitution of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032477" start="3582" end="3634" title="8th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="8th Guards &amp;#x27;Panfilov&amp;#x27; Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="3718" end="3725" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386607" start="3735" end="3759" title="Baltic Military District" label="Baltic Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q854333" start="3922" end="3928" title="Tokmok" label="Tokmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="3942" end="3952" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47282" start="4004" end="4007" title="Osh" label="Osh"/>
<link wikidata="Q97353778" start="4009" end="4018" title="2nd Guards Motor Rifle Brigade" label="a brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312143" start="4022" end="4030" title="Koy-Tash" label="Koy-Tash"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="4039" end="4046" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q194452" start="4112" end="4119" title="Karakol" label="Karakol"/>
<link wikidata="Q311946" start="4124" end="4129" title="Naryn" label="Naryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426665" start="4930" end="4934" title="Kant Air Base" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4958" end="4972" title="5th Air Army#2007 Russian Structure" label="999th Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330412" start="5596" end="5624" title="Joint CIS Air Defence System" label="Joint CIS Air Defence System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886552" start="5795" end="5809" title="Transit Center at Manas" label="Manas air base"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="5840" end="5853" title="War on Terror" label="War on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174018" start="5920" end="5948" title="National Guard of Kyrgyzstan" label="National Guard of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294298" start="6049" end="6064" title="Internal Troops of Kyrgyzstan" label="Internal Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="6355" end="6381" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886552" start="6401" end="6415" title="Manas Air Base" label="Manas Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426665" start="6503" end="6525" title="Kant Air Base" label="999th Air Base at Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="6575" end="6594" title="former Soviet state" label="former Soviet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q318693" start="7008" end="7047" title="Collective Security Treaty Organization" label="Collective Security Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426239" start="7107" end="7149" title="Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS" label="Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q805876" start="7217" end="7225" title="Balykchy" label="Balykchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q805876" start="7383" end="7391" title="Balykchy" label="Balykchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="7460" end="7479" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="7600" end="7612" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="7614" end="7621" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="7623" end="7628" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="7630" end="7640" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="7642" end="7650" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="7655" end="7661" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129823" start="7760" end="7821" title="Military Institute of the Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic" label="Military Institute of the Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30541335" start="7824" end="7849" title="MVD Academy of Kyrgyzstan" label="MVD Academy of Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="8075" end="8097" title="Republic of Kazakhstan" label="Republic of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="8103" end="8125" title="Republic of Azerbaijan" label="Republic of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="8131" end="8149" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8158" end="8189" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q487413" start="8673" end="8689" title="Issyk-Kul Region" label="Issyk-Kul Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988972" start="8719" end="8756" title="Kyrgyz State National Military Lyceum" label="Kyrgyz State National Military Lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4221178" start="8928" end="8956" title="Kyrgyz State Medical Academy" label="Kyrgyz State Medical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63346572" start="9905" end="9942" title="State Committee for National Security (Kyrgyzstan)" label="State Committee for National Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294298" start="9945" end="9969" title="Ministry of the Interior (Kyrgyzstan)" label="Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917019" start="9971" end="9992" title="State Border Guard Service of Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyz Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="10050" end="10068" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="10086" end="10090" title="IISS" label="IISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160173" start="10476" end="10508" title="Conflict Studies Research Centre" label="Conflict Studies Research Centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16703" wikidata="Q3395215" url="?curid=16703" title="Foreign relations of Kyrgyzstan">
<text>Kyrgyzstan has close relations with other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, particularly Kazakhstan and Russia, given the historical legacy of the Soviet Union. It also has close relations with Turkey as well, given their shared heritage as Turkic languages.

While Kyrgyzstan was initially determined to stay in the ruble zone, the stringent conditions set forth by the Russian Government prompted Kyrgyzstan to introduce its own currency, the som, in May 1993. Kyrgyzstan&#x27;s withdrawal from the ruble zone was done with little prior notification and initially caused tensions in the region. Both Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan temporarily suspended trade, and Uzbekistan even introduced restrictions tantamount to economic sanctions. Both nations feared an influx of rubles and an increase in inflation. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan&#x27;s hostility toward Kyrgyzstan was short-lived, and the three nations signed an agreement in January 1994 creating an economic union. This led to the relaxation of border restrictions between the nations the following month. Kyrgyzstan also has contributed to the CIS peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan.

Turkey has sought to capitalize on its cultural and ethnic links to the region and has found Kyrgyzstan receptive to cultivating bilateral relations. The Kyrgyz Republic also has experienced a dramatic increase in trade with the People&#x27;s Republic of China, its southern neighbor. Kyrgyzstan has been active in furthering regional cooperation, such as joint military exercises with Uzbek and Kazakh troops.

In January 1999, a new OSCE office opened in Bishkek; on February 18, 2000, the OSCE announced that an additional office would open in Osh to assist Bishkek in carrying out its work. Kyrgyzstan is a member of the OSCE, the CIS, and the United Nations.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Kyrgyzstan maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
== Illegal drug trade ==
Kyrgyzstan is a limited illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly for CIS consumption. There is a limited government eradication program. Kyrgyzstan is used increasingly as a transshipment point for illicit drugs to Russia and Western Europe from Southwest Asia. In 2020, with the assistance of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Program Office in Kyrgyzstan, the Analytical Center of the Counter Narcotic Service of the Ministry of Interior of the Kyrgyz Republic was established to combat drug trafficking.

==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Kyrgyzstan
* List of diplomatic missions of Kyrgyzstan

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="0" end="10" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="57" end="91" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="106" end="116" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="121" end="127" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="164" end="176" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="211" end="217" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="258" end="274" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="334" end="339" title="Russian ruble" label="ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q35881" start="462" end="465" title="Kyrgyzstani som" label="som"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="634" end="644" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="1143" end="1153" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1156" end="1162" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1385" end="1416" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="1591" end="1595" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="1613" end="1620" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1804" end="1818" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="2015" end="2023" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131584" start="2028" end="2039" title="opium poppy" label="opium poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456407" start="2157" end="2170" title="transshipment" label="transshipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2198" end="2204" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="2209" end="2223" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="2229" end="2243" title="Southwest Asia" label="Southwest Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433570" start="2513" end="2554" title="List of diplomatic missions in Kyrgyzstan" label="List of diplomatic missions in Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606086" start="2557" end="2598" title="List of diplomatic missions of Kyrgyzstan" label="List of diplomatic missions of Kyrgyzstan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16705" wikidata="Q1783775" url="?curid=16705" title="Kool Keith">
<text>Keith Matthew Thornton (born October 7, 1963), better known by his stage name Kool Keith, is an American rapper and record producer from The Bronx, New York City, known for his surreal, abstract, and often profane or incomprehensible lyrics. Kool Keith has recorded prolifically both as a solo artist and in group collaborations. Kool Keith is generally considered to be one of hip-hop&#x27;s most eccentric and unusual personalities.

Kool Keith was a cofounding member of Ultramagnetic MCs, whose debut &quot;Critical Beatdown&quot; was released in 1988. After two more albums with the group, &quot;Funk Your Head Up&quot; and &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot;, Kool Keith released his critically acclaimed solo debut album, &quot;Dr. Octagonecologyst&quot;, under the name Dr. Octagon in 1996. He subsequently released a series of further independently released hip hop albums, including &quot;Sex Style&quot;, &quot;First Come, First Served&quot; (as Dr. Dooom), and most recently &quot;Keith&quot;.

After releasing only one album on a major label, &quot;Black Elvis/Lost in Space&quot;, Kool Keith subsequently returned to independently releasing music, producing further efforts as a solo artist and in collaboration with groups such as Analog Brothers, Masters of Illusion, Thee Undatakerz and Project Polaroid. Kool Keith has also made guest appearances in collaboration with Peeping Tom and Yeah Yeah Yeahs. He was also featured on the short track DDT on Jurassic 5&#x27;s album &quot;Power in Numbers&quot;.
The Prodigy&#x27;s hit &quot;Smack My Bitch Up&quot; was based on a sample of Kool Keith&#x27;s voice saying &quot;Change my pitch up. Smack my bitch up&quot; on &quot;Give The Drummer Some&quot; by Ultramagnetic MCs.

==History==

===Ultramagnetic MCs (1984–1993)===
Thornton began his career with the group Ultramagnetic MCs under the pseudonym Kool Keith in 1984. Four years later, their release of the album &quot;Critical Beatdown&quot; was critically acclaimed and later became recognized as widely influential for its innovative production, complex rhymes, and chopped sampling. Just after its release, Thornton was reportedly institutionalized in Bellevue Hospital Center. However, he later said that the idea that he was institutionalized came from a flippant remark made during an interview, and he never expected the story to become so well known.

Ultramagnetic MCs would release two more albums (1992&#x27;s &quot;Funk Your Head Up&quot; and 1993&#x27;s &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot;) with little commercial success due to West Coast hip hop&#x27;s changing landscape. They went on hiatus for years, leading Thorton to embark on a solo career.

===Dr. Octagon debuts (1995–1996)===
Thornton released his first notable solo single, &quot;Earth People&quot;, in 1995, under the name Dr. Octagon. This was followed by the release of the concept album &quot;Dr. Octagonecologyst&quot; the following year. The album&#x27;s production by Dan the Automator and Kutmasta Kurt, with scratching by DJ Qbert was acclaimed by critics, and the album was released nationally by DreamWorks Records in 1997, after an initial release on the smaller Bulk Recordings label (as, simply, &quot;Dr. Octagon&quot;) a year prior. &quot;Dr. Octagonecologyst&quot; was considered a departure from old school hip hop to abstract hip hop, with surrealistic, horror, science-fiction, and sexual themes. DreamWorks also issued an instrumental version of the album, titled &quot;Instrumentalyst (Octagon Beats)&quot;.

===Further releases (1996–2001)===
In 1996, Thornton collaborated with Tim Dog for the single &quot;The Industry is Wack&quot;, performing under the name Ultra—the album &quot;Big Time&quot; soon followed. The following year, Thornton followed the release the sophomore album, &quot;Sex Style&quot; under the name Kool Keith. Being a dirty rap concept album, Thornton described it as &quot;pornocore&quot;, filled with sexual metaphors to diss other rappers. An instrumental version was also released. This year, a collaborative album with Godfather Don titled &quot;Cenobites&quot;, was released as an LP.

In 1999, he released the album &quot;First Come, First Served&quot; under the name &quot;Dr. Dooom&quot;, in which the album&#x27;s main character killed off Dr. Octagon on the album&#x27;s opening track. The same year, on August 10, 1999, Thornton released &quot;Black Elvis/Lost in Space&quot;, under the major record labels Ruffhouse and Columbia. It peaked at #10 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Heatseekers chart, #74 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and #180 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, Despite standing out as Thornton&#x27;s most commercially successful project to date, he was disappointed with the album&#x27;s delays and promotional efforts, even though a promotional video was made for the lead single, &quot;Livin&#x27; Astro&quot;, which aired on a few episodes of the MTV show &quot;Amp&quot; in early 2000. Its sequel, &quot;Black Elvis 2&quot;, was released in 2023.

On June 5, 2001, Thornton released the album &quot;Spankmaster&quot; on TVT and Gothom Records. It peaked at #16 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Heatseekers chart, #11 on the Top Independent Albums chart and #48 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. The album has yet to be on streaming.

===Collaborations (2000–2004)===
On July 25, 2000, Thornton released the album &quot;Matthew&quot;. It peaked at #47 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Heatseekers chart. The following month, Thornton collaborated with Ice-T, Marc Live, Black Silver and Pimp Rex for the album &quot;Pimp to Eat&quot;, under the group name Analog Brothers, with Keith performing as Keith Korg and Ice-T as Ice Oscillator. The album was re-released by Mello Music Group on streaming, CD, and LP in 2016. Masters of Illusion, a collaboration with KutMasta Kurt and Motion Man, followed a few months later.

Thornton, Marc Live and H-Bomb formed the group KHM, releasing the album &quot;Game&quot; on November 19, 2002. They later changed their name to &quot;Clayborne Family&quot; by the release of their second album two years later. During the same year (2004) that Clayborne Family was released in, &quot;Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz&quot; (with Reverend Tom (Kool Keith) Al Bury-U (BIG NONAME), M-Balmer and The Funeral Director) and &quot;Diesel Truckers&quot;, another collaboration with KutMasta Kurt.

===Second Dr. Octagon album (2002–2004)===
In 2002, Thornton began recording &quot;The Resurrection of Dr. Octagon&quot; with producer Fanatik J, signing a contract with CMH Records to release the album, which was eventually completed without much input from Thornton, due to a falling out over contractual terms.

On October 12, 2004, Real Talk Entertainment issued the album &quot;Dr. Octagon Part 2&quot;. The album was discontinued by court order. On June 27, &quot;The Return of Dr. Octagon&quot; was released by OCD International, an imprint of CMH, advertised as the official follow-up to &quot;Dr. Octagonecologyst&quot;. Some critics felt that it was not as good as its predecessor. Thornton stated that he liked the album, but felt that it hurt his reputation as a musician. In August, Thornton performed under the Dr. Octagon billing, but did not acknowledge the release of the OCD album.

===Further collaborations and solo albums (2006–present)===
On April 25, 2006, Thornton released the album &quot;Nogatco Rd.&quot; under the name Mr. Nogatco, and &quot;Project Polaroid&quot;, a collaboration with TomC3. &quot;The Return of Dr. Octagon&quot;, the sequel to &quot;Dr. Octagonecologyst&quot;, was released two months later, as well as a Dr. Dooom sequel titled &quot;Dr. Dooom 2&quot; being released two years later.

In 2007, Ultramagnetic MCs released the reunion album &quot;The Best Kept Secret&quot;. In 2009, Kool Keith released the concept album &quot;Tashan Dorrsett&quot;; a follow-up, &quot;The Legend of Tashan Dorrsett&quot;, followed two years later. In 2012, Kool Keith performed at the Gathering of the Juggalos. He has stated that he is considering retiring from music. In 2013, Keith appeared as Dr. Octagon on the Yeah Yeah Yeahs song &quot;Buried Alive&quot;, from their album &quot;Mosquito&quot;. In 2015, Keith released &quot;Time? Astonishing!&quot; with producer L&#x27;Orange and began the start of his relationship with Mello Music Group. Since then, Keith also re-issued his group album with the Analog Brothers (Ice-T, Pimp Rex, Marc Live, Silver Synth) &quot;Pimp To Eat&quot; with Mello Music. Kool Keith&#x27;s recent solo album &quot;Feature Magnetic&quot; was dropped on September 16, 2016 and it features MF DOOM, Slug from Atmosphere, Dirt Nasty and many others. Artwork for the &quot;Feature Magnetic&quot; album was produced by Marc Santo.

In 2018, Keith collaborated once again with Dan the Automator and DJ Qbert for another Dr. Octagon album. &quot;&quot; was released on streaming services on April 6, 2018, with the physical release scheduled for Record Store Day, April 21, 2018. The Record Store Day release includes both vinyl and CD copies. Using his Deltron persona, Del the Funky Homosapien guests on &quot;3030 Meets the Doc, Pt. 1&quot;. NPR offered a first look at the album on March 29, 2018. Kool Keith appears on &quot;Western&quot; by the bluegrass-rap group Gangstagrass, performing as himself. Throughout five years, Thornton released &quot;Controller of Trap&quot;, &quot;Keith&quot;, &quot;Computer Technology&quot;, &quot;Saks 5th Ave&quot;, &quot;Space Goretex&quot; (with Thetan), &quot;Keith&#x27;s Salon&quot;, &quot;Subatomic&quot; (with Del the Funky Homosapien), &quot;Serpent&quot; (with Real Bad Man), and &quot;Black Elvis 2&quot;.

Thornton&#x27;s fan site refers to his discography of roughly fifty album releases, most of which have been commercially released. Singles such as &quot;Spectrum&quot; continue to appear online under the artist&#x27;s name, on sites such as SoundCloud and Spotify.

==Lyrical and performance style==

Thornton&#x27;s lyrics are often abstract, surreal, and filled with non-sequiturs, extreme violence, exaggerated braggadocio, and profane shock humor. For example, &quot;Technical Difficulties,&quot; from the album Dr. Octagonecologyst contains the following lyrics: &quot;Intestines, investments, hide money in your stomach / Who can stop Pepto-Bismol? Only a Gremlin eatin&#x27; in Larry Parker like Gizmo.&quot; In &quot;Extravagant Traveler&quot; from Matthew, he boasts: &quot;Sautéed fish and shrimp / the Dallas Mavericks want me as a bald-headed five-foot-eight guard with a ninety-five inch vertical / Vince Carter respects my legs, ask Shawn Kemp,&quot; whereas on &quot;Miami Mike&quot; from &quot;Saks Fifth Avenue&quot; he proclaims &quot;I watch you take a shower in my 747 flying over your house / I used to live in the Twin Towers by myself.&quot; Thornton is also known for an explicit style focusing on sexual themes, which Thornton has referred to as &quot;pornocore&quot;. In a 2007 interview, Thornton claims to have &quot;invented horrorcore&quot;.

==Alter egos==

Kool Keith is known for his many alter egos. As of 2012, Kool Keith had at least 58 such alter egos: these include well-known aliases such as Dr. Octagon, Dr. Dooom, and Black Elvis, which appeared on albums bearing their names; and the more obscure, such as firearms dealer &quot;Crazy Lou&quot; and &quot;Exotron Geiger Counter One Gamma Plus Sequencer,&quot; as he introduced himself in an appearance on Marley Marl&#x27;s radio show &quot;In Control&quot;. Some of Kool Keith&#x27;s monikers have only existed on album artwork, such as &quot;Mr. Green&quot; and &quot;Elvin Presley.&quot;

In reference to his relationship between himself and his various stage personalities, Keith has said, &quot;I don&#x27;t even feel like I&#x27;m a human being anymore&quot;.

==Discography==

Solo albums

*&quot;Dr. Octagonecologyst&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Sex Style&quot; (1997)
*&quot;First Come, First Served&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Black Elvis/Lost in Space&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Matthew&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Spankmaster&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Nogatco Rd.&quot; (2006)
*&quot;The Return of Dr. Octagon&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Dr. Dooom 2&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Tashan Dorrsett&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Love &amp; Danger&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Demolition Crash&quot; (2014)
*&quot;El Dorado Driven&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Feature Magnetic&quot; (2016)
*&quot;&quot; (2018)
*&quot;Controller of Trap&quot; (2018)
*&quot;Keith&quot; (2019)
*&quot;Computer Technology&quot; (2019)
*&quot;Saks 5th Ave&quot; (2019)
*&quot;Keith&#x27;s Salon&quot; (2021)
*&quot;Black Elvis 2&quot; (2023)
*&quot;Mr. Controller&quot; (2023)
*&quot;World Area&quot; (2023)

Collaborative albums

*&quot;Big Time&quot; (with Tim Dog as Ultra) (1996)
*&quot;The Cenobites&quot; (with Godfather Don as The Cenobites) (1997)
*&quot;Pimp to Eat&quot; (with Ice-T, Black Silver, Marc Live and Pimpin&#x27; Rex as Analog Brothers) (2000)
*&quot;A Much Better Tomorrow&quot; (with Dan The Automator) (2000)
*&quot;Masters of Illusion&quot; (with KutMasta Kurt and Motion Man as Masters of Illusion) (2000)
*&quot;Game&quot; (with Jacky Jasper and Marc Live as KHM) (2002)
*&quot;Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz&quot; (with M-Balmer, The Funeral Director and Al Bury-U as Thee Undatakerz) (2004)
*&quot;Kool Keith Official Space Tape&quot; (with DJ Junkaz Lou) (2004)
*&quot;Diesel Truckers&quot; (with KutMasta Kurt as The Diesel Truckers) (2004)
*&quot;Clayborne Family&quot; (with Jacky Jasper and Marc Live as Clayborne Family) (2004)
*&quot;The Original SoundTrack Album of Project Polaroid&quot; (with TomC3 as Project Polaroid) (2006)
*&quot;Idea of a Masterpiece&quot; (with 57-41) (2009)
*&quot;Bikinis N Thongs&quot; (with Denis Deft) (2009)
*&quot;Stoned&quot; (with H-Bomb as 7th Veil) (2009)
*&quot;Magnetic Pimp Force Field&quot; (with Big Sche Eastwood) (2013)
*&quot;Time? Astonishing!&quot; (with L&#x27;Orange) (2015) 
*&quot;A Couple of Slices&quot; (with Ray West) (2015)
*&quot;Moosebumps: An Exploration Into Modern Day Horripilation The SP 1200 Remixes&quot; (with Dan The Automator) (2018)
*&quot;The Foundation Album&quot; (2019)
*&quot;Space Goretex&quot; (with Thetan) (2020)
*&quot;Subatomic&quot; (2022, with FNKPMPN)
*&quot;Serpent&quot; (2023, with Real Bad Man)
*&quot;Lonnie Parachute&quot; (2023, with Your Best Friend Jippy)
*&quot;STRIKE! eMERGENCY heARTS Mix&quot; (with scott crow, Ceschi, Xiu Xiu)(2024)(Emergency Hearts)
*&quot;STRIKE! Mark Pistel Mix&quot; (with scott crow, Ceschi, Mark Pistel, Xiu Xiu)(2024)(Emergency Hearts)
*&quot;STRIKE! AwareNess Remix&quot; (with scott crow, Ceschi, AwareNess, Xiu Xiu)(2024)(Emergency Hearts)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1783775" start="0" end="22" title="Kool Keith" label="Keith Matthew Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783775" start="78" end="88" title="Kool Keith" label="Kool Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="137" end="146" title="The Bronx" label="The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252866" start="474" end="491" title="Ultramagnetic MCs" label="Ultramagnetic MCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697782" start="511" end="528" title="Critical Beatdown" label="Critical Beatdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509237" start="601" end="618" title="Funk Your Head Up" label="Funk Your Head Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735010" start="635" end="652" title="The Four Horsemen (album)" label="The Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q909513" start="729" end="749" title="Dr. Octagonecologyst" label="Dr. Octagonecologyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304308" start="772" end="783" title="Dr. Octagon" label="Dr. Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480887" start="893" end="902" title="Sex Style" label="Sex Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746022" start="916" end="940" title="First Come, First Served" label="First Come, First Served"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053837" start="987" end="992" title="Keith (album)" label="Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920725" start="1056" end="1081" title="Black Elvis/Lost in Space" label="Black Elvis/Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751040" start="1240" end="1255" title="Analog Brothers" label="Analog Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785460" start="1257" end="1276" title="Masters of Illusion (group)" label="Masters of Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777719" start="1278" end="1293" title="Thee Undatakerz" label="Thee Undatakerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249254" start="1298" end="1314" title="Project Polaroid" label="Project Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853822" start="1381" end="1392" title="Peeping Tom (band)" label="Peeping Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q641858" start="1397" end="1412" title="Yeah Yeah Yeahs" label="Yeah Yeah Yeahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399598" start="1461" end="1471" title="Jurassic 5" label="Jurassic 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239912" start="1491" end="1507" title="Power in Numbers" label="Power in Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="1515" end="1526" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q371487" start="1544" end="1561" title="Smack My Bitch Up" label="Smack My Bitch Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697782" start="1683" end="1704" title="Critical Beatdown" label="Give The Drummer Some"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252866" start="1824" end="1841" title="Ultramagnetic MCs" label="Ultramagnetic MCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697782" start="1933" end="1950" title="Critical Beatdown" label="Critical Beatdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894927" start="2170" end="2194" title="Bellevue Hospital Center" label="Bellevue Hospital Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509237" start="2442" end="2459" title="Funk Your Head Up" label="Funk Your Head Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735010" start="2482" end="2511" title="The Four Horsemen (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Four Horsemen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q429264" start="2551" end="2569" title="West Coast hip hop" label="West Coast hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304308" start="2809" end="2820" title="Dr. Octagon" label="Dr. Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="2862" end="2875" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q909513" start="2882" end="2902" title="Dr. Octagonecologyst" label="Dr. Octagonecologyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254458" start="2960" end="2977" title="Dan the Automator" label="Dan the Automator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817546" start="2982" end="2995" title="Kutmasta Kurt" label="Kutmasta Kurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413166" start="3002" end="3012" title="scratching" label="scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q963338" start="3016" end="3024" title="DJ Qbert" label="DJ Qbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899781" start="3092" end="3110" title="DreamWorks Records" label="DreamWorks Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041957" start="3476" end="3507" title="Instrumentalyst (Octagon Beats)" label="Instrumentalyst (Octagon Beats)"/>
<link wikidata="Q348257" start="3587" end="3594" title="Tim Dog" label="Tim Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906562" start="3686" end="3706" title="Big Time (Ultra album)" label="&amp;quot;Big Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480887" start="3799" end="3808" title="Sex Style" label="Sex Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709211" start="3850" end="3859" title="dirty rap" label="dirty rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109744" start="4056" end="4069" title="Godfather Don" label="Godfather Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058873" start="4083" end="4092" title="Cenobites (album)" label="Cenobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746022" start="4161" end="4185" title="First Come, First Served" label="First Come, First Served"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920725" start="4388" end="4413" title="Black Elvis/Lost in Space" label="Black Elvis/Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377914" start="4451" end="4460" title="Ruffhouse Records" label="Ruffhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="4465" end="4473" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303631" start="4499" end="4538" title="Heatseekers Albums" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Heatseekers chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="4551" end="4577" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="4601" end="4626" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="4918" end="4921" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748027" start="4933" end="4936" title="Amp (TV series)" label="Amp"/>
<link wikidata="Q119589234" start="4976" end="4989" title="Black Elvis 2" label="Black Elvis 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950832" start="5071" end="5082" title="Spankmaster" label="Spankmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283665" start="5092" end="5095" title="TVT Records" label="TVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789808" start="5394" end="5401" title="Matthew (album)" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303631" start="5433" end="5472" title="Heatseekers Albums" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Heatseekers chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q309941" start="5522" end="5527" title="Ice-T" label="Ice-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388566" start="5586" end="5597" title="Pimp to Eat" label="Pimp to Eat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751040" start="5626" end="5641" title="Analog Brothers" label="Analog Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152647" start="5737" end="5754" title="Mello Music Group" label="Mello Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785460" start="5789" end="5808" title="Masters of Illusion (group)" label="Masters of Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817546" start="5831" end="5844" title="KutMasta Kurt" label="KutMasta Kurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976327" start="5915" end="5921" title="H-Bomb (rapper)" label="H-Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519811" start="5970" end="5974" title="Game (KHM album)" label="Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130066" start="6042" end="6058" title="Clayborne Family" label="Clayborne Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430576" start="6192" end="6227" title="Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz" label="Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275022" start="6335" end="6350" title="Diesel Truckers" label="Diesel Truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012889" start="6571" end="6582" title="CMH Records" label="CMH Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354845" start="6737" end="6760" title="Real Talk Entertainment" label="Real Talk Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760403" start="6871" end="6896" title="The Return of Dr. Octagon" label="The Return of Dr. Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012889" start="6919" end="6936" title="OCD International" label="OCD International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047456" start="7415" end="7426" title="Nogatco Rd." label="Nogatco Rd."/>
<link wikidata="Q7249254" start="7471" end="7487" title="Project Polaroid" label="Project Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304060" start="7684" end="7695" title="Dr. Dooom 2" label="Dr. Dooom 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716728" start="7795" end="7815" title="The Best Kept Secret (Ultramagnetic MCs album)" label="The Best Kept Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687183" start="7876" end="7891" title="Tashan Dorrsett" label="Tashan Dorrsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746780" start="7918" end="7947" title="The Legend of Tashan Dorrsett" label="The Legend of Tashan Dorrsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134769" start="8018" end="8043" title="Gathering of the Juggalos" label="Gathering of the Juggalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q641858" start="8149" end="8164" title="Yeah Yeah Yeahs" label="Yeah Yeah Yeahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11632983" start="8219" end="8227" title="Mosquito (Yeah Yeah Yeahs album)" label="Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152647" start="8363" end="8380" title="Mello Music Group" label="Mello Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751040" start="8440" end="8455" title="Analog Brothers" label="Analog Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800479" start="8583" end="8599" title="Feature Magnetic" label="Feature Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q304675" start="8656" end="8663" title="MF Doom" label="MF DOOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338197" start="8665" end="8669" title="Slug (rapper)" label="Slug"/>
<link wikidata="Q175305" start="8687" end="8697" title="Simon Rex" label="Dirt Nasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033379" start="8782" end="8792" title="Marc Santo" label="Marc Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254458" start="8839" end="8856" title="Dan the Automator" label="Dan the Automator"/>
<link wikidata="Q963338" start="8861" end="8869" title="DJ Qbert" label="DJ Qbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304308" start="8882" end="8893" title="Dr. Octagon" label="Dr. Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="9007" end="9023" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366718" start="9115" end="9122" title="Deltron 3030" label="Deltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q608452" start="9132" end="9156" title="Del the Funky Homosapien" label="Del the Funky Homosapien"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053837" start="9448" end="9453" title="Keith (album)" label="Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q608452" start="9621" end="9645" title="Del the Funky Homosapien" label="Del the Funky Homosapien"/>
<link wikidata="Q568769" start="9962" end="9972" title="SoundCloud" label="SoundCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="9977" end="9984" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="10055" end="10063" title="Abstract art" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="10065" end="10072" title="surrealism" label="surreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780448" start="10090" end="10102" title="Non sequitur (literary device)" label="non-sequitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499866" start="10160" end="10171" title="shock humor" label="shock humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q909513" start="10237" end="10257" title="Dr. Octagonecologyst" label="Dr. Octagonecologyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q81890" start="10362" end="10374" title="Pepto-Bismol" label="Pepto-Bismol"/>
<link wikidata="Q124978968" start="10406" end="10418" title="Larry H. Parker" label="Larry Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789808" start="10478" end="10485" title="Matthew (album)" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="10534" end="10550" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q241261" start="10633" end="10645" title="Vince Carter" label="Vince Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q150510" start="10668" end="10678" title="Shawn Kemp" label="Shawn Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="10806" end="10809" title="Boeing 747" label="747"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="10857" end="10868" title="Twin Towers" label="Twin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="10943" end="10949" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709211" start="10998" end="11007" title="pornocore" label="pornocore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139136" start="11075" end="11085" title="horrorcore" label="horrorcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347312" start="11517" end="11528" title="Marley Marl" label="Marley Marl"/>
<link wikidata="Q909513" start="11916" end="11936" title="Dr. Octagonecologyst" label="Dr. Octagonecologyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480887" start="11957" end="11966" title="Sex Style" label="Sex Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746022" start="11987" end="12011" title="First Come, First Served" label="First Come, First Served"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920725" start="12032" end="12057" title="Black Elvis/Lost in Space" label="Black Elvis/Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789808" start="12078" end="12085" title="Matthew (album)" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950832" start="12106" end="12117" title="Spankmaster" label="Spankmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047456" start="12138" end="12149" title="Nogatco Rd." label="Nogatco Rd."/>
<link wikidata="Q7760403" start="12170" end="12195" title="The Return of Dr. Octagon" label="The Return of Dr. Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304060" start="12216" end="12227" title="Dr. Dooom 2" label="Dr. Dooom 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687183" start="12248" end="12263" title="Tashan Dorrsett" label="Tashan Dorrsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800397" start="12284" end="12301" title="Love and Danger (Kool Keith album)" label="Love &amp;amp; Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430578" start="12322" end="12338" title="Demolition Crash" label="Demolition Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q26966358" start="12359" end="12375" title="El Dorado Driven" label="El Dorado Driven"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800479" start="12396" end="12412" title="Feature Magnetic" label="Feature Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053837" start="12493" end="12498" title="Keith (album)" label="Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q119589234" start="12631" end="12644" title="Black Elvis 2" label="Black Elvis 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906562" start="12754" end="12762" title="Big Time (Ultra album)" label="Big Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q348257" start="12775" end="12782" title="Tim Dog" label="Tim Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058873" start="12807" end="12820" title="Cenobites (album)" label="The Cenobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109744" start="12833" end="12846" title="Godfather Don" label="Godfather Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388566" start="12879" end="12890" title="Pimp to Eat" label="Pimp to Eat"/>
<link wikidata="Q309941" start="12903" end="12908" title="Ice-T" label="Ice-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751040" start="12958" end="12973" title="Analog Brothers" label="Analog Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658401" start="12989" end="13011" title="A Much Better Tomorrow" label="A Much Better Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254458" start="13024" end="13041" title="Dan the Automator" label="Dan The Automator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785461" start="13057" end="13076" title="Masters of Illusion (album)" label="Masters of Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817546" start="13089" end="13102" title="Kutmasta Kurt" label="KutMasta Kurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785460" start="13121" end="13140" title="Masters of Illusion (group)" label="Masters of Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519811" start="13150" end="13166" title="Game (KHM album)" label="&amp;quot;Game&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976327" start="13173" end="13185" title="Jacky Jasper" label="Jacky Jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430576" start="13222" end="13257" title="Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz" label="Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777719" start="13318" end="13333" title="Thee Undatakerz" label="Thee Undatakerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275022" start="13421" end="13436" title="Diesel Truckers" label="Diesel Truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817546" start="13449" end="13462" title="KutMasta Kurt" label="KutMasta Kurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130066" start="13501" end="13517" title="Clayborne Family" label="Clayborne Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976327" start="13530" end="13542" title="Jacky Jasper" label="Jacky Jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249254" start="13592" end="13641" title="Project Polaroid" label="The Original SoundTrack Album of Project Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976327" start="13824" end="13830" title="H-Bomb (rapper)" label="H-Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065538" start="14466" end="14472" title="Ceschi" label="Ceschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758193" start="14474" end="14481" title="Xiu Xiu" label="Xiu Xiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065538" start="14562" end="14568" title="Ceschi" label="Ceschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273277" start="14570" end="14581" title="Mark Pistel" label="Mark Pistel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758193" start="14583" end="14590" title="Xiu Xiu" label="Xiu Xiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065538" start="14671" end="14677" title="Ceschi" label="Ceschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758193" start="14690" end="14697" title="Xiu Xiu" label="Xiu Xiu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16707" wikidata="Q8446" url="?curid=16707" title="Kurt Cobain">
<text>Kurt Donald Cobain (February 20, 1967 – April 5, 1994) was an American musician. He was the lead vocalist, guitarist, primary songwriter, and a founding member of the grunge band Nirvana. Through his angsty songwriting and anti-establishment persona, his compositions widened the thematic conventions of mainstream rock music. He was heralded as a spokesman of Generation X, and is widely recognized as one of the most influential rock musicians.

Cobain formed Nirvana with Krist Novoselic and Aaron Burckhard in 1987, establishing themselves as part of the Seattle music scene that later became known as grunge. Burckhard was replaced by Chad Channing before the band released their debut album &quot;Bleach&quot; (1989) on Sub Pop, after which Channing was in turn replaced by Dave Grohl. With this finalized lineup, the band signed with DGC and found commercial success with the single &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; from their critically acclaimed second album &quot;Nevermind&quot; (1991). Cobain wrote many other hit Nirvana songs such as &quot;Come as You Are&quot;, &quot;Lithium&quot;, &quot;In Bloom&quot;, &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot;, and &quot;Something in the Way&quot;. Although he was hailed as the voice of his generation following Nirvana&#x27;s sudden success, he was uncomfortable with this role.

During his final years, Cobain struggled with a heroin addiction, stomach pain, and chronic depression. He also struggled with the personal and professional pressures of fame, and was often in the spotlight for his tumultuous marriage to fellow musician Courtney Love, with whom he had a daughter named Frances. In March 1994, he overdosed on a combination of champagne and Rohypnol, subsequently undergoing an intervention and detox program. On April 8, 1994, he was found dead in the greenhouse of his Seattle home at the age of 27, with police concluding that he had died around three days earlier from a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head.

Cobain was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, alongside Nirvana bandmates Novoselic and Grohl, in their first year of eligibility in 2014. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; included him on its lists of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time, 100 Greatest Guitarists, and 100 Greatest Singers of All Time. He was ranked 7th by MTV in the &quot;22 Greatest Voices in Music&quot;, and was placed 20th by &quot;Hit Parader&quot; on their 2006 list of the &quot;100 Greatest Metal Singers of All Time&quot;.

== Early life ==
Kurt Donald Cobain was born at Grays Harbor Hospital in Aberdeen, Washington, on February 20, 1967, the son of waitress Wendy Elizabeth (née Fradenburg; 1947–2021) and car mechanic Donald Leland Cobain (born 1946). His parents married in Coeur d&#x27;Alene, Idaho, on July 31, 1965. Cobain had Dutch, English, French, German, Irish, and Scottish ancestry. The Cobain surname comes from his Irish ancestors, who emigrated in 1875 from Carrickmore, a village near Omagh in County Tyrone in Ulster, the northern province in Ireland. Researchers found that they were shoemakers, originally surnamed Cobane, and were Ulster Scots people who came from the Inishatieve area of Carrickmore. They first settled in Canada, where they lived in Cornwall, Ontario, before moving to Washington. Cobain mistakenly believed that his Irish ancestors came from County Cork. His younger sister, Kimberly, was born on April 24, 1970.

Cobain&#x27;s family had a musical background. His maternal uncle, Chuck Fradenburg, played in a band called the Beachcombers; his aunt, Mari Earle, played guitar and performed in bands throughout Grays Harbor County; and his great-uncle, Delbert, had a career as an Irish tenor, making an appearance in the 1930 film &quot;King of Jazz&quot;. Cobain was described as a happy and excitable child, who also exhibited sensitivity and care. His talent as an artist was evident from an early age, as he would draw his favorite characters from films and cartoons, such as the Creature from the Black Lagoon and Donald Duck, in his bedroom. He was encouraged by his grandmother, Iris Cobain, a professional artist. Cobain developed an interest in music at a young age. According to his aunt Mari, he began singing at the age of two. At age four, he started playing the piano and singing, writing a song about a trip to a park. He listened to artists including Electric Light Orchestra (ELO), and, from a young age, would sing songs including Arlo Guthrie&#x27;s &quot;Motorcycle Song&quot;, the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Hey Jude&quot;, Terry Jacks&#x27; &quot;Seasons in the Sun&quot;, and the theme song to the &quot;Monkees&quot; television show.

When Cobain was nine years old, his parents divorced. He later said the divorce had a profound effect on his life, and his mother noted that his personality changed dramatically; Cobain became defiant and withdrawn. In a 1993 interview, he said he felt &quot;ashamed&quot; of his parents as a child and had desperately wanted to have a &quot;typical family ... I wanted that security, so I resented my parents for quite a few years because of that.&quot; His parents found new partners after the divorce. Although his father had promised not to remarry, he married Jenny Westeby, to Cobain&#x27;s dismay. Cobain, his father, Westeby, and her two children, Mindy and James, moved into a new household. Cobain liked Westeby at first, as she gave him the maternal attention he desired. In January 1979, Westeby gave birth to a boy, Chad Cobain. This new family, which Cobain insisted was not his real one, was in stark contrast to the attention Cobain was used to receiving as an only boy, and he became resentful of his stepmother. Cobain&#x27;s mother dated a man who was abusive; Cobain witnessed the domestic violence inflicted upon her, with one incident resulting in her being hospitalized with a broken arm. His mother refused to press charges, remaining committed to the relationship.

Cobain behaved insolently toward adults during this period and began bullying another boy at school. His father and Westeby took him to a therapist who concluded that he would benefit from a single-family environment. Both sides of the family unsuccessfully attempted to reunite his parents. On June 28, 1979, Cobain&#x27;s mother granted full custody to his father. Cobain&#x27;s teenage rebellion quickly became overwhelming for his father who placed him in the care of family and friends. While living with the born-again Christian family of his friend Jesse Reed, Cobain became a devout Christian and attended church services regularly. He later renounced Christianity, engaging in what were described as &quot;anti-God&quot; rants. Cobain claimed that &quot;Lithium&quot; was about his experience while living with the Reed family. He also stated in a 1992 interview that it was a fictionalized account of a man who &quot;turned to religion as a last resort to keep himself alive&quot; after the death of his girlfriend, &quot;to keep him from suicide&quot;. However, spirituality remained an important part of Cobain&#x27;s personal life and beliefs.

Although uninterested in sports, Cobain was enrolled in a junior high school wrestling team at the insistence of his father. He was a skilled wrestler but despised the experience. Because of the ridicule he endured from his teammates and coach, he allowed himself to be pinned in an attempt to sadden his father. Later, his father enlisted him in a Little League Baseball team, where Cobain would intentionally strike out to avoid playing. Cobain befriended a gay student at school and was bullied by peers who concluded that he was gay. In an interview, he said that he liked being associated with a gay identity because he did not like people, and when they thought he was gay they left him alone. He said, &quot;I started being really proud of the fact that I was gay even though I wasn&#x27;t.&quot; Cobain backed away in an occasion where this friend tried to kiss him, explaining to his friend that he was not gay, though they remained friends. According to Cobain, he used to spray paint &quot;God Is Gay&quot; on pickup trucks in the Aberdeen area. Police records show that Cobain was arrested for spray painting the phrase &quot;ain&#x27;t got no how watchamacallit&quot; on vehicles.
Cobain often drew during classes. When given a caricature assignment for an art course, Cobain drew Michael Jackson but was told by the teacher that the image was inappropriate for a school hallway. He then drew an image of then-President Ronald Reagan that was seen as &quot;unflattering&quot;. Through art and electronics classes, Cobain met Buzz Osborne, singer and guitarist of the Melvins, who became his friend and introduced him to punk rock and hardcore music. As attested to by several of Cobain&#x27;s classmates and family members, the first concert he attended was Sammy Hagar and Quarterflash, held at the Seattle Center Coliseum in 1983. Cobain, however, claimed that the first live show he attended was the Melvins, when they played a free concert outside the Thriftway supermarket where Osborne worked. Cobain wrote in his journals of this experience, as well as in interviews, singling out the impact it had on him. As a teenager living in Montesano, Washington, Cobain eventually found escape through the thriving Pacific Northwest punk scene, going to punk rock shows in Seattle.

During his second year in high school, Cobain began living with his mother in Aberdeen. Two weeks prior to graduation, he dropped out of Aberdeen High School upon realizing that he did not have enough credits to graduate. His mother gave him an ultimatum: find employment or leave. After one week, Cobain found his clothes and other belongings packed away in boxes. Feeling banished, Cobain stayed with friends, occasionally sneaking back into his mother&#x27;s basement. Cobain also claimed that during periods of homelessness, he lived under a bridge over the Wishkah River, an experience that inspired the song &quot;Something in the Way&quot;. Though family and friends cast doubt of this claim, with his future bandmate Krist Novoselic later saying, &quot;He hung out there, but you couldn&#x27;t live on those muddy banks, with the tides coming up and down. That was his own revisionism.&quot; In late 1986, Cobain moved into an apartment, paying his rent by working at the Polynesian Resort, a themed resort on the Pacific coast at Ocean Shores, Washington approximately west of Aberdeen. During this period, he traveled frequently to Olympia, Washington, to go to rock concerts. During his visits to Olympia, Cobain formed a relationship with Tracy Marander. Their relationship was close but strained by financial problems and Cobain&#x27;s absence when touring. Marander supported the couple by working at the cafeteria of the Boeing plant in Auburn, Washington, often stealing food. Cobain spent most of his time sleeping into the late evening, watching television, and concentrating on art projects.

Marander&#x27;s insistence that he get a job caused arguments that influenced Cobain to write the song &quot;About a Girl&quot;, which appeared on Nirvana&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Bleach&quot;. Marander is credited with having taken the cover photo for the album, as well as the front and back cover photos of their Blew single. She did not become aware that Cobain wrote &quot;About a Girl&quot; about her until years after his death. Soon after his separation from Marander, Cobain began dating Tobi Vail, an influential punk zinester of the riot grrrl band Bikini Kill who embraced the DIY ethos. After meeting Vail, Cobain vomited, overwhelmed with anxiety caused by his infatuation with her. This event inspired the lyric &quot;love you so much it makes me sick&quot; in the song &quot;Aneurysm&quot;. While Cobain regarded Vail as his female counterpart, his relationship with her waned; he desired the maternal comfort of a traditional relationship, which Vail regarded as sexist within a countercultural punk rock community. Vail&#x27;s lovers were described by her friend Alice Wheeler as &quot;fashion accessories&quot;. Cobain wrote many of his songs about Vail.

== Career ==

=== Early musical projects ===
On his 14th birthday, February 20, 1981, Cobain&#x27;s uncle offered him the choice of either a bike or a used guitar; Cobain chose the guitar. Soon, he was trying to play Led Zeppelin&#x27;s song &quot;Stairway to Heaven&quot;. He also learned how to play &quot;Louie Louie&quot;, Queen&#x27;s &quot;Another One Bites the Dust&quot;, and the Cars&#x27; &quot;My Best Friend&#x27;s Girl&quot;, before he began working on his own songs. Cobain played left-handed, despite being forced to write right-handed.

In early 1985, Cobain formed Fecal Matter after he had dropped out of Aberdeen High School. One of &quot;several joke bands&quot; that arose from the circle of friends associated with the Melvins, it initially featured Cobain singing and playing guitar, Melvins drummer Dale Crover playing bass, and Greg Hokanson playing drums. They spent several months rehearsing original material and covers, including songs by the Ramones, Led Zeppelin, and Jimi Hendrix.

=== Nirvana ===

During high school, Cobain rarely found anyone with whom he could play music. While hanging out at the Melvins&#x27; practice space, he met Krist Novoselic, a fellow devotee of punk rock. Novoselic&#x27;s mother owned a hair salon, and the pair occasionally practiced in the upstairs room of the salon. A few years later, Cobain tried to convince Novoselic to form a band with him by lending him a copy of a home demo recorded by Fecal Matter. After months of asking, Novoselic agreed to join Cobain, forming the beginnings of Nirvana. Religion appeared to remain a significant muse to Cobain during this time as he often used Christian imagery in his work and developed an interest in Jainism and Buddhist philosophy.
Cobain became disenchanted after early touring because of the band&#x27;s inability to draw substantial crowds and the difficulty in supporting themselves financially. During their first few years playing together, Novoselic and Cobain were hosts to a succession of drummers. Eventually, the band settled on Chad Channing with whom Nirvana recorded the album &quot;Bleach&quot;, released on Sub Pop Records in 1989. Cobain, however, became dissatisfied with Channing&#x27;s style and subsequently fired him. He and Novoselic eventually hired Dave Grohl to replace Channing. Grohl helped the band record their 1991 major-label debut, &quot;Nevermind&quot;. With &quot;Nevermind&quot;″s lead single, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, Nirvana quickly entered the mainstream, popularizing a subgenre of alternative rock called &quot;grunge&quot;. Since their debut, Nirvana has sold over 28 million albums in the United States alone and over 75 million worldwide. The success of &quot;Nevermind&quot; provided numerous Seattle bands, such as Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Soundgarden, access to wider audiences. As a result, alternative rock became a dominant genre on radio and music television in the U.S. during the first half of the 1990s. Nirvana was considered the &quot;flagship band of Generation X&quot;, and Cobain found himself reluctantly anointed by the media as the generation&#x27;s &quot;spokesman&quot;. He resented this characterization since he believed his artistic message had been misinterpreted by the public.

Cobain struggled to reconcile the massive success of Nirvana with his underground roots and vision. He also felt persecuted by the media, comparing himself to Frances Farmer whom he named a song after. He began to harbor resentment against people who claimed to be fans of the band yet refused to acknowledge, or misinterpreted, the band&#x27;s social and political views. A vocal opponent of sexism, racism, sexual assault, and homophobia, he was publicly proud that Nirvana had played at a gay rights benefit concert that was held to oppose Oregon&#x27;s 1992 Ballot Measure 9, which would have directed Oregon schools to teach that homosexuality was &quot;abnormal, wrong, unnatural and perverse&quot;. Cobain was a vocal supporter of the pro-choice movement, and Nirvana was involved in L7&#x27;s Rock for Choice campaign. He received death threats from a small number of anti-abortion activists for participating in the pro-choice campaign, with one activist threatening to shoot Cobain as soon as he stepped on a stage.

=== Other collaborations ===
In 1989, members of Nirvana and fellow American alternative rock band Screaming Trees formed a side project known as the Jury. The band featured Cobain on vocals and guitar, Mark Lanegan on vocals, Krist Novoselic on bass, and Mark Pickerel on drums. Over two days of recording sessions, on August 20 and 28, 1989, the band recorded four songs also performed by Lead Belly; &quot;Where Did You Sleep Last Night?&quot;, an instrumental version of &quot;Grey Goose&quot;, &quot;Ain&#x27;t It a Shame&quot;, and &quot;They Hung Him on a Cross&quot;, the latter of which featured Cobain performing solo. Cobain was inspired to record the songs after receiving a copy of &quot;Lead Belly&#x27;s Last Sessions&quot; from friend Slim Moon; after hearing it, he &quot;felt a connection to Leadbelly&#x27;s almost physical expressions of longing and desire.&quot;

In 1990, Cobain and his girlfriend, Tobi Vail of the riot grrrl band Bikini Kill, collaborated on a musical project called Bathtub is Real in which they both sang and played guitar and drums. They recorded their songs on a four-track tape machine that belonged to Vail&#x27;s father. In Everett True&#x27;s 2009 book &quot;Nirvana: The Biography&quot;, Vail is quoted as saying that Cobain &quot;would play the songs he was writing, I would play the songs I was writing and we&#x27;d record them on my dad&#x27;s four-track. Sometimes I&#x27;d sing on the songs he was writing and play drums on them ... He was really into the fact that I was creative and into music. I don&#x27;t think he&#x27;d ever played music with a girl before. He was super-inspiring and fun to play with.&quot; The musician Slim Moon described their sound as &quot;like the minimal quiet pop songs that Olympia is known for. Both of them sang; it was really good.&quot;

In 1992, Cobain contacted William S. Burroughs about a possible collaboration. Burroughs responded by sending him a recording of &quot;The Junky&#x27;s Christmas&quot; (which he recorded in his studio in Lawrence, Kansas). Two months later at a studio in Seattle, Cobain added guitar backing based on &quot;Silent Night&quot; and &quot;To Anacreon in Heaven&quot;. The two would meet shortly later in Lawrence, Kansas and produce &quot;The &#x27;Priest&#x27; They Called Him&quot;, a spoken word version of &quot;The Junky&#x27;s Christmas&quot;.

== Musical influences ==
The Beatles were an early and lasting influence on Cobain; his aunt Mari remembers him singing &quot;Hey Jude&quot; at the age of two. &quot;My aunts would give me Beatles records&quot;, Cobain told Jon Savage in 1993, &quot;so for the most part [I listened to] the Beatles [as a child], and if I was lucky, I&#x27;d be able to buy a single.&quot; Cobain expressed a particular fondness for John Lennon, whom he called his &quot;idol&quot; in his posthumously released journals, and he said that he wrote the song &quot;About a Girl&quot;, from Nirvana&#x27;s 1989 debut album &quot;Bleach&quot;, after spending three hours listening to &quot;Meet the Beatles!&quot;.

Cobain was also a fan of 1970s hard rock and heavy metal bands, including Led Zeppelin, AC/DC, Black Sabbath, Aerosmith, Queen, and Kiss. Nirvana occasionally played cover songs by these bands, including Led Zeppelin&#x27;s &quot;Heartbreaker&quot;, &quot;Moby Dick&quot; and &quot;Immigrant Song&quot;, Black Sabbath&#x27;s &quot;Hand of Doom&quot;, and Kiss&#x27; &quot;Do You Love Me?&quot; and wrote the &quot;Incesticide&quot; song &quot;Aero Zeppelin&quot; as a tribute to Led Zeppelin and Aerosmith. Recollecting touring with his band, Cobain stated, &quot;I used to take a nap in the van and listen to Queen. Over and over again and drain the battery on the van. We&#x27;d be stuck with a dead battery because I&#x27;d listened to Queen too much&quot;.

He was introduced to punk rock and hardcore music by his Aberdeen classmate Buzz Osborne, lead singer and guitarist of the Melvins, who taught Cobain about punk by loaning him records and old copies of the Detroit-based magazine &quot;Creem&quot;. Punk rock proved to be a profound influence on a teenaged Cobain&#x27;s attitude and artistic style. His first punk rock album was &quot;Sandinista!&quot; by the Clash, but he became a bigger fan of fellow 1970s British punk band the Sex Pistols, describing them as &quot;one million times more important than the Clash&quot; in his journals. He quickly discovered contemporary American hardcore bands like Black Flag, Bad Brains, Millions of Dead Cops and Flipper. The Melvins themselves were a major early musical influence on Cobain; his admiration for them led him to drive their van on tour and help them to carry their equipment. He and Novoselic watched hundreds of Melvins rehearsals and &quot;learned almost everything from them&quot;, as stated by Cobain. The Melvins&#x27; heavy, grungey sound was mimicked by Nirvana on many songs from &quot;Bleach&quot;; in an early interview given by Nirvana, Cobain stated that their biggest fear was to be perceived as a &quot;Melvins rip-off&quot;. After their commercial success, the members of Nirvana would constantly talk about the Melvins&#x27; importance to them in the press.

Cobain was an admirer of Jimi Hendrix, and said in reference to the growing media attention on the Seattle scene at the time, &quot;I mean, we had Jimi Hendrix. Heck. What more do we want?&quot;. In a 1993 interview Cobain called Hendrix &quot;a great musician and a great composer,&quot; and noted that, &quot;I have great respect for him.&quot;

Cobain was also a fan of protopunk acts like the Stooges, whose 1973 album &quot;Raw Power&quot; he listed as his favorite of all time in his journals.

The 1980s American alternative rock band Pixies were instrumental in helping an adult Cobain develop his own songwriting style. In a 1992 interview with &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, Cobain said that hearing their 1988 debut album, &quot;Surfer Rosa&quot;, &quot;convinced him to abandon his more Black Flag-influenced songwriting in favor of the Iggy Pop/Aerosmith-type songwriting that appeared on &quot;Nevermind&quot;. In a 1993 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, he said that &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; was his attempt at &quot;trying to rip off the Pixies. I have to admit it. When I heard the Pixies for the first time, I connected with that band so heavily that I should have been in that band—or at least a Pixies cover band. We used their sense of dynamics, being soft and quiet and then loud and hard&quot;.

Cobain&#x27;s appreciation of early alternative rock bands also extended to Sonic Youth and R.E.M., both of which the members of Nirvana befriended and looked up to for advice. It was under recommendation from Sonic Youth&#x27;s Kim Gordon that Nirvana signed to DGC in 1990, and both bands did a two-week tour of Europe in the summer of 1991, as documented in the 1992 documentary, &quot;1991: The Year Punk Broke&quot;. In 1993, Cobain said of R.E.M.: &quot;If I could write just a couple of songs as good as what they&#x27;ve written... I don&#x27;t know how that band does what they do. God, they&#x27;re the greatest. They&#x27;ve dealt with their success like saints, and they keep delivering great music&quot;.

After attaining mainstream success, Cobain became a devoted champion of lesser known indie bands, covering songs by the Vaselines, Meat Puppets, Wipers and Fang onstage and/or in the studio, wearing Daniel Johnston T-shirts during photo shoots, having the K Records logo tattooed on his forearm, and enlisting bands like Butthole Surfers, Shonen Knife, Chokebore and Half Japanese along for the &quot;In Utero&quot; tour in late 1993 and early 1994. Cobain even invited his favorite musicians to perform with him: ex-Germs guitarist Pat Smear joined the band in 1993, and the Meat Puppets appeared onstage during Nirvana&#x27;s 1993 &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; appearance to perform three songs from their second album, &quot;Meat Puppets II&quot;.

Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Unplugged&quot; set includes renditions of &quot;The Man Who Sold the World&quot;, by David Bowie, and the American folk song, &quot;Where Did You Sleep Last Night&quot;, as adapted by Lead Belly. Cobain introduced the latter by calling Lead Belly his favorite performer, and in a 1993 interview revealed he had been introduced to him from reading the American author William S. Burroughs, saying: &quot;I remember [Burroughs] saying in an interview, &#x27;These new rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll kids should just throw away their guitars and listen to something with real soul, like Leadbelly.&#x27; I&#x27;d never heard about Leadbelly before so I bought a couple of records, and now he turns out to be my absolute favorite of all time in music. I absolutely love it more than any rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll I ever heard.&quot; The album &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot; was released posthumously in 1994. It has drawn comparisons to R.E.M.&#x27;s 1992 release, &quot;Automatic for the People&quot;. In 1993, Cobain had predicted that the next Nirvana album would be &quot;pretty ethereal, acoustic, like R.E.M.&#x27;s last album&quot;.

&quot;Yeah, he talked a lot about what direction he was heading in&quot;, Cobain&#x27;s friend, R.E.M.&#x27;s lead singer Michael Stipe, told &quot;Newsweek&quot; in 1994. &quot;I mean, I know what the next Nirvana recording was going to sound like. It was going to be very quiet and acoustic, with lots of stringed instruments. It was going to be an amazing fucking record, and I&#x27;m a little bit angry at him for killing himself. He and I were going to record a trial run of the album, a demo tape. It was all set up. He had a plane ticket. He had a car picking him up. And at the last minute he called and said, &#x27;I can&#x27;t come. Stipe was chosen as the godfather of Cobain&#x27;s and Courtney Love&#x27;s daughter, Frances Bean Cobain.

== Artistry ==

According to Grohl, Cobain believed that music comes first and lyrics second; he focused primarily on the melodies. He complained when fans and rock journalists attempted to decipher his singing and extract meaning from his lyrics, writing: &quot;Why in the hell do journalists insist on coming up with a second-rate Freudian evaluation of my lyrics, when 90 percent of the time they&#x27;ve transcribed them incorrectly?&quot; Though Cobain insisted on the subjectivity and unimportance of his lyrics, he labored and procrastinated in writing them, often changing the content and order of lyrics during performances. Cobain would describe his own lyrics as &quot;a big pile of contradictions. They&#x27;re split down the middle between very sincere opinions that I have and sarcastic opinions and feelings that I have and sarcastic and hopeful, humorous rebuttals toward cliché bohemian ideals that have been exhausted for years.&quot;

Cobain originally wanted &quot;Nevermind&quot; to be divided into two sides: a &quot;Boy&quot; side, for the songs written about the experiences of his early life and childhood, and a &quot;Girl&quot; side, for the songs written about his dysfunctional relationship with Vail. Charles R. Cross wrote, &quot;In the four months following their break-up, Kurt would write a half dozen of his most memorable songs, all of them about Tobi Vail.&quot; Though Cobain wrote &quot;Lithium&quot; before meeting Vail, he wrote the lyrics to reference her. Cobain said in an interview with &quot;Musician&quot; that he wrote about &quot;some of my very personal experiences, like breaking up with girlfriends and having bad relationships, feeling that death void that the person in the song is feeling. Very lonely, sick.&quot; While Cobain regarded &quot;In Utero&quot; as &quot;for the most part very impersonal&quot;, its lyrics deal with his parents&#x27; divorce, his newfound fame and the public image and perception of himself and Courtney Love on &quot;Serve the Servants&quot;, with his enamored relationship with Love conveyed through lyrical themes of pregnancy and the female anatomy on &quot;Heart-Shaped Box.&quot;

Cobain was affected enough to write &quot;Polly&quot; from &quot;Nevermind&quot; after reading a newspaper story of an incident in 1987, when a 14-year-old girl was kidnapped after attending a punk rock show, then raped and tortured with a blowtorch. She escaped after gaining the trust of her captor Gerald Friend through flirting with him. After seeing Nirvana perform, Bob Dylan cited &quot;Polly&quot; as the best of Nirvana&#x27;s songs, and said of Cobain, &quot;the kid has heart&quot;. Patrick Süskind&#x27;s novel &quot;Perfume: The Story of a Murderer&quot; inspired Cobain to write the song &quot;Scentless Apprentice&quot; from &quot;In Utero&quot;. The book is a historical horror novel about a perfumer&#x27;s apprentice born with no body odor of his own but with a highly developed sense of smell, and who attempts to create the &quot;ultimate perfume&quot; by killing virginal women and taking their scent.

Cobain immersed himself in artistic projects throughout his life, as much so as he did in songwriting. The sentiments of his artwork followed the same subjects of his lyrics, often expressed through a dark and macabre sense of humor. Noted were his fascination with physiology, his own rare medical conditions, and the human anatomy. According to Novoselic, &quot;Kurt said that he never liked literal things. He liked cryptic things. He would cut out pictures of meat from grocery-store fliers, then paste these orchids on them ... And all this stuff on [&quot;In Utero&quot;] about the body—there was something about anatomy. He really liked that. You look at his art—there are these people, and they&#x27;re all weird, like mutants. And dolls—creepy dolls.&quot;

Cobain contributed backing guitar for a spoken word recording of beat poet William S. Burroughs&#x27; entitled &quot;The &quot;Priest&quot; They Called Him&quot;. Cobain regarded Burroughs as a hero. During Nirvana&#x27;s European tour Cobain kept a copy of Burroughs&#x27; &quot;Naked Lunch&quot;, purchased from a London bookstall. Cobain met with Burroughs at his home in Lawrence, Kansas in October 1993. Burroughs expressed no surprise at Cobain&#x27;s death: &quot;It wasn&#x27;t an act of will for Kurt to kill himself. As far as I was concerned, he was dead already.&quot;

== Equipment ==
In a &quot;Guitar World&quot; retrospective, Cobain&#x27;s guitar tone was deemed &quot;one of the most iconic&quot; in the history of the electric guitar, while noting that rather than relying on expensive or vintage items, Cobain used &quot;an eccentric cache of budget models, low-end imports and pawn shop prizes.&quot; Cobain stated in a 1992 interview, &quot;Junk is always best,&quot; but denied this was a punk statement and claimed it was a necessity, as he had trouble finding high quality left-handed guitars.

Cobain&#x27;s first guitar was a used electric guitar from Sears that he received on his 14th birthday. He took guitar lessons long enough to learn AC/DC&#x27;s &quot;Back in Black&quot; and began playing with local kids. Cobain found the guitar smashed after leaving it in a locker, but he was able to purchase new equipment, including a Peavey amp, by recovering and selling his stepfather&#x27;s gun collection, which his mother had dumped in a river after discovering his infidelity. Upon forming what would be Nirvana, Cobain was playing a Fender Champ amplifier and a right-handed Univox Hi-Flier guitar he flipped over and strung for left-handed playing.

For the recording of &quot;Bleach&quot;, Cobain needed to borrow a Fender Twin Reverb due to his main amplifier, a solid-state Randall, being repaired at the time, but as the Twin Reverb&#x27;s speakers were blown, he was forced to pair it with an external cabinet featuring two 12&quot; speakers. He used a Boss DS-1 for distortion, while playing Hi-Flier guitars, which cost him each. Nirvana embarked on their first American tour in 1989, at the start of which Cobain played an Epiphone ET270; however, he destroyed the guitar onstage during a show, a subsequent habit that forced label Sub Pop to have to call local pawn shops looking for replacement guitars. Cobain&#x27;s first acoustic guitar, a Stella 12-string, cost him . Cobain strung it with six (or sometimes five) strings, and while the guitar&#x27;s tuners had to be held together with duct tape, it sounded good enough that the guitar was later used to record the &quot;Nevermind&quot; tracks &quot;Polly&quot; and &quot;Something in the Way.&quot;

Despite receiving a advance upon signing with Geffen Records, Cobain retained a preference for inexpensive gear. He became a fan of Japanese-made Fender guitars ahead of recording &quot;Nevermind&quot;, due to their slim necks and wide availability in left-handed orientation. These included several Stratocasters fitted with humbucker pickups in the bridge positions, as well as a 1965 Jaguar with DiMarzio pickups and a 1969 Competition Mustang, the latter of which Cobain cited as his favorite, despite noting, &quot;They&#x27;re cheap and totally inefficient, and they sound like crap and are very small.&quot; For the album, Cobain used a rackmount system featuring a Mesa/Boogie Studio preamp, a Crown power amp, and Marshall cabinets. He also used a Vox AC30 and a Fender Bassman. Producer Butch Vig preferred to avoid pedals, but allowed Cobain to use his Boss DS-1, which Cobain considered a key part of his sound, as well as an Electro-Harmonix Big Muff fuzz pedal and a Small Clone chorus, which can be heard on songs like &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit,&quot; &quot;Come As You Are,&quot; and &quot;Aneurysm.&quot;

Cobain used his &#x27;69 Mustang, &#x27;65 Jaguar, a custom Jaguar/Mustang, and a Hi-Flier for the &quot;In Utero&quot; recording sessions. To tour behind the album, Cobain placed an order for 10 Mustangs split between Fiesta Red and Sonic Blue. As the Fender Custom Shop was new, the guitars were to be shipped out two at a time over a period of months. By the time of his death, Cobain had received six of the guitars. The remaining four, waiting to be shipped, were instead sold as regular stock at Japanese music stores without informing buyers the guitars had been made for Cobain.

For Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Unplugged&quot; performance, Cobain played a righthanded 1959 Martin D-18E acoustic guitar modified for left-handed playing. The guitar became the most expensive ever sold when it fetched over at auction in 2020. Cobain&#x27;s 1969 Competition Mustang, which he also played in the &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; music video, sold at a 2022 auction to Jim Irsay, owner of the Indianapolis Colts, for , with an original estimate of .

== Personal life ==

=== Relationships and family ===
There are differing accounts of exactly when and how Cobain first met Courtney Love. In his 1993 authorized biography of Nirvana, Michael Azerrad cites a January 21, 1989, Dharma Bums gig in Portland where Nirvana played as support, while the Charles R. Cross 2001 Cobain biography has Love and Cobain meeting at the same Satyricon nightclub venue in Portland but a different Nirvana show, January 12, 1990, when both still led ardent underground rock bands. Love made advances soon after they met, but Cobain was evasive. Early in their interactions, Cobain broke off dates and ignored Love&#x27;s advances because he was unsure if he wanted a relationship. Cobain noted, &quot;I was determined to be a bachelor for a few months [...] But I knew that I liked Courtney so much right away that it was a really hard struggle to stay away from her for so many months.&quot; Everett True, who was an associate of both Cobain and Love, disputes those versions of events in his 2006 book, claiming that he himself introduced the couple on May 17, 1991.

Cobain was already aware of Love through her role in the 1987 film &quot;Straight to Hell&quot;. According to True, the pair were formally introduced at an L7 and Butthole Surfers concert in Los Angeles in May 1991. In the weeks that followed, after learning from Grohl that Cobain shared mutual interests with her, Love began pursuing Cobain. In late 1991, the two were often together and bonded through drug use.

On February 24, 1992, a few days after the conclusion of Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Pacific Rim&quot; tour, Cobain and Love were married on Waikiki Beach in Hawaii. Love wore a satin and lace dress once owned by Frances Farmer, and Cobain donned a Guatemalan purse and wore green pajamas, because he had been &quot;too lazy to put on a tux.&quot; Eight people were in attendance at the ceremony, including Grohl, but not Novoselic. Love said she was warned by the Sonic Youth bassist Kim Gordon that marrying Cobain would &quot;destroy her life&quot;; Love responded: &quot;&#x27;Whatever! I love him, and I want to be with him!&#x27; ... It wasn&#x27;t his fault. He wasn&#x27;t trying to do that.&quot;

The couple&#x27;s daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, was born August 18, 1992. A sonogram was included in the artwork for Nirvana&#x27;s single, &quot;Lithium.&quot; In a 1992 &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; article&quot;,&quot; Love admitted to a drug binge with Cobain in the early weeks of her pregnancy. At the time, she claimed that &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; had misquoted her. Love later admitted to using heroin before knowing she was pregnant. The couple were asked by the press if Frances was addicted to drugs at birth. The Los Angeles County Department of Children&#x27;s Services visited the Cobain&#x27;s days after Love gave birth and later took them to court, stating that their drug usage made them unfit parents. Frances was removed from her parents&#x27; care for a &quot;short period of time&quot; in the first few weeks of her life.

=== Sexuality ===
In October 1992, when asked, &quot;Well, are you gay?&quot; by &quot;Monk Magazine&quot;, Cobain replied, &quot;If I wasn&#x27;t attracted to Courtney, I&#x27;d be a bisexual.&quot; In another interview, he described identifying with the gay community in &quot;The Advocate&quot;, stating, &quot;I&#x27;m definitely gay in spirit and I probably could be bisexual&quot; and &quot;if I wouldn&#x27;t have found Courtney, I probably would have carried on with a bisexual lifestyle&quot;, but also that he was &quot;more sexually attracted to women&quot;. He described himself as being &quot;feminine&quot; in childhood, and often wore dresses and other stereotypically feminine clothing. Some of his song lyrics, as well as phrases he would use to vandalize vehicles and a bank, included &quot;God is gay&quot;, &quot;Jesus is gay&quot;, &quot;HOMOSEXUAL SEX RULES&quot;, and &quot;Everyone is gay&quot;. One of his personal journals states, &quot;I am not gay, although I wish I were, just to piss off homophobes.&quot;

Cobain advocated for LGBTQ+ rights, including traveling to Oregon to perform at a benefit opposing the 1992 Oregon Ballot Measure 9, and supported local bands with LGBTQ+ members. He reported having felt &quot;different&quot; from the age of seven, and was a frequent target of homophobic bullying in his school due to his having a &quot;gay friend&quot;. Cobain was interviewed by two gay magazines, &quot;Out&quot; and &quot;The Advocate&quot;; the 1993 interview with &quot;The Advocate&quot; being described as &quot;the only [interview] the band&#x27;s lead singer says he plans to do for &quot;Incesticide&quot;&quot;, an album whose liner notes included a statement decrying homophobia, racism and misogyny:

=== Health and addiction ===
At school Cobain was diagnosed with attention deficit disorder and was prescribed Ritalin. Throughout most of his life, Cobain had chronic bronchitis and intense physical pain due to an undiagnosed chronic stomach condition. In an interview with Jon Savage in 1993 he said, &quot;Every time I&#x27;ve had an endoscope, they find a red irritation in my stomach. But it&#x27;s psychosomatic, it&#x27;s all from anger. And screaming&quot;. He then goes on to mention that he, &quot;had minor scoliosis in junior high&quot;. According to &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, Cobain had depression. In 1993, he told Michael Azerrad that he had narcolepsy and manic depression. His cousin brought attention to the family history of suicide, mental illness and alcoholism, noting that two of her uncles had died by suicide with guns.

According to Cross, Cobain suffered a mental breakdown midway through Nirvana&#x27;s show in Rome on November 27, 1989. After smashing his guitar, he climbed a 30 ft speak stack and shouted, &quot;I&#x27;m going to kill myself!&quot;. Eventually he climbed down and took the following day off, sightseeing with Sub Pop manager, Bruce Pavitt. Cobain completed the remaining five European tour dates and returned to the USA.

He first drank alcohol in 7th grade (c. 12 yrs) and he often drank to excess throughout his life. His first drug experience was with cannabis in 1980, at age 13. He regularly used the drug during adulthood. Cobain also had a period of consuming &quot;notable&quot; amounts of LSD, as observed by Marander, and had been involved in solvent abuse as a teenager. Novoselic said he was &quot;really into getting fucked up: drugs, acid, any kind of drug&quot;. He occasionally experimented with methamphetamine and cocaine when the band were on tour. One example was when Novoselic and Cobain took cocaine after their gig in New York on July 18, 1989. Cobain first took heroin in 1986, administered to him by a dealer in Tacoma, Washington, who had previously supplied him with oxycodone and aspirin. Cobain used heroin sporadically for several years; by the end of 1991, his use had developed into addiction. Cobain claimed that he was &quot;determined to get a habit&quot; as a way to self-medicate his stomach condition. &quot;It started with three days in a row of doing heroin and I don&#x27;t have a stomach pain. That was such a relief,&quot; he said. However, his long-time friend Buzz Osborne disputes this, saying that his stomach pain was more likely caused by his heroin use: &quot;He made it up for sympathy and so he could use it as an excuse to stay loaded. Of course he was vomiting—that&#x27;s what people on heroin do, they vomit. It&#x27;s called &#x27;vomiting with a smile on your face&#x27;.&quot; Cobain told Novoselic in 1990 that he had used heroin and he spoke to Grohl about it in January 1991.

Cobain&#x27;s heroin use began to affect Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Nevermind&quot; tour. During a 1992 photoshoot with Michael Lavine, before their first &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; performance on January 11, he fell asleep several times, having used heroin beforehand. Cobain told biographer Michael Azerrad: &quot;They&#x27;re not going to be able to tell me to stop. So I really didn&#x27;t care. Obviously to them it was like practicing witchcraft or something. They didn&#x27;t know anything about it so they thought that any second, I was going to die.&quot;

The morning after the band&#x27;s performance on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 1992, Cobain experienced his first near-death overdose after injecting heroin; Love resuscitated him.

On May 2, 1993 Cobain overdosed at his home in Seattle and Love called the paramedics. He was taken to Harborview Medical Center, but was discharged the same day.

Prior to a performance at the New Music Seminar in New York City on July 23, 1993, Cobain suffered another overdose. Rather than calling for an ambulance, Love injected Cobain with naloxone to resuscitate him. Cobain proceeded to perform with Nirvana, giving the public no indication that anything had happened.

By March 1994, Love had &quot;seen Kurt close to death from heroin overdoses on more than a dozen occasions,&quot; according to Cross.

==Death==
Following a tour stop at Terminal Eins in Munich, Germany, on March 1, 1994, Cobain was diagnosed with bronchitis and severe laryngitis. He flew to Rome the next day for medical treatment, and was joined there by his wife, Courtney Love, on March 3. The next morning, Love awoke to find that Cobain had overdosed on a combination of champagne and Rohypnol. Cobain was rushed to the hospital and was unconscious for the rest of the day. Dave Grohl mentioned in his memoir that he received a phone call at this time saying Cobain had died. However, a few minutes later he was called again and told that the singer was hospitalized but stable. Love later said that the incident was Cobain&#x27;s first suicide attempt. After five days, Cobain was released and returned to Seattle. 

On March 18, 1994, Love phoned the Seattle police informing them that Cobain was suicidal and had locked himself in a room with a gun. Police arrived and confiscated several guns and a bottle of pills from Cobain, who insisted that he was not suicidal and had locked himself in the room to hide from Love.

Love arranged an intervention regarding Cobain&#x27;s drug use on March 25, 1994. The ten people involved included musician friends, record company executives, and one of Cobain&#x27;s closest friends, Dylan Carlson. Cobain reacted with anger, insulting and heaping scorn on the participants, and locked himself in the upstairs bedroom. However, by the end of the day, Cobain agreed to undergo a detox program, and he entered a residential facility in Los Angeles for a few days on March 30, 1994. The same day he left for Los Angeles, Cobain asked his friend, Dylan Carlson, to buy a shotgun for him saying it was for &quot;self-protection&quot;. This weapon is the one Cobain used in his suicide.

On the evening of April 1, 1994, Cobain escaped the facility and flew to Seattle. On the flight, he sat near Duff McKagan of Guns N&#x27; Roses. Despite Cobain&#x27;s animosity towards Guns N&#x27; Roses, Cobain &quot;seemed happy&quot; to see McKagan. McKagan later said that he knew from &quot;all of my instincts that something was wrong&quot;. Most of Cobain&#x27;s friends and family were unaware of his whereabouts. On April 6, amid rumors of Nirvana breaking up, the band pulled out of the 1994 Lollapalooza festival.
On April 8, Cobain&#x27;s body was discovered at his Lake Washington Boulevard home by an electrician, who had arrived to install a security system. A suicide note was found, addressed to Cobain&#x27;s childhood imaginary friend Boddah, that stated that Cobain had not &quot;felt the excitement of listening to as well as creating music, along with really writing ... for too many years now&quot;. Cobain&#x27;s body had been there for days; the coroner&#x27;s report estimated he died on April 5, 1994, at the age of 27.

=== Aftermath ===
A public vigil was held on April 10, at a park at Seattle Center, drawing approximately 7,000 mourners. Prerecorded messages by Novoselic and Love were played at the memorial. Love read portions of the suicide note to the crowd, crying and chastising Cobain. Near the end of the vigil, Love distributed some of Cobain&#x27;s clothing to those who remained. Grohl said that the news of Cobain&#x27;s death was &quot;probably the worst thing that has happened to me in my life. I remember the day after that I woke up and I was heartbroken that he was gone. I just felt like, &#x27;Okay, so I get to wake up today and have another day and he doesn&#x27;t.

&quot;Billboard,&quot; reporting from Seattle on April 23, stated that within a few hours of Cobain&#x27;s death being confirmed on April 8, the only remaining Nirvana titles at Park Ave Records on Queen Anne Avenue were two &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot; import CD singles. A marketing director at the three-store Cellophane Square chain said that &quot;all three stores sold about a few hundred CDs, singles, and vinyl by the morning of April 9&quot;. A buyer at Tower Records on Mercer Street said: &quot;It&#x27;s a pathetic scene, everything is going out the door. If people were really fans, they would&#x27;ve had this stuff already.&quot; In the United Kingdom, sales of Nirvana releases rose dramatically immediately after Cobain&#x27;s death.

Grohl believed that he knew Cobain would die at an early age, saying that &quot;sometimes you just can&#x27;t save someone from themselves&quot;, and &quot;in some ways, you kind of prepare yourself emotionally for that to be a reality&quot;. Dave Reed, who for a short time had been Cobain&#x27;s foster father, said that &quot;he had the desperation, not the courage, to be himself. Once you do that, you can&#x27;t go wrong, because you can&#x27;t make any mistakes when people love you for being yourself. But for Kurt, it didn&#x27;t matter that other people loved him; he simply didn&#x27;t love himself enough.&quot;

A final ceremony was arranged by Cobain&#x27;s mother on May 31, 1999, and was attended by Love and Tracy Marander. As a Buddhist monk chanted, daughter Frances Bean scattered Cobain&#x27;s ashes into McLane Creek in Olympia, the city where he &quot;had found his true artistic muse&quot;. In 2006, Love said she retained Cobain&#x27;s ashes, kept in a bank vault in Los Angeles because &quot;no cemetery in Seattle will take them&quot;. Cobain&#x27;s death became a topic of public fascination and debate. His artistic endeavors and struggles with addiction, illness and depression, as well as the circumstances of his death, have become a frequent topic of controversy. According to a spokesperson for the Seattle Police Department, the department receives at least one weekly request to reopen the investigation, resulting in the maintenance of the basic incident report on file.

In March 2014, the Seattle police developed four rolls of film that had been left in an evidence vault; no reason was provided for why the rolls were not developed earlier. According to the Seattle police, the 35mm film photographs show the scene of Cobain&#x27;s dead body more clearly than previous Polaroid images taken by the police. Detective Mike Ciesynski, a cold case investigator, was instructed to look at the film because &quot;it is 20 years later and it&#x27;s a high media case&quot;. Ciesynski stated that Cobain&#x27;s death remains a suicide and that the images would not have been released publicly. The photos in question were later released, one by one, weeks before the 20th anniversary of Cobain&#x27;s death. One photo shows Cobain&#x27;s arm, still wearing the hospital bracelet from the drug rehab facility he had left just a few days prior to returning to Seattle. Another photo shows Cobain&#x27;s foot resting next to a bag of shotgun shells, one of which was used in his death.

== Legacy ==
Cobain is remembered as one of the most influential rock musicians in the history of alternative music. His angst-fueled songwriting and anti-establishment persona led him to be referenced as the spokesman of Generation X. In addition, Cobain&#x27;s songs widened the themes of mainstream rock music of the 1980s to discussion of personal reflection and social issues. On April 10, 2014, Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Grohl, Novoselic and Love accepted the accolade at the ceremony, where Cobain was also remembered. Cobain is one of the best-known members of the 27 Club, a list of musicians who died when they were 27 years old.

&quot;Music &amp; Media&quot; reporting on April 23, 1994, after Cobain had died, stated that Jørgen Larsen, the president of MCA Music Entertainment International was asked where he thought Cobain stood in terms of his contribution to contemporary music, and Larsen replied that &quot;If anybody comes out of nowhere to sell 11 or 12 million albums you have to conclude that there&#x27;s something there. He wasn&#x27;t just a one-hit wonder.&quot;

According to music journalist Paul Lester, who worked at &quot;Melody Maker&quot; at the time, Cobain&#x27;s suicide triggered an immediate reappraisal of his work. He wrote: &quot;The general impression offered by &quot;In Utero&quot; was that Cobain was some kind of whiny, self-absorbed, grunge, misery guts who could make routinely powerful music but was hardly a suffering godhead. You could almost hear a collective sigh of relief after April 5, 1994, that Cobain could no longer further sully his reputation; that the myth-making machinery could finally be cranked into action.&quot;

Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins referred to Cobain as &quot;the Michael Jordan of our generation&quot;. Lars Ulrich of Metallica reflected on Cobain&#x27;s influence stating that &quot;with Kurt Cobain you felt you were connecting to the real person, not to a perception of who he was—you were not connecting to an image or a manufactured cut-out. You felt that between you and him there was nothing—it was heart-to-heart. There are very few people who have that ability.&quot; In 1996, the Church of Kurt Cobain was established in Portland, Oregon, but it was later claimed by some media outlets to have been a media hoax. Reflecting on Cobain&#x27;s death over 10 years later, MSNBC&#x27;s Eric Olsen wrote, &quot;In the intervening decade, Cobain, a small, frail but handsome man in life, has become an abstract Generation X icon, viewed by many as the &#x27;last real rock star&#x27;... a messiah and martyr whose every utterance has been plundered and parsed.&quot;

In 2003, David Fricke of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Cobain the 12th greatest guitarist of all time. He was later ranked the 73rd greatest guitarist and 45th greatest singer of all time by the same magazine, and by MTV as seventh in the &quot;22 Greatest Voices in Music&quot;. In 2006, he was placed at number twenty by &quot;Hit Parader&quot; on their list of the &quot;100 Greatest Metal Singers of All Time&quot;.

In 2005, a sign was put up in Aberdeen, Washington, that read &quot;Welcome to Aberdeen—Come As You Are&quot; as a tribute to Cobain. The sign was paid for and created by the Kurt Cobain Memorial Committee, a non-profit organization created in May 2004 to honor Cobain. The Committee planned to create a Kurt Cobain Memorial Park and a youth center in Aberdeen. Because Cobain was cremated and his remains scattered into the Wishkah River in Washington, many Nirvana fans visit Viretta Park, near Cobain&#x27;s former Lake Washington home to pay tribute. On the anniversary of his death, fans gather in the park to celebrate his life and memory. Controversy erupted in July 2009 when a monument to Cobain in Aberdeen along the Wishkah River included the quote &quot;... Drugs are bad for you. They will fuck you up.&quot; The city ultimately decided to sandblast the monument to replace the expletive with &quot;f---&quot;, but fans immediately drew the letters back in. In December 2013, the small city of Hoquiam, where Cobain once lived, announced that April 10 would become the annual Nirvana Day. Similarly, in January 2014, Cobain&#x27;s birthday, February 20, was declared annual &quot;Kurt Cobain Day&quot; in Aberdeen.

In July 2021, the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation confirmed that Cobain&#x27;s childhood home in Aberdeen would be included on their Heritage Register, and that the owner would be making it into an exhibit for people to visit.

== Media ==
=== Books ===
Prior to Cobain&#x27;s death, Michael Azerrad published &quot;Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana&quot;, a book chronicling Nirvana&#x27;s career from its beginning, as well as the personal histories of the band members. The book explored Cobain&#x27;s drug addiction, as well as the countless controversies surrounding the band. After Cobain&#x27;s death, Azerrad republished the book to include a final chapter discussing the last year of Cobain&#x27;s life. The book involved the band members themselves, who provided interviews and personal information to Azerrad specifically for the book. In 2006, Azerrad&#x27;s taped conversations with Cobain were transformed into a documentary about Cobain, titled &quot;Kurt Cobain: About a Son&quot;. Though this film does not feature any music by Nirvana, it has songs by the artists that inspired Cobain.

Journalists Ian Halperin and Max Wallace published their investigation of any possible conspiracy surrounding Cobain&#x27;s death in their 1998 book &quot;Who Killed Kurt Cobain?&quot;. Halperin and Wallace argued that, while there was not enough evidence to prove a conspiracy, there was more than enough to demand that the case be reopened. The book included the journalists&#x27; discussions with Tom Grant, who had taped nearly every conversation that he had undertaken while he was in Love&#x27;s employ. Over the next several years, Halperin and Wallace collaborated with Grant to write a second book, 2004&#x27;s &quot;Love and Death: The Murder of Kurt Cobain&quot;.

In 2001, writer Charles R. Cross published a biography of Cobain, titled &quot;Heavier Than Heaven&quot;. For the book, Cross conducted over 400 interviews, and was given access by Courtney Love to Cobain&#x27;s journals, lyrics, and diaries. Cross&#x27; biography was met with criticism, including allegations of Cross accepting second-hand (and incorrect) information as fact. Friend Everett True—who derided the book as being inaccurate, omissive, and highly biased—said &quot;Heavier than Heaven&quot; was &quot;the Courtney-sanctioned version of history&quot; or, alternatively, Cross&#x27;s &quot;Oh, I think I need to find the new Bruce Springsteen now&quot; Kurt Cobain book. However, beyond the criticism, the book contained details about Cobain and Nirvana&#x27;s career that would have otherwise been unknown. In 2008, Cross published &quot;Cobain Unseen&quot;, a compilation of annotated photographs and creations and writings by Cobain throughout his life and career.

In 2002, a sampling of Cobain&#x27;s writings was published as &quot;Journals&quot;. The book fills 280 pages with a simple black cover; the pages are arranged somewhat chronologically (although Cobain generally did not date them). The journal pages are reproduced in color, and there is a section added at the back with explanations and transcripts of some of the less legible pages. The writings begin in the late 1980s and were continued until his death. A paperback version of the book, released in 2003, included a handful of writings that were not offered in the initial release. In the journals, Cobain talked about the ups and downs of life on the road, made lists of what music he was enjoying, and often scribbled down lyric ideas for future reference. Upon its release, reviewers and fans were conflicted about the collection. Many were elated to be able to learn more about Cobain and read his inner thoughts in his own words, but were disturbed by what was viewed as an invasion of his privacy.

In 2019, on the 25th anniversary of Cobain&#x27;s death, former Nirvana manager, Danny Goldberg, published &quot;Serving the Servant: Remembering Kurt Cobain&quot;. In promotion of the book, Goldberg stated:

=== Film and television ===
In the 1998 documentary &quot;Kurt &amp; Courtney&quot;, filmmaker Nick Broomfield investigated Tom Grant&#x27;s claim that Cobain was actually murdered. He took a film crew to visit a number of people associated with Cobain and Love; Love&#x27;s father, Cobain&#x27;s aunt, and one of the couple&#x27;s former nannies. Broomfield also spoke to Mentors bandleader Eldon &quot;El Duce&quot; Hoke, who claimed Love offered him to kill Cobain. Although Hoke claimed he knew who killed Cobain, he failed to mention a name, and offered no evidence to support his assertion. Broomfield inadvertently captured Hoke&#x27;s last interview, as he died days later, reportedly hit by a train. However, Broomfield felt he had not uncovered enough evidence to conclude the existence of a conspiracy. In a 1998 interview, Broomfield summed it up by saying:

Broomfield&#x27;s documentary was noted by &quot;The New York Times&quot; to be a rambling, largely speculative and circumstantial work, relying on flimsy evidence as was his later documentary &quot;Biggie &amp; Tupac&quot;.

The documentary &quot;Teen Spirit: The Tribute to Kurt Cobain&quot; was released as a home video in 1996, and on DVD in 2001. &quot;The Vigil&quot; is a 1998 comedy film about a group of young people who travel from Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada to Seattle in the United States to attend the memorial vigil for Cobain in 1994. It stars Donny Lucas and Trevor White.

Gus Van Sant loosely based his 2005 movie &quot;Last Days&quot; on the events in the final days of Cobain&#x27;s life, starring Michael Pitt as the main character Blake who was based on Cobain.

In 2006, the Jon Brewer directed documentary, &quot;All Apologies: Kurt Cobain 10 Years On&quot;, and the BBC documentary, &quot;The Last 48 Hours of Kurt Cobain&quot;, were released. In January 2007, Love began to shop the biography &quot;Heavier Than Heaven&quot; to various movie studios in Hollywood to turn the book into an A-list feature film about Cobain and Nirvana.

A Brett Morgen film, entitled &quot;Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck&quot;, premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2015, followed by small-screen and cinema releases. Morgen said that documentary &quot;will be this generation&#x27;s &quot;The Wall&quot;&quot;.

&quot;Soaked in Bleach&quot; is a 2015 American docudrama directed by Benjamin Statler. The film details the events leading up to the death of Kurt Cobain, as seen through the perspective of Tom Grant, the private detective who was hired by Courtney Love to find Cobain, her husband, shortly before his death in 1994. It also explores the premise that Cobain&#x27;s death was not a suicide. The film stars Tyler Bryan as Cobain and Daniel Roebuck as Grant, with Sarah Scott portraying Courtney Love and August Emerson as Dylan Carlson. Love&#x27;s legal team issued a cease-and-desist letter against theatres showing the documentary.

Regarding the depiction of Nirvana, and in particular Kurt Cobain, the indie rock author Andrew Earles wrote:

Matt Reeves&#x27; film &quot;The Batman&quot; depicts a version of Bruce Wayne, performed by Robert Pattinson, that was loosely inspired by Cobain. Reeves stated, &quot;when I write, I listen to music, and as I was writing the first act, I put on Nirvana&#x27;s &#x27;Something in the Way,&#x27; that&#x27;s when it came to me that, rather than make Bruce Wayne the playboy version we&#x27;ve seen before, there&#x27;s another version who had gone through a great tragedy and become a recluse. So I started making this connection to Gus Van Sant&#x27;s &quot;Last Days&quot;, and the idea of this fictionalised version of Kurt Cobain being in this kind of decaying manor.&quot; &quot;Something in the Way&quot; was used in trailers to promote &quot;The Batman&quot; prior to its release and is featured twice in the film.

To mark the 30th anniversary of Cobain&#x27;s death a new documentary titled &quot;Kurt Cobain: Moments That Shook Music&quot; aired on BBC Two and BBC iPlayer on April 13, 2024.

=== Theatre ===
In September 2009, the Roy Smiles play &quot;Kurt and Sid&quot; debuted at the Trafalgar Studios in London&#x27;s West End. The play, set in Cobain&#x27;s greenhouse on the day of his suicide, revolves around the ghost of Sid Vicious visiting Cobain to try to convince him not to kill himself. Cobain was played by Shaun Evans.

=== Video games ===
Cobain was included as a playable character in the 2009 video game &quot;Guitar Hero 5&quot;; he can be used to play songs by Nirvana and other acts. Novoselic and Grohl released a statement condemning the inclusion and urging the developer, Activision, to alter it, saying they had no control over the use of Cobain&#x27;s likeness. Love denied that she had given permission, saying it was &quot;the result of a cabal of a few assholes&#x27; greed&quot;, and threatened to sue. The vice-president of Activision said that Love had contributed photos and videos to the development and had been &quot;great to work with&quot;.

== Discography ==
===Nirvana===
&quot;For a complete list of all Nirvana releases, see Nirvana discography&quot;.
* &quot;Bleach&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Nevermind&quot; (1991)
* &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993)

=== Posthumous albums ===
=== Posthumous singles ===
=== Posthumous videos ===
* &quot;Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck&quot; (DVD and Blu-ray) (2015)

=== Collaborations ===
== See also ==
* List of most valuable celebrity memorabilia

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* 
* The Kurt Cobain Equipment FAQ info on his guitars, amplifiers &amp; effects
* Official police reports into Cobain&#x27;s death at The Smoking Gun
* Kurt Cobain at Rotten Tomatoes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="0" end="18" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Donald Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="167" end="173" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="179" end="186" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558113" start="223" end="241" title="anti-establishment" label="anti-establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="361" end="373" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="431" end="435" title="Rock_music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="475" end="490" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990978" start="495" end="510" title="Aaron Burckhard" label="Aaron Burckhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="559" end="566" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="606" end="612" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="640" end="653" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="703" end="709" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="726" end="733" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="780" end="790" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="841" end="844" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="896" end="919" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="977" end="986" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="1057" end="1072" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come as You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="1086" end="1093" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129976" start="1107" end="1115" title="In Bloom" label="In Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="1129" end="1145" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716700" start="1163" end="1183" title="Something in the Way" label="Something in the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="1578" end="1591" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q426999" start="1627" end="1634" title="Frances Bean Cobain" label="Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q62947" start="1698" end="1706" title="Flunitrazepam" label="Rohypnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q959298" start="1735" end="1747" title="Intervention (counseling)" label="intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="1785" end="1802" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="he was found dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="1828" end="1835" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326461" start="1848" end="1857" title="27 Club" label="age of 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="2017" end="2043" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2144" end="2157" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34704955" start="2197" end="2233" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time" label="100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="2319" end="2322" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262054" start="2400" end="2411" title="Hit Parader" label="Hit Parader"/>
<link wikidata="Q233808" start="2570" end="2590" title="Aberdeen, Washington" label="Aberdeen, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q499681" start="2752" end="2777" title="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene, Idaho" label="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376912" start="2948" end="2959" title="Carrickmore" label="Carrickmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q510513" start="2976" end="2981" title="Omagh" label="Omagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="3002" end="3008" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202156" start="3023" end="3031" title="Provinces of Ireland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="3126" end="3145" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster Scots people"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="3247" end="3264" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="3283" end="3293" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="3357" end="3368" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q493222" start="3626" end="3645" title="Grays Harbor County" label="Grays Harbor County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194608" start="3753" end="3765" title="King of Jazz" label="King of Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612" start="4000" end="4030" title="Creature from the Black Lagoon" label="Creature from the Black Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="4035" end="4046" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="4383" end="4407" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q552925" start="4465" end="4477" title="Arlo Guthrie" label="Arlo Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4514" end="4525" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="4538" end="4546" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q453296" start="4554" end="4565" title="Terry Jacks" label="Terry Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q76743491" start="4578" end="4596" title="Seasons in the Sun" label="Seasons in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544883" start="4612" end="4622" title="(Theme From) The Monkees" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="4630" end="4665" title="The Monkees" label="&amp;quot;Monkees&amp;quot; television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="5769" end="5786" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="6473" end="6493" title="born-again Christian" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="6722" end="6729" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432080" start="7194" end="7203" title="Scholastic wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q608201" start="7466" end="7488" title="Little League Baseball" label="Little League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="7528" end="7538" title="strike out" label="strike out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="8411" end="8426" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="8550" end="8563" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="8655" end="8667" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="8697" end="8704" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="8750" end="8759" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="8764" end="8772" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q435780" start="8888" end="8899" title="Sammy Hagar" label="Sammy Hagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431662" start="8904" end="8916" title="Quarterflash" label="Quarterflash"/>
<link wikidata="Q977529" start="8930" end="8953" title="Seattle Center Coliseum" label="Seattle Center Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809259" start="9086" end="9095" title="Associated Wholesale Grocers" label="Thriftway"/>
<link wikidata="Q987133" start="9268" end="9289" title="Montesano, Washington" label="Montesano, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="9343" end="9360" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713582" start="9548" end="9568" title="Aberdeen High School (Washington)" label="Aberdeen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905805" start="9973" end="9986" title="Wishkah River" label="Wishkah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716700" start="10031" end="10051" title="Something in the Way" label="Something in the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="10136" end="10151" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423697" start="10450" end="10474" title="Ocean Shores, Washington" label="Ocean Shores, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="10553" end="10572" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="10847" end="10853" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q661595" start="10863" end="10881" title="Auburn, Washington" label="Auburn, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q642170" start="11132" end="11144" title="About a Girl (Nirvana song)" label="About a Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="11204" end="11210" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q650884" start="11340" end="11344" title="Blew" label="Blew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530134" start="11521" end="11530" title="Tobi Vail" label="Tobi Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260412" start="11547" end="11556" title="punk zine" label="punk zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="11568" end="11578" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="11584" end="11595" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="11613" end="11616" title="DIY" label="DIY"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274517" start="11815" end="11823" title="Aneurysm (song)" label="Aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="12020" end="12035" title="countercultural" label="countercultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="12416" end="12428" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192023" start="12447" end="12465" title="Stairway to Heaven" label="Stairway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q625090" start="12507" end="12518" title="Louie Louie" label="Louie Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="12526" end="12531" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q568065" start="12545" end="12571" title="Another One Bites the Dust" label="Another One Bites the Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="12583" end="12591" title="the Cars" label="the Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945007" start="12604" end="12630" title="My Best Friend&amp;#x27;s Girl (song)" label="My Best Friend&amp;#x27;s Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q931863" start="12781" end="12793" title="Fecal Matter (band)" label="Fecal Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713582" start="12822" end="12842" title="Aberdeen High School (Washington)" label="Aberdeen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="12940" end="12947" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q451088" start="13022" end="13033" title="Dale Crover" label="Dale Crover"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="13167" end="13178" title="the Ramones" label="the Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="13180" end="13192" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="13198" end="13210" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="13370" end="13385" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="13916" end="13923" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13928" end="13936" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="14257" end="14270" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="14314" end="14320" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="14340" end="14355" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="14491" end="14501" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="14588" end="14597" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="14751" end="14767" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="14781" end="14787" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="14990" end="15005" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="15007" end="15016" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="15022" end="15033" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="15244" end="15256" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="15554" end="15565" title="Underground rock" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q235103" start="15643" end="15657" title="Frances Farmer" label="Frances Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080818" start="15672" end="15678" title="Frances Farmer Will Have Her Revenge on Seattle" label="a song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="15976" end="15986" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101087" start="16027" end="16062" title="1992 Oregon Ballot Measure 9" label="Oregon&amp;#x27;s 1992 Ballot Measure 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="16226" end="16236" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="16275" end="16277" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354808" start="16285" end="16300" title="Rock for Choice" label="Rock for Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915360" start="16323" end="16335" title="death threat" label="death threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="16360" end="16373" title="Pro-life movement" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="16588" end="16604" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411035" start="16610" end="16625" title="Screaming Trees" label="Screaming Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="16714" end="16726" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="16738" end="16753" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890240" start="16767" end="16780" title="Mark Pickerel" label="Mark Pickerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="16902" end="16912" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q921000" start="16920" end="16951" title="In the Pines" label="Where Did You Sleep Last Night?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887978" start="16992" end="17002" title="Grey Goose (folk song)" label="Grey Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q798670" start="17016" end="17037" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t It a Shame" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t It a Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688890" start="17055" end="17079" title="They Hung Him on a Cross" label="They Hung Him on a Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540599" start="17262" end="17271" title="Slim Moon" label="Slim Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530134" start="17432" end="17441" title="Tobi Vail" label="Tobi Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="17449" end="17459" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="17465" end="17476" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611194" start="17619" end="17634" title="Stereo-Pak" label="four-track tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="17683" end="17695" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540599" start="18195" end="18204" title="Slim Moon" label="Slim Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="18368" end="18388" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743866" start="18477" end="18503" title="The Junky&amp;#x27;s Christmas" label="The Junky&amp;#x27;s Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="18546" end="18562" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="18597" end="18604" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711679" start="18778" end="18816" title="The &amp;quot;Priest&amp;quot; They Called Him" label="The &amp;#x27;Priest&amp;#x27; They Called Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="18915" end="18926" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="19016" end="19024" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q117379" start="19114" end="19124" title="Jon Savage" label="Jon Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="19306" end="19317" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706795" start="19384" end="19392" title="Journals (Cobain)" label="journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q913616" start="19558" end="19575" title="Meet the Beatles!" label="Meet the Beatles!"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="19615" end="19624" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="19629" end="19640" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="19658" end="19670" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="19672" end="19677" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="19679" end="19692" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="19694" end="19703" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="19705" end="19710" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="19716" end="19720" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q392695" start="19814" end="19826" title="Heartbreaker (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Heartbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095561" start="19840" end="19849" title="Moby Dick (instrumental)" label="Moby Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783363" start="19866" end="19880" title="Immigrant Song" label="Immigrant Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782969" start="19915" end="19927" title="Hand of Doom (song)" label="Hand of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q833616" start="19956" end="19971" title="Destroyer (Kiss album)" label="Do You Love Me?"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="19998" end="20009" title="Incesticide" label="Incesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="20422" end="20434" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="20469" end="20476" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q869645" start="20581" end="20586" title="Creem" label="Creem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142897" start="20731" end="20742" title="Sandinista!" label="Sandinista!"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="20752" end="20761" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="20828" end="20839" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="21001" end="21011" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="21013" end="21023" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785354" start="21025" end="21046" title="Millions of Dead Cops" label="Millions of Dead Cops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428959" start="21051" end="21058" title="Flipper (band)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="21385" end="21391" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="21754" end="21766" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="21828" end="21841" title="Seattle sound" label="Seattle scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27190" start="22102" end="22111" title="protopunk" label="protopunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="22122" end="22133" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q918613" start="22158" end="22167" title="Raw Power" label="Raw Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="22249" end="22265" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="22271" end="22277" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="22389" end="22401" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q571213" start="22464" end="22475" title="Surfer Rosa" label="Surfer Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="22573" end="22581" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="22680" end="22693" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="23138" end="23149" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="23154" end="23160" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="23291" end="23301" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="23325" end="23328" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23451" end="23476" title="1991: The Year Punk Broke" label="1991: The Year Punk Broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="23866" end="23871" title="indie rock" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542725" start="23897" end="23910" title="the Vaselines" label="the Vaselines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132613" start="23912" end="23924" title="Meat Puppets" label="Meat Puppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889932" start="23926" end="23932" title="Wipers (band)" label="Wipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739231" start="23937" end="23941" title="Fang (band)" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q433060" start="23980" end="23995" title="Daniel Johnston" label="Daniel Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="23996" end="24004" title="T-shirts" label="T-shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080929" start="24037" end="24046" title="K Records" label="K Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018174" start="24102" end="24118" title="Butthole Surfers" label="Butthole Surfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891518" start="24120" end="24132" title="Shonen Knife" label="Shonen Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q635705" start="24134" end="24143" title="Chokebore" label="Chokebore"/>
<link wikidata="Q931544" start="24148" end="24161" title="Half Japanese" label="Half Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="24182" end="24190" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850698" start="24298" end="24303" title="Germs (band)" label="Germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="24314" end="24323" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="24420" end="24433" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q756379" start="24505" end="24520" title="Meat Puppets II" label="Meat Puppets II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341319" start="24599" end="24625" title="The Man Who Sold the World (song)" label="The Man Who Sold the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="24636" end="24647" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q921000" start="24683" end="24713" title="In the Pines" label="Where Did You Sleep Last Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="24735" end="24745" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="24918" end="24938" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="25383" end="25408" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q782550" start="25512" end="25536" title="Automatic for the People" label="Automatic for the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q215182" start="25804" end="25817" title="Michael Stipe" label="Michael Stipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="25830" end="25838" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="26380" end="26393" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q426999" start="26411" end="26430" title="Frances Bean Cobain" label="Frances Bean Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="26766" end="26774" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="27328" end="27336" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="27664" end="27680" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942594" start="27971" end="27979" title="Musician (magazine)" label="Musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="28413" end="28426" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="28580" end="28596" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="28647" end="28652" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445068" start="28845" end="28854" title="Blow torch" label="blowtorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549156" start="28906" end="28919" title="Gerald Friend" label="Gerald Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="28977" end="28986" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105994" start="29099" end="29114" title="Patrick Süskind" label="Patrick Süskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q459303" start="29134" end="29166" title="Perfume (novel)" label="Perfume: The Story of a Murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113338" start="29213" end="29233" title="Scentless Apprentice" label="Scentless Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="29251" end="29259" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q579021" start="29313" end="29321" title="perfumer" label="perfumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="29795" end="29805" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="30336" end="30347" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="30371" end="30391" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711679" start="30413" end="30451" title="The &amp;quot;Priest&amp;quot; They Called Him" label="The &amp;quot;Priest&amp;quot; They Called Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q379286" start="30576" end="30587" title="Naked Lunch" label="Naked Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="30905" end="30917" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="31475" end="31480" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="31564" end="31569" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466691" start="31583" end="31596" title="Back in Black (song)" label="Back in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339598" start="31755" end="31761" title="Peavey Electronics" label="Peavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="31961" end="31967" title="Fender (company)" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443232" start="31968" end="31973" title="Fender Champ" label="Champ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896846" start="32003" end="32009" title="Univox" label="Univox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052413" start="32010" end="32018" title="Univox Hi-Flier" label="Hi-Flier"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="32146" end="32152" title="Fender (company)" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443281" start="32153" end="32164" title="Twin Reverb" label="Twin Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114736" start="32206" end="32213" title="Randall Amplification" label="Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911536" start="32387" end="32396" title="Boss DS-1" label="Boss DS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q753863" start="32560" end="32568" title="Epiphone" label="Epiphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135950" start="32782" end="32788" title="Stella (guitar)" label="Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="33395" end="33407" title="Stratocaster" label="Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q516104" start="33421" end="33430" title="humbucker" label="humbucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q775605" start="33482" end="33488" title="Fender Jaguar" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207857" start="33494" end="33502" title="DiMarzio" label="DiMarzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q384486" start="33522" end="33541" title="Fender Mustang" label="Competition Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="33768" end="33779" title="Mesa/Boogie" label="Mesa/Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="33818" end="33826" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122899" start="33852" end="33855" title="Vox (company)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q430501" start="33856" end="33860" title="AC30" label="AC30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342675" start="33874" end="33881" title="Fender Bassman" label="Bassman"/>
<link wikidata="Q591457" start="34033" end="34049" title="Electro-Harmonix" label="Electro-Harmonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q859092" start="34050" end="34058" title="Big Muff" label="Big Muff"/>
<link wikidata="Q591457" start="34076" end="34087" title="Small Clone" label="Small Clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447824" start="34475" end="34493" title="Fender Custom Shop" label="Fender Custom Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022479" start="34897" end="34903" title="C. F. Martin &amp;amp; Company" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195842" start="35191" end="35200" title="Jim Irsay" label="Jim Irsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="35215" end="35233" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="35397" end="35410" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="35457" end="35472" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269220" start="35499" end="35510" title="Dharma Bums (band)" label="Dharma Bums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="35518" end="35526" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="35570" end="35586" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426961" start="35649" end="35668" title="Satyricon nightclub" label="Satyricon nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="36198" end="36210" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065276" start="36448" end="36464" title="Straight to Hell (film)" label="Straight to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="36531" end="36533" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018174" start="36538" end="36554" title="Butthole Surfers" label="Butthole Surfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301187" start="36869" end="36880" title="Pacific Rim" label="Pacific Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="36925" end="36938" title="Waikiki Beach" label="Waikiki Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="37249" end="37260" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="37269" end="37279" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q426999" start="37519" end="37538" title="Frances Bean Cobain" label="Frances Bean Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="37568" end="37576" title="Medical ultrasonography" label="sonogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="37638" end="37645" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="37669" end="37680" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900630" start="38418" end="38431" title="Monk Magazine" label="Monk Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="38610" end="38622" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101087" start="39471" end="39499" title="1992 Oregon Ballot Measure 9" label="1992 Oregon Ballot Measure 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q951591" start="39775" end="39778" title="Out (magazine)" label="Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="39968" end="39979" title="Incesticide" label="Incesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="40008" end="40019" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="40050" end="40060" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="40073" end="40081" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="40149" end="40175" title="attention deficit disorder" label="attention deficit disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="40195" end="40202" title="Ritalin" label="Ritalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="40252" end="40262" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117379" start="40359" end="40369" title="Jon Savage" label="Jon Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="40653" end="40666" title="The Telegraph (London)" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="40685" end="40695" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="40742" end="40752" title="narcolepsy" label="narcolepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="40757" end="40773" title="manic depression" label="manic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="40944" end="40949" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="40969" end="40985" title="mental breakdown" label="mental breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="41242" end="41249" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q612885" start="41259" end="41271" title="Bruce Pavitt" label="Bruce Pavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="41488" end="41496" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="41631" end="41634" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q900521" start="41686" end="41699" title="solvent abuse" label="solvent abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="42071" end="42089" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q407535" start="42128" end="42137" title="oxycodone" label="oxycodone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="42142" end="42149" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="42249" end="42258" title="Substance use disorder" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="42539" end="42551" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832117" start="43087" end="43101" title="Michael Lavine" label="Michael Lavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="43265" end="43280" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="43593" end="43612" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="43668" end="43676" title="Drug overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654758" start="43828" end="43853" title="Harborview Medical Center" label="Harborview Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="44070" end="44078" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q372317" start="44373" end="44386" title="Munich-Riem airport" label="Terminal Eins"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="44451" end="44461" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194557" start="44473" end="44483" title="laryngitis" label="laryngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62947" start="44695" end="44703" title="Flunitrazepam" label="Rohypnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518184" start="45047" end="45062" title="suicide attempt" label="suicide attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442150" start="45163" end="45177" title="Seattle Police Department" label="Seattle police"/>
<link wikidata="Q959298" start="45452" end="45464" title="Intervention (counseling)" label="intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q194534" start="45637" end="45650" title="Dylan Carlson (musician)" label="Dylan Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345789" start="45831" end="45836" title="Drug detoxification" label="detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q194534" start="45996" end="46009" title="Dylan Carlson (musician)" label="Dylan Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q251865" start="46244" end="46256" title="Duff McKagan" label="Duff McKagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="46260" end="46278" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="46637" end="46649" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259147" start="46713" end="46738" title="Denny-Blaine, Seattle" label="Lake Washington Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963679" start="46811" end="46823" title="suicide note" label="suicide note"/>
<link wikidata="Q259065" start="46872" end="46888" title="imaginary friend" label="imaginary friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q326461" start="47171" end="47180" title="27 Club" label="age of 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044487" start="47251" end="47265" title="Seattle Center" label="Seattle Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="47862" end="47871" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="48087" end="48103" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265728" start="48319" end="48332" title="Tower Records" label="Tower Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622606" start="49434" end="49446" title="McLane Creek" label="McLane Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q313702" start="50418" end="50433" title="Instant film" label="Polaroid images"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055205" start="50483" end="50492" title="cold case" label="cold case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763371" start="51072" end="51086" title="shotgun shells" label="shotgun shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="51347" end="51359" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="51556" end="51582" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q326461" start="51730" end="51737" title="27 Club" label="27 Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988980" start="51804" end="51821" title="Music &amp;amp; Media" label="Music &amp;amp; Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="51924" end="51961" title="MCA Music Entertainment" label="MCA Music Entertainment International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371690" start="52279" end="52290" title="Paul Lester" label="Paul Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="52312" end="52324" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="52841" end="52853" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="52857" end="52878" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="52911" end="52925" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106193" start="52951" end="52962" title="Lars Ulrich" label="Lars Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="52966" end="52975" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q110291455" start="53338" end="53359" title="Church of Kurt Cobain" label="Church of Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="53526" end="53531" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387212" start="53539" end="53549" title="Eric Olsen (writer)" label="Eric Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="53662" end="53674" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492894" start="53828" end="53840" title="David Fricke" label="David Fricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="53850" end="53863" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="54039" end="54042" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262054" start="54151" end="54162" title="Hit Parader" label="Hit Parader"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189415" start="54547" end="54572" title="Kurt Cobain Memorial Park" label="Kurt Cobain Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905805" start="54668" end="54681" title="Wishkah River" label="Wishkah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933704" start="54721" end="54733" title="Viretta Park" label="Viretta Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323525" start="54761" end="54776" title="Lake Washington" label="Lake Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q990621" start="55250" end="55257" title="Hoquiam, Washington" label="Hoquiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972237" start="55490" end="55558" title="Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation" label="Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="55793" end="55808" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55825" end="55862" title="Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana" label="Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="56479" end="56503" title="Kurt Cobain: About a Son" label="Kurt Cobain: About a Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q442886" start="56630" end="56642" title="Ian Halperin" label="Ian Halperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795347" start="56647" end="56658" title="Max Wallace" label="Max Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q106238844" start="56773" end="56796" title="Who Killed Kurt Cobain?" label="Who Killed Kurt Cobain?"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57244" end="57285" title="Love and Death: The Murder of Kurt Cobain" label="Love and Death: The Murder of Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="57310" end="57326" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q617600" start="57373" end="57392" title="Heavier Than Heaven" label="Heavier Than Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="57680" end="57692" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="57932" end="57949" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193490" start="58146" end="58159" title="Cobain Unseen" label="Cobain Unseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706795" start="58345" end="58353" title="Journals (Cobain)" label="Journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="59259" end="59282" title="Invasion of privacy" label="invasion of his privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578806" start="59366" end="59380" title="Danny Goldberg" label="Danny Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405348" start="59398" end="59442" title="Serving the Servant" label="Serving the Servant: Remembering Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713591" start="59552" end="59571" title="Kurt &amp;amp; Courtney" label="Kurt &amp;amp; Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q612007" start="59589" end="59604" title="Nick Broomfield" label="Nick Broomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q287816" start="59867" end="59874" title="The Mentors" label="Mentors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499437" start="59886" end="59916" title="Eldon Hoke" label="Eldon &amp;quot;El Duce&amp;quot; Hoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="60414" end="60432" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451402" start="60564" end="60582" title="Biggie &amp;amp; Tupac" label="Biggie &amp;amp; Tupac"/>
<link wikidata="" start="60613" end="60652" title="Teen Spirit: The Tribute to Kurt Cobain" label="Teen Spirit: The Tribute to Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="60677" end="60687" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q115813797" start="60723" end="60732" title="The Vigil (1998 film)" label="The Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="60749" end="60760" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q270887" start="60807" end="60817" title="Lethbridge" label="Lethbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="60838" end="60845" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23748134" start="60925" end="60936" title="Donny Lucas" label="Donny Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839484" start="60941" end="60953" title="Trevor White (actor)" label="Trevor White"/>
<link wikidata="Q25186" start="60956" end="60968" title="Gus Van Sant" label="Gus Van Sant"/>
<link wikidata="Q526162" start="61004" end="61013" title="Last Days (2005 film)" label="Last Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q352540" start="61084" end="61096" title="Michael Pitt" label="Michael Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921475" start="61164" end="61174" title="Jon Brewer" label="Jon Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61203" end="61241" title="All Apologies: Kurt Cobain 10 Years On" label="All Apologies: Kurt Cobain 10 Years On"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="61257" end="61260" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409416" start="61280" end="61312" title="The Last 48 Hours of Kurt Cobain" label="The Last 48 Hours of Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646993" start="61480" end="61486" title="A-list" label="A-list"/>
<link wikidata="Q17332507" start="61529" end="61541" title="Brett Morgen" label="Brett Morgen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61563" end="61591" title="Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck" label="Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="61616" end="61638" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q213683" start="61774" end="61782" title="Pink Floyd – The Wall" label="The Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143056" start="61803" end="61819" title="Soaked in Bleach" label="Soaked in Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="61845" end="61854" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="61927" end="61936" title="Death of Kurt Cobain" label="the death"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="62038" end="62051" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q552031" start="62229" end="62243" title="Daniel Roebuck" label="Daniel Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="62282" end="62295" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207300" start="62300" end="62314" title="August Emerson" label="August Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194534" start="62318" end="62331" title="Dylan Carlson (musician)" label="Dylan Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q931613" start="62543" end="62554" title="Matt Reeves" label="Matt Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q61117344" start="62572" end="62582" title="The Batman (film)" label="The Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="62610" end="62621" title="Bruce Wayne" label="Bruce Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36767" start="62636" end="62652" title="Robert Pattinson" label="Robert Pattinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099032" start="62909" end="62916" title="playboy lifestyle" label="playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303143" start="63028" end="63035" title="recluse" label="recluse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63449" end="63486" title="Kurt Cobain: Moments That Shook Music" label="Kurt Cobain: Moments That Shook Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="63502" end="63509" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557489" start="63514" end="63525" title="BBC iPlayer" label="BBC iPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373375" start="63585" end="63595" title="Roy Smiles" label="Roy Smiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447158" start="63607" end="63619" title="Kurt and Sid" label="Kurt and Sid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447888" start="63641" end="63658" title="Trafalgar Studios" label="Trafalgar Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="63784" end="63795" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q785482" start="63877" end="63888" title="Shaun Evans" label="Shaun Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955682" start="63984" end="63997" title="Guitar Hero 5" label="Guitar Hero 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="64153" end="64163" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q915525" start="64624" end="64643" title="Nirvana discography" label="Nirvana discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="64659" end="64665" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="64687" end="64696" title="Nevermind (album)" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="64718" end="64726" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64828" end="64856" title="Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck" label="Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck"/>
<link wikidata="Q131831084" start="64929" end="64972" title="List of most valuable celebrity memorabilia" label="List of most valuable celebrity memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779089" start="65175" end="65190" title="The Smoking Gun" label="The Smoking Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="65208" end="65223" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16708" wikidata="Q92738" url="?curid=16708" title="Kent Beck">
<text>Kent Beck (born 1961) is an American software engineer and the creator of extreme programming, a software development methodology that eschews rigid formal specification for a collaborative and iterative design process. Beck was one of the 17 original signatories of the Agile Manifesto, the founding document for agile software development. Extreme and Agile methods are closely associated with Test-Driven Development (TDD), of which Beck is perhaps the leading proponent.

Beck pioneered software design patterns, as well as the commercial application of Smalltalk. He wrote the SUnit unit testing framework for Smalltalk, which spawned the xUnit series of frameworks, notably JUnit for Java, which Beck wrote with Erich Gamma. Beck popularized CRC cards with Ward Cunningham, the inventor of the wiki.

He lives in San Francisco, California and previously worked at Facebook. In 2019, Beck joined Gusto as a software fellow and coach, where he coaches engineering teams as they build out payroll systems for small businesses.

== History ==
Beck attended the University of Oregon between 1979 and 1987, receiving B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer and information science.

In 1996 Beck was hired to work on the Chrysler Comprehensive Compensation System. Beck in turn brought in Ron Jeffries. In March 1996 the development team estimated the system would be ready to go into production around one year later. In 1997 the development team adopted a way of working which is now formalized as extreme programming. The one-year delivery target was nearly achieved, with actual delivery being only a couple of months late.

== Publications ==
=== Books ===
* 1996. &quot;Kent Beck&#x27;s Guide to Better Smalltalk : A Sorted Collection&quot;. Cambridge University Press. ()
* 1997. &quot;Smalltalk Best Practice Patterns&quot;. Prentice Hall. ()
* 2000. &quot;Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change&quot;. Addison-Wesley. Winner of the Jolt Productivity Award. ()
* 2000. &quot;Planning Extreme Programming&quot;. With Martin Fowler. Addison-Wesley. ()
* 2002. &quot;Test-Driven Development by Example&quot;. Addison-Wesley. Winner of the Jolt Productivity Award. ()
*: Beck&#x27;s concept of test-driven development centers on two basic rules:
*:# Never write a single line of code unless you have a failing automated test.
*:# Eliminate duplication.
The book illustrates the use of unit testing as part of the methodology, including examples in Java and Python. One section includes using test-driven development to develop a unit testing framework.
* 2003. &quot;Contributing to Eclipse: Principles, Patterns, and Plugins&quot;. With Erich Gamma. Addison-Wesley. ()
* 2004. &quot;JUnit Pocket Guide&quot;. O&#x27;Reilly. ()
* 2004. &quot;Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd Edition&quot;. With Cynthia Andres. Addison-Wesley. Completely rewritten. ()
* 2008. &quot;Implementation Patterns&quot;. Addison-Wesley. ()
* 2023. &quot;Tidy First?: A Personal Exercise in Empirical Software Design&quot;. O&#x27;Reilly. ()

=== Selected papers ===
* 1987. &quot;Using Pattern Languages for Object-Oriented Programs&quot;. With Ward Cunningham. OOPSLA&#x27;87.
* 1989. &quot;A Laboratory For Teaching Object-Oriented Thinking&quot;. With Ward Cunningham. OOPSLA&#x27;89.
* 1989. &quot;Simple Smalltalk Testing: With Patterns&quot;. SUnit framework, origin of xUnit frameworks.

== References ==
==External links==

* on the WikiWikiWeb
* Sample chapter of Kent&#x27;s book, IMPLEMENTATION PATTERNS
* TalkWare Podcast interview with Kent Beck
* FLOSS Weekly interview with Kent Beck
* Kent Beck&#x27;s Notes at Facebook
* Kent Beck on unit testing
*Being Human Podcast - A conversation with Kent Beck
*Kent Beck website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92738" start="0" end="9" title="Kent Beck" label="Kent Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="37" end="54" title="software engineer" label="software engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209711" start="74" end="93" title="extreme programming" label="extreme programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="97" end="129" title="Software development process" label="software development methodology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="271" end="286" title="Agile software development#The Agile Manifesto" label="Agile Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="314" end="340" title="agile software development" label="agile software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q950250" start="396" end="419" title="Test-driven development" label="Test-Driven Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q181156" start="491" end="514" title="software design pattern" label="software design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="558" end="567" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395059" start="582" end="587" title="SUnit" label="SUnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q907375" start="588" end="600" title="unit testing" label="unit testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q285539" start="644" end="649" title="xUnit" label="xUnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q847675" start="680" end="685" title="JUnit" label="JUnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q92838" start="718" end="729" title="Erich Gamma" label="Erich Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095986" start="748" end="756" title="Class-responsibility-collaboration card" label="CRC card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637" start="763" end="778" title="Ward Cunningham" label="Ward Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="819" end="844" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="870" end="878" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q20540697" start="901" end="906" title="Gusto (company)" label="Gusto"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="1063" end="1083" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1117" end="1121" title="Bachelor of Science" label="B.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="1126" end="1130" title="Master of Science" label="M.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="1142" end="1174" title="University of Oregon Department of Computer and Information Science" label="computer and information science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088634" start="1215" end="1257" title="Chrysler Comprehensive Compensation System" label="Chrysler Comprehensive Compensation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q92789" start="1283" end="1295" title="Ron Jeffries" label="Ron Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q209711" start="1494" end="1513" title="extreme programming" label="extreme programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253844" start="1938" end="1965" title="Jolt Awards" label="the Jolt Productivity Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q74894" start="2025" end="2038" title="Martin Fowler (software engineer)" label="Martin Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q950250" start="2199" end="2222" title="test-driven development" label="test-driven development"/>
<link wikidata="Q92838" start="2643" end="2654" title="Erich Gamma" label="Erich Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278551" start="3161" end="3167" title="OOPSLA" label="OOPSLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395059" start="3348" end="3353" title="SUnit" label="SUnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q285539" start="3375" end="3380" title="xUnit" label="xUnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197736" start="3440" end="3451" title="WikiWikiWeb" label="WikiWikiWeb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16709" wikidata="Q122922" url="?curid=16709" title="Swedish krona">
<text>The krona (; plural: &quot;kronor&quot;; sign: kr; code: SEK) is the currency of the Kingdom of Sweden. It is one of the currencies of the European Union. Both the ISO code &quot;SEK&quot; and currency sign &quot;kr&quot; are in common use for the krona; the former precedes or follows the value, the latter usually follows it but, especially in the past, it sometimes preceded the value. In English, the currency is sometimes referred to as the Swedish crown, as means &quot;crown&quot; in Swedish. The Swedish krona was the ninth-most traded currency in the world by value in April 2016.

One krona is subdivided into 100 &quot;öre&quot; (singular; plural &quot;öre&quot; or &quot;ören&quot;, where the former is always used after a cardinal number, hence &quot;50 öre&quot;, but otherwise the latter is often preferred in contemporary speech). Coins as small as 1 öre were formerly in use, but the last coin smaller than 1 krona was discontinued in 2010. Goods can still be priced in &quot;öre&quot;, but all sums are rounded to the nearest krona when paying with cash. The word &quot;öre&quot; is ultimately derived from the Latin word for gold (&quot;aurum&quot;).

== History ==
The introduction of the krona, which replaced the riksdaler at par, was a result of the Scandinavian Monetary Union, which came into effect in 1876 and lasted until the beginning of World War I. The parties to the union were the Scandinavian countries, where the name was &quot;krona&quot; in Sweden and &quot;krone&quot; in Denmark and Norway, which in English literally means &quot;crown&quot;. The three currencies were on the gold standard, with the krona/krone defined as of a kilogram of pure gold.

The mutual equivalence of all three currencies ended in World War I when their convertibility to gold was suspended. While their gold parities remained during most of the interwar period, these currencies were generally quoted at varying market rates.

== Coins ==
=== Contemporary ===
On 11September 2012, the Riksbank announced a new series of coins with new sizes to replace the 1-krona and 5-kronor coins; the new coins arrived in October 2016. The design of the coins follows the theme of singer-songwriter Ted Gärdestad&#x27;s song, &quot;&quot; (English: &quot;Sun, wind and water&quot;), with the designs depicting the elements on the reverse side of the coins. This also included the reintroduction of the 2-kronor coin, while the current 10-kronor coin remained the same. The new coins also have a new portrait of the king in their design. One of the reasons for a new series of coins was to end the use of nickel (for allergy reasons). Vending machines and parking meters have to a fairly high degree stopped accepting coins and accept only bank cards or mobile phone payments.

=== History ===

Between 1873 and 1876, coins in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, and 50 öre and 1, 2, 10, and 20 kronor were introduced. The 1, 2 and 5 öre were in bronze, the 10, 25, 50 öre and 1 krona and 2 kronor were in silver, and the 10 and 20 kronor were in gold. Gold 5-kronor coins were added in 1881.

In 1873 the Scandinavian Monetary Union currency was fixed so that 2,480 kronor purchased 1 kg of gold. In 2017 the price of gold is 365,289 kronor per kg. So one öre in 1873 bought as much gold as 1.47 kronor in 2017. So if it is reasonable to have the smallest denomination coin 1 krona today, in 1873 a reasonable smallest denomination coin was 1 öre. A 10 kr gold coin weighed 4.4803 grams with 900 fineness so that the fine weight was 4.03327 grams or exactly 1/248th of a kilogram.

In 1902, production of gold coins ceased, and was briefly restarted in 1920 and 1925 before ceasing entirely. Due to metal shortages during World War I, iron replaced bronze between 1917 and 1919. Nickel-bronze replaced silver in the 10, 25 and 50 öre in 1920, with silver returning in 1927.

Metal shortages due to World War II again led to changes in the Swedish coinage. Between 1940 and 1947, the nickel-bronze 10, 25 and 50 öre were again issued. In 1942, iron again replaced bronze (until 1952) and the silver content of the other coins was reduced. In 1962, cupronickel replaced silver in the 10-öre, 25-öre and 50-öre coins.

In 1968, the 2-kronor switched to cupronickel and the 1-krona switched to cupronickel-clad copper (it was replaced entirely by cupronickel in 1982). Nonetheless, all previous mintages of the 1-krona (since 1875) and 2-kronor (since 1876) were still legal tender until 2017, though 2-kronor coins were extremely rarely seen in circulation as they have not been issued since 1971. The 2-kronor coins contained 40% silver until 1966, which meant they had been for several years worth much more than face value, so most have been bought and melted down by arbitrageurs, and the rest are kept by collectors.

In 1954, 1955 and 1971, 5-kronor silver coins were produced, with designs similar to contemporary 1-krona and 2-kronor coins. In 1972, a new, smaller 5-kronor coin was introduced, struck in cupronickel-clad nickel. The current design has been produced since 1976. 5-kronor coins minted since 1954 are legal tender but tend to be kept by collectors for their silver content.

The royal motto of the monarch is also inscribed on many of the coins. A new 5-kronor coin was designed in 1974, at a time when there were political efforts to abandon the monarchy and the young inexperienced king. The monarchy remained, but the 5-kronor was not given a portrait. Coins minted before 1974 have the same size, but contain the portrait of King Gustav VI Adolf and his royal motto.

Cash rounding (Swedish: ), commonly called Swedish rounding, is a legally-enforced method of rounding off change, up or down, to the nearest unit of physical currency, while retaining the as pricing and accounting unit. It was required in conjunction with the phaseout of smaller coins, as follows:
* 1971: 1- and 2-öre phased out; change rounded to nearest 5-öre.
* 1984: 5- and 25-öre phased out; change rounded to nearest 10-öre.
* 1991: 10-öre phased out; change rounded to nearest 50-öre.
* 2010: 50-öre phased out; change rounded to nearest 1-krona.

In 1971 the 2-kronor coin ceased production. In 1972 the sizes of the 5-öre and 5-kronor coins were reduced.

In 1991, aluminium-brass (&quot;Nordic gold&quot;) 10-kronor coins were introduced; previous 10-kronor coins are not legal tender. In the same year bronze-coloured 50-öre coins were introduced.

On 18December 2008, the Riksbank announced a proposal to phase out the 50-öre, the final öre coin, by 2010. The öre would still remain a subdivision unit for electronic payments. The reasons may have included low purchasing power, higher production and distribution cost than the value and the coins cannot be used in most parking machines and vending machines. On 25 March 2009, the Riksdag formally decided to enact the law to abolish 50-öre coins as legal tender. Under that law, the final date payments could be made with 50-öre coins was 30 September 2010. Remaining 50-öre coins could be exchanged at banks until the end of March 2011.
After the launch of the current coin series in 2016, all the old kronor coins have been invalid since 2017. They cannot be used for payments, nor can they be exchanged for legal tender at any bank, and are instead instructed to be recycled as metal.

Jubilee and commemorative coins have been minted, and those since 1897 are also legal tender.

== Banknotes ==

=== Contemporary ===
=== History ===

In 1874, notes were introduced by the Riksbank in denominations of 1 krona and 5, 10, 50, 100 and 1,000 kronor. The 1 krona was only initially issued for two years, although it reappeared between 1914 and 1920. In 1939 and 1958, 10,000-kronor notes were issued.

Production of the 5-kronor note ceased in 1981, although a coin had been issued since 1972. With the introduction of a 10-krona coin in 1991, production of 10-kronor notes ceased and a 20-kronor note was introduced.

All remaining one krona banknotes became invalid after 31 December 1987. All remaining five krona and ten krona banknotes became invalid after 31 December 1998.

An exhaustive list of every banknote design since 1874 is not included, but the following five designs were or will be retired in 2016–2017. The oldest design began to be printed in 1985.

A 20-kronor banknote (a new denomination) was printed 1991–1995 with a portrait of the writer Selma Lagerlöf and on the reverse was an engraved interpretation of a passage from the book &quot;The Wonderful Adventures of Nils&quot;. The banknote became invalid after 31 December 2005. A more secure version with the same portrait was printed from 1997 to 2008 and became invalid after 30 June 2016.

A 50-kronor banknote (3rd design since 1896) was printed 1996–2003 with a portrait of the singer Jenny Lind and on the reverse was a picture of a silver harp and its tonal range. The banknote became invalid after 31 December 2013. A more secure version with the same portrait was printed from 2006 to 2011 and became invalid after 30 June 2016.

A 100-kronor banknote (3rd design since 1898) was printed 1986–2000 with a portrait of the botanist Carl Linnaeus and on the reverse was a drawing of a bee pollinating a flower. The banknote became invalid after 31 December 2005. A more secure version with the same portrait was introduced in 2001 and became invalid after 30 June 2017.

A 500-kronor banknote (a new denomination) in a blue shade was introduced in 1985 with a portrait of King Charles XI and on the reverse an engraving depicts Christopher Polhem, the &quot;father of Swedish engineering&quot;. These banknotes became invalid on 31 December 1998. A 500-kronor banknote (red, but without foil strips) with the same portrait was printed 1989–2000. This banknote became invalid after 31 December 2005. A more secure version with the same portrait was introduced in 2001 and became invalid after 30 June 2017. The banknote had some controversy in 1985 because of the executions of &quot;Snapphane&quot; guerrilla warriors that King Charles XI ordered.

The first two designs of 1,000-kronor banknotes (printed from 1894 to 1950 and 1952–1973) became invalid on 31 December 1987. The third design with portrait of King Charles XIV John and Jöns Jacob Berzelius (printed 1976–1988) and declared invalid on 31 December 1998. In preparation for retirement of the 10,000-kronor banknotes a new 1,000-kronor banknotes (of the 4th design / without foil strips) was printed from 1989 to 1991 with a portrait of Gustav Vasa and on the reverse a harvest picture from Olaus Magnus&#x27;s Description of the Northern Peoples from 1555. Circulation peaked at over 48 million in 2001.

On 15 March 2006, the Riksbank introduced a new, more secure 1,000-kronor banknote with the same portrait and the Riksbank became the first central bank in the world to use the security feature of MOTION (a moving image in the striped band) on the new 1,000-kronor banknote. When the banknote is tilted, the picture in the striped band appears to move. The Vasa banknote without security thread became invalid after 31 December 2013 at which time there was only 10 million in circulation. The Vasa banknotes with the security thread became invalid after 30 June 2016 at which time there was under 4 million in circulation. Replacement banknotes featuring Dag Hammarskjöld became valid on 1 October 2015, but were circulated in considerably fewer quantities (less than 3.5 million), thus reducing the supply of cash in Sweden.

The 10,000 krona banknote was always printed in small quantities as it was one of the most valuable banknotes in the world. The first design featuring the Head of Mercury was printed in 1939 and became invalid after 31 December 1987. The second design was printed 1958 and featured a portrait of Gustav VI Adolf, and became invalid after 31 December 1991.

Invalid banknotes can be redeemed via the Riksbank, with an administration fee of 200 kronor.

=== 2015 series ===

On 6April 2011, the Riksbank announced the names of the persons whose portraits would decorate the new series of banknotes that would be introduced in 2015. This would also include a new 200-kronor banknote. These are:

*Astrid Lindgren on the 20-kronor banknote; purple
*Evert Taube on the 50-kronor banknote; orange
*Greta Garbo on the 100-kronor banknote; blue
*Ingmar Bergman on the 200-kronor banknote; green
*Birgit Nilsson on the 500-kronor banknote; red
*Dag Hammarskjöld on the 1,000-kronor banknote; brown

On 24April 2012, the Riksbank announced the base for the new designs of the banknotes, based on Göran Österlund&#x27;s entry titled &quot;Cultural Journey&quot;.

The first banknotes, the 20, 50, 200, and 1,000 krona, were issued on 1 October 2015 with the other two notes, the 100 and 500 krona, to follow on 3October 2016.

==== 500 kr banknote controversy ====
Opera singer Malena Ernman has criticized the Riksbank for choosing a design where Birgit Nilsson was depicted performing &quot;Die Walküre&quot; by Richard Wagner. She pointed out that it was very inappropriate to include something by Wagner, whose works were associated with Nazi Germany, in a time of increasing problems with antisemitism in Sweden. Wagner died long before the Nazi era, and the association is that Hitler liked his music. The Riksbank replied saying that it is &quot;unfortunate that the choice of design is seen as negative&quot;, and stated that it is not going to be changed.

 journalist Björn Wiman went further in his criticism, condemning the Riksbank for selecting Nilsson at all for the 500-kronor banknote. He brings up an example from Nilsson&#x27;s 1995 autobiography, where she described Mauritz Rosengarten from Decca using antisemitic jokes about greed.

== Exchange rate ==

To see where Swedish krona ranks in &quot;most traded currencies&quot;, read the article on the Foreign exchange market.

The exchange rate of the Swedish krona against other currencies has historically been dependent on the monetary policy pursued by Sweden at the time. Since the Swedish banking rescue, a managed float regimen has been upheld.

The weakest the krona has been relative to the euro was 6 March 2009 when one euro bought 11.6465 SEK. The strongest the krona has been relative to the euro was on 13 August 2012 when one euro bought 8.2065 SEK. The weakness in the euro was due to the crisis in Greece which began in July 2012 and fear of further spreading to Italy and Spain. The average exchange rate since the beginning of 2002 when the euro banknote and coins were issued and 1 March 2017 was 9.2884 SEK/EUR.

== Relationship to the euro ==
According to the 1994 accession treaty (effective 1 January 1995), Sweden is required to join the eurozone and therefore must convert to the euro once the convergence criteria are met. Notwithstanding this, on 14 September 2003, a consultative Swedish referendum was held on the euro, in which 56% of voters were opposed to the adoption of the currency, out of an overall turnout of 82.6%. The Swedish government has argued such a course of action is possible since one of the requirements for eurozone membership is a prior two-year membership of the ERM II. By simply not joining the exchange rate mechanism, the Swedish government is provided a formal loophole avoiding the theoretical requirement of adopting the euro.

Some of Sweden&#x27;s major parties continue to believe it would be in the national interest to join, but all parties have pledged to abide by the results of the referendum, and none have shown any interest in raising the issue again. There was an agreement among the parties not to discuss the issue before the 2010 general election. In a poll from May 2007, 33.3% were in favour, while 53.8% were against and 13.0% were uncertain.

In February 2009, Fredrik Reinfeldt, the prime minister of Sweden, stated that a new referendum on the euro issue will not be held until support is gained from the people and all the major parties. Therefore, the timing is now at the discretion of the Social Democrats. He added, the request of Mona Sahlin, former leader of the Social Democratic Party, for deferral of a new referendum until after the 2010 mandate period should be respected.

, support for Swedish membership of the euro among the general population is low. In September 2013, support fell as low as 9%. The only party in the Riksdag that supports Swedish entry in the euro (as of 2015) is the Liberal Party.

== Banknotes and coins per capita in circulation ==
Sweden is a wealthy country and in the 1970s and 1980s the value of banknotes and coins per capita was one of the highest in the world. In 1991, the largest banknote worth 10,000kr that was in circulation since 1958 was declared invalid and no longer was legal tender. For a discussion of the financial and banking crisis that hit Sweden in the early 1990s see the article History of Sweden (1991–present) and Swedish banking rescue.

Unlike the United States, which by policy never declares issued money invalid, Sweden and most other European countries have a date when older series of banknotes or older coin designs are invalid and are no longer legal tender. Invalid old banknotes of any age can, however, be deposited in the Riksbank, and the value be sent to a bank account.

From the years 2001 to 2008 banknotes and coins were circulated at a near constant level of around 12,000 krona per capita, but in 2006 a modified 1,000-krona banknote with a motion security strip was produced. Within seven years the banknotes without the strip were declared invalid, leaving only a radically reduced number of banknotes with foil valid. The Swish mobile payment system was established in Sweden in 2012 and become a popular alternative to cash payments. The Vasa 1,000-krona banknote without the foil strip became invalid after 31 December 2013, and the pieces with the foil strip are invalid after 30 June 2016.

Although many countries are performing larger and larger share of transactions by electronic means, Sweden is unique in that it is also reducing its cash in circulation by a significant percentage. According to Bank for International Settlements the last year Sweden was surpassed in cash on a per capita basis converted to United States dollars by the US in 1993, the Euro Area in 2003, Australia in 2007, Canada in 2009, United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia in 2013, South Korea in 2014, Russia in 2016, and Mexico in 2019. As of 2019 Sweden was still circulating more cash per person (converted to USD) than Argentina, Brazil, Turkey, India, Indonesia, and South Africa.

The tables show the value of the banknotes and coins per capita for participating countries on Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI). Local currency is converted to US dollars using end of the year rates.

The circulation levels in the table above were reported to the Bank for International Settlements. Possible discrepancies with these statistics and other sources may be because some sources exclude &quot;commemorative banknotes and coins&quot; (3.20% of total for Sweden in 2015) and other sources exclude &quot;banknotes and coin held by banks&quot; (2.68% of total for Sweden in 2015) as opposed &quot;banknotes and coin in circulation outside banks&quot;.

Circulation levels of cash on a per capita basis, are reduced by 51% from the high in 2007 compared to 2018. Speculation about Sweden declaring all banknotes and coins invalid at some future date is widespread in the media with Björn Ulvaeus as a celebrity advocate of a cashless Sweden which he believes will result in a safer society because simple robbery will involve stealing goods that must be fenced.

The value of the payments between households, companies and authorities in Sweden amounts to about 20,000 kronor annual per capita in cash. In shops, almost one in seven payments is made in cash. More than half of the adult population has the Swish payment app. Annual withdrawals from Swedish ATMs in 2015 amount to 15,300 kronor per capita. According to Skingsley, &quot;what some consumers, smaller companies and local clubs often see as a problem, is not so much getting hold of cash, but being able to deposit it in a bank account.&quot;

To see how circulation of the Swedish krona ranks compared to other currencies see Bank for International Settlements#Red Books.

== The e-krona ==

The e-krona (electronic krona) is a proposed electronic currency to be issued directly by the Riksbank. It is different from the electronic transfers using commercial bank money as central bank money has no nominal credit risk, as it stands for a claim on the central bank, which cannot go bankrupt, at least not for debts in Swedish krona.

The declining use of cash in Sweden is going to be reinforced cyclically. As more businesses find that they can function without accepting cash, the number of businesses refusing to accept cash will increase. That will re-enforce the need for more and more citizens to get the Swish app which is already used by half the population. Cash machines, which are controlled by a Swedish bank consortium, are being dismantled by the hundreds, especially in rural areas.

The Riksbank has not taken a decision on issuing e-krona. First, the Riksbank needs to investigate a number of technical, legal and practical issues. &quot;The declining use of cash in Sweden means that this is more of a burning issue for us than for most other central banks. Although it may appear simple at first glance to issue e-krona, this is something entirely new for a central bank and there is no precedent to follow&quot;. If the Riksbank chooses to issue e-krona, it is not to replace cash, but to act as a complement to it. &quot;The Riksbank will continue issuing banknotes and coins as long as there is demand for them in society. It is our statutory duty and we will of course continue to live up to it,&quot; concluded Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley.

In December 2020, Sweden&#x27;s Minister for Financial Markets Per Bolund announced a government review to explore the feasibility of moving to a digital currency that was expected to be completed by the end of November in 2022. Anna Kinberg Batra, a former chairwoman of the Riksbank&#x27;s finance committee, was announced as the leader of the review. As of 2023, no decision has been made.

== See also ==

* Economy of Sweden
* Fyrk 
* List of currencies in Europe
* Monetary policy of Sweden
* Scandinavian Monetary Union
* Swedish National Debt Office
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*

== External links ==
* Sveriges Riksbank 
* Swedish monetary standards in historical perspective
* Historical and current banknotes of Sweden </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="4" end="9" title="Swedish krona" label="krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="41" end="45" title="currency sign" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="47" end="49" title="Swedish krona" label="kr"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="51" end="55" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="57" end="60" title="Swedish krona" label="SEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="69" end="77" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="96" end="102" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008401" start="121" end="153" title="currencies of the European Union" label="currencies of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="446" end="459" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="476" end="481" title="Crown (headgear)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423728" start="630" end="633" title="öre" label="öre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366931" start="1021" end="1028" title="Cash rounding" label="rounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1129" end="1134" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338813" start="1235" end="1244" title="Swedish riksdaler" label="riksdaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q975735" start="1245" end="1251" title="at par" label="at par"/>
<link wikidata="Q60812" start="1273" end="1300" title="Scandinavian Monetary Union" label="Scandinavian Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1367" end="1378" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1510" end="1517" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1522" end="1528" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="1615" end="1628" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q552529" start="2203" end="2216" title="Ted Gärdestad" label="Ted Gärdestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="2608" end="2614" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365703" start="2757" end="2778" title="Mobile payment" label="mobile phone payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3724" end="3735" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3900" end="3912" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q649090" start="4149" end="4160" title="cupronickel" label="cupronickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="4170" end="4176" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q273088" start="4770" end="4779" title="arbitrage" label="arbitrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437510" start="4809" end="4819" title="Coin collecting" label="collectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067410" start="5201" end="5212" title="Royal mottos of Swedish monarchs" label="royal motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="5556" end="5571" title="Gustav VI Adolf" label="Gustav VI Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366931" start="5594" end="5607" title="Cash rounding" label="Cash rounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q112260" start="6293" end="6304" title="Nordic gold" label="Nordic gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="6840" end="6847" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q564652" start="7537" end="7545" title="Sveriges Riksbank" label="Riksbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q44519" start="8424" end="8438" title="Selma Lagerlöf" label="Selma Lagerlöf"/>
<link wikidata="Q726254" start="8522" end="8554" title="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils" label="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils"/>
<link wikidata="Q231345" start="8826" end="8836" title="Jenny Lind" label="Jenny Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q182718" start="8875" end="8886" title="Nyckelharpa" label="silver harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="9175" end="9188" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52935" start="9514" end="9529" title="Charles XI of Sweden" label="King Charles XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q353693" start="9570" end="9588" title="Christopher Polhem" label="Christopher Polhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094949" start="10025" end="10034" title="Snapphane" label="Snapphane"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="10251" end="10272" title="Charles XIV John" label="King Charles XIV John"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="10277" end="10297" title="Jöns Jacob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jacob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="10541" end="10552" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q315804" start="10595" end="10607" title="Olaus Magnus" label="Olaus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717669" start="10615" end="10650" title="A Description of the Northern Peoples" label="Description of the Northern Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267" start="11365" end="11381" title="Dag Hammarskjöld" label="Dag Hammarskjöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="11700" end="11707" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="11833" end="11848" title="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden" label="Gustav VI Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q55767" start="12231" end="12246" title="Astrid Lindgren" label="Astrid Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q455625" start="12282" end="12293" title="Evert Taube" label="Evert Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443" start="12329" end="12340" title="Greta Garbo" label="Greta Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="12375" end="12389" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q233951" start="12425" end="12439" title="Birgit Nilsson" label="Birgit Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267" start="12473" end="12489" title="Dag Hammarskjöld" label="Dag Hammarskjöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q187210" start="12904" end="12917" title="Malena Ernman" label="Malena Ernman"/>
<link wikidata="Q233951" start="12974" end="12988" title="Birgit Nilsson" label="Birgit Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q324319" start="13019" end="13030" title="Die Walküre" label="Die Walküre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="13040" end="13054" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13168" end="13180" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775244" start="13220" end="13242" title="antisemitism in Sweden" label="antisemitism in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="13738" end="13743" title="Decca Records" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="13899" end="13922" title="Foreign exchange market" label="Foreign exchange market"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="13929" end="13942" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899016" start="14028" end="14043" title="monetary policy of Sweden" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546782" start="14085" end="14107" title="Swedish banking rescue" label="Swedish banking rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415489" start="14111" end="14124" title="managed float" label="managed float"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363231" start="14680" end="14701" title="Treaty of Accession 1994" label="1994 accession treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="14761" end="14769" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="14804" end="14808" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q744775" start="14818" end="14838" title="Euro convergence criteria" label="convergence criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352712" start="14907" end="14925" title="2003 Swedish euro referendum" label="Swedish referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="15157" end="15165" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q733221" start="15215" end="15221" title="European Exchange Rate Mechanism" label="ERM II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340192" start="15699" end="15720" title="2010 Swedish general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q52920" start="15839" end="15856" title="Fredrik Reinfeldt" label="Fredrik Reinfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q687075" start="15862" end="15886" title="prime minister of Sweden" label="prime minister of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="16073" end="16089" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q231413" start="16116" end="16127" title="Mona Sahlin" label="Mona Sahlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="16416" end="16423" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q110857" start="16484" end="16497" title="Liberals (Sweden)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866759" start="16925" end="16957" title="History of Sweden (1991–present)" label="History of Sweden (1991–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q546782" start="16962" end="16984" title="Swedish banking rescue" label="Swedish banking rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658819" start="17694" end="17699" title="Swish (payment)" label="Swish"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="18178" end="18212" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="18732" end="18780" title="Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures" label="Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="18924" end="18958" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20357" end="20401" title="Bank for International Settlements#Red Books" label="Bank for International Settlements#Red Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q10836209" start="20468" end="20487" title="electronic currency" label="electronic currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658819" start="21042" end="21047" title="Swish (payment)" label="Swish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455200" start="22414" end="22431" title="Economy of Sweden" label="Economy of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318907" start="22434" end="22438" title="Fyrk" label="Fyrk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065610" start="22442" end="22470" title="List of currencies in Europe" label="List of currencies in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899016" start="22473" end="22498" title="Monetary policy of Sweden" label="Monetary policy of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q60812" start="22501" end="22528" title="Scandinavian Monetary Union" label="Scandinavian Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375451" start="22531" end="22559" title="Swedish National Debt Office" label="Swedish National Debt Office"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16710" wikidata="Q1564109" url="?curid=16710" title="Krone">
<text>Krone (the cognate of Crown) may refer to:
==General==
* Crown
* ADC KRONE &amp; The KRONE Group in ADC Telecommunications
* KRONE LSA-PLUS, a popular telecommunications connector, or krone tool
* Krone an der Brahe, the German name for Koronowo, Poland
* &quot;Diu Crône&quot;, a medieval poem
* &quot;Kronen Zeitung&quot;, an Austrian tabloid
* The Krone Group, manufacturer 
* Krone (mountain), in the Alps
* Bernard Krone Holding, a German company

==Name==
* Fred Krone (1930–2010), American actor and stuntman
* Heinrich Krone (1895-1989), German politician
* Julie Krone, American jockey
* Sigismund Ernst Richard Krone (1861 – 1917), German naturalist
* Hermann Krone (1827 – 1916), German photographer
* Roger Krone, CEO of Leidos

==Currency==
* Named by European monarchies:
** Scandinavia:
*** Danish krone
****Krone (Danish coin)
*** Norwegian krone
*** Swedish krona
** Austro-Hungarian krone
** Faroese króna
** Fiume krone
** Yugoslav krone
* Named by republics:
** Czech koruna
** Estonian kroon
** Icelandic króna
** Slovak koruna

==See also==
* Krona (disambiguation)
* Koruna (disambiguation)
* Crown (British coin)
* Crown (currency)
* Crone, a stock character in folklore and fairy tale, an old woman
* Lower Croan, a farmstead in Cornwall, England, UK
* Crohn&#x27;s disease, a type of inflammatory bowel disease</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1564109" start="0" end="5" title="Krone" label="Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564109" start="22" end="27" title="Krone" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="57" end="62" title="Crown" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q290159" start="100" end="122" title="ADC Telecommunications" label="ADC Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956484" start="125" end="139" title="KRONE LSA-PLUS" label="KRONE LSA-PLUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498582" start="184" end="194" title="Punch down tool" label="krone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q611297" start="237" end="245" title="Koronowo" label="Koronowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379155" start="262" end="271" title="Diu Crône" label="Diu Crône"/>
<link wikidata="Q644103" start="303" end="317" title="Kronen Zeitung" label="Kronen Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q279044" start="347" end="362" title="Bernard Krone Holding" label="The Krone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438887" start="380" end="396" title="Krone (mountain)" label="Krone (mountain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q279044" start="412" end="433" title="Bernard Krone Holding" label="Bernard Krone Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495699" start="464" end="474" title="Fred Krone" label="Fred Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q69130" start="518" end="532" title="Heinrich Krone" label="Heinrich Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308321" start="566" end="577" title="Julie Krone" label="Julie Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130240" start="597" end="626" title="Sigismund Ernst Richard Krone" label="Sigismund Ernst Richard Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q71235" start="662" end="675" title="Hermann Krone" label="Hermann Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18001449" start="713" end="724" title="Roger Krone" label="Roger Krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="806" end="818" title="Danish krone" label="Danish krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19800000" start="823" end="842" title="Krone (Danish coin)" label="Krone (Danish coin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="847" end="862" title="Norwegian krone" label="Norwegian krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="867" end="880" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q303713" start="884" end="906" title="Austro-Hungarian krone" label="Austro-Hungarian krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q191068" start="910" end="923" title="Faroese króna" label="Faroese króna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241612" start="927" end="938" title="Fiume krone" label="Fiume krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525711" start="942" end="956" title="Yugoslav krone" label="Yugoslav krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131016" start="982" end="994" title="Czech koruna" label="Czech koruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q129983" start="998" end="1012" title="Estonian kroon" label="Estonian kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="1016" end="1031" title="Icelandic króna" label="Icelandic króna"/>
<link wikidata="Q178874" start="1035" end="1048" title="Slovak koruna" label="Slovak koruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134727" start="1065" end="1087" title="Krona (disambiguation)" label="Krona (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q297849" start="1090" end="1113" title="Koruna (disambiguation)" label="Koruna (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141751" start="1116" end="1136" title="Crown (British coin)" label="Crown (British coin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189842" start="1139" end="1155" title="Crown (currency)" label="Crown (currency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187700" start="1158" end="1163" title="Crone" label="Crone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693415" start="1226" end="1237" title="Lower Croan" label="Lower Croan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="1278" end="1298" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16712" wikidata="Q131716" url="?curid=16712" title="Kattegat">
<text>The Kattegat (; ) is a sea area bounded by the peninsula of Jutland in the west, the Danish straits islands of Denmark and the Baltic Sea to the south and the Swedish provinces of Bohuslän, Västergötland, Halland and Scania in Sweden in the east. The Baltic Sea drains into the Kattegat through the Danish straits. The sea area is a continuation of the Skagerrak and may be seen as a bay of the North Sea and North Atlantic Ocean, though this is not the case in traditional Scandinavian usage.

The Kattegat is a rather shallow sea and can be dangerous to navigate due to many sandy, stony reefs and the tricky shifting currents. In modern times, artificial seabed channels have been dug, many reefs have been dredged either by sand pumping or boulder clearance, and a well-developed light signaling network has been installed to protect the heavy international traffic on this small sea.

There are several large cities and major ports on the Kattegat, including, in descending size, Gothenburg, Aarhus, Aalborg, Halmstad, Varberg and Frederikshavn.

==Geography==

According to the definition established in a 1932 convention signed by Denmark, Norway and Sweden (registered in the League of Nations Treaty Series 1933–1934), the northern boundary between the Kattegat and Skagerrak is at the northernmost point of Skagen on Jutland and the southern boundary towards Øresund is at the tip of Kullen Peninsula in Scania.

Major waterways that drain into the Kattegat are the rivers of Göta älv at Gothenburg, together with the Lagan, Nissan, Ätran and Viskan in the province of Halland on the Swedish side, and the Danish river of Gudenå in Jutland.

The main islands of the Kattegat are Samsø, Læsø and Anholt; due to their relatively dry climate, the last two are, perceived to belong to &quot;the Danish desert belt&quot;.

A number of noteworthy coastal areas abut the Kattegat, including the Kullaberg Nature Reserve in Scania, , which contains a number of rare species and a scenic rocky shore, the town of Mölle, which has a picturesque harbour and views into the Kullaberg, and Skagen at the northern tip of Denmark.

Since the 1950s, a bridge project usually referred to as &quot;Kattegatbroen&quot; (the Kattegat Bridge) connecting Jutland and Zealand across the Kattegat has been considered. Since the late 2000s, the project has seen a renewed interest from several influential politicians in Denmark. The bridge is usually envisioned as connecting Hov (a village south of Odder in the Aarhus area) with Samsø and Kalundborg.

===Extent===
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the &quot;Kattegat, Sound and Belts&quot; (that is, the Kattegat, Øresund, Great Belt, and Little Belt) as follows:

==Etymology==
According to &quot;Den Store Danske Encyklopædi&quot; and &#x27;, the name is from the Dutch words &#x27; &#x27;cat&#x27;s&#x27; and &quot;&quot; &#x27;gate, passage&#x27;. It derives from late medieval navigation jargon, in which captains of the Hanseatic trading fleets would compare the Danish straits to a passage so tight that even a cat would have difficulty squeezing its way through, owing to the many reefs and shoals. At one point, the passable waters were a mere wide. The name of the Copenhagen street &quot;Kattesundet&quot; has a comparable etymological meaning, namely &#x27;narrow passage&#x27;, .

An archaic name for both the Skagerrak and Kattegat was the &quot;Norwegian Sea&quot; or &quot;Jutland Sea&quot; (Knýtlinga saga mentions the name &quot;Jótlandshaf&quot;). Its ancient Latin name was &quot;&quot;.

==History==
Controlling and having access to the Kattegat have been important throughout the history of international seafaring. Until the completion of the Eider Canal in 1784, the Kattegat was the only sea route into and out of the Baltic region.

Beginning in 1429 in the Middle Ages, the Danish royal family – and later the state of Denmark – prospered greatly from the Sound dues, a toll charged for passage through the Øresund, while Copenhagen sheltered and repaired ships and provided trade opportunities and protection from piracy. The dues were eventually lifted, in 1857.

== Biology ==

The salinity in the Kattegat has a pronounced two-layer structure. The upper layer&#x27;s salinity is between 18‰ and 26‰, while that of the lower layer (separated by a strong halocline at around ) has a salinity between 32‰ and 34‰. The lower layer consists of inflowing seawater from the Skagerrak, with a salinity on par with most other coastal seawaters, while the upper layer, consisting of inflowing seawater from the Baltic Sea, has a much lower salinity, comparable to brackish water, but still a great deal higher than the rest of the Baltic. These two opposing flows transport a net surplus of of seawater from the Baltic to the Skagerrak every year. During strong winds, the Kattegat&#x27;s layers are completely mixed in places such as the Great Belt, making the overall salinity highly variable. This leads to some distinctive conditions for sealife in the area.

Cold seeps, known locally as &quot;bubbling reefs&quot; (), can be found in the northern Kattegat. Unlike those in most other places (including the North Sea and Skagerrak), the Kattegat&#x27;s cold seeps are at relatively shallow depths, generally from below the surface. The seeps rely on methane deposited during the Eemian period and during calm weather the bubbles can sometimes be seen on the surface of the water. Carbonate cementation and lithification form slaps or pillars up to tall and support a rich biodiversity. Due to their distinct properties, the Kattegat bubbling reefs are under protection and are recognised by the European Union (EU) as a Natura 2000 habitat (type 1180).

===Ecological collapse===
The Kattegat, characterised by widespread anoxia, was one of the first marine dead zones to be noted in the 1970s, when scientists began to study the effects of heavy industry on the natural world. Since then, research has leant much insight into processes like eutrophication, and how to deal with it. Since the first Action Plan for the Aquatic Environment in 1985, Denmark and the EU have begun costly, far-reaching domestic projects to stop, repair and prevent these environmentally destructive and economically damaging processes and are now busy implementing the fourth Action Plan. The action plans sum up a broad range of initiatives and include the so-called Nitrate Directives. The action plans have generally been viewed as a success, although the work is not finished and not all goals have been met yet.

== Protections and regulation ==
Due to its very heavy sea traffic and many large coastal settlements, the Kattegat has been designated as a Sulphur Emission Control Area as part of the Baltic Sea since 2006. As from 1 January 2016 the benchmark for sulphur in fuels was lowered to 0.1%.

Several large areas of the Kattegat are designated under Natura 2000 and various bird protections such as the Ramsar Convention. The remaining larger shallow reefs are among the protections, as they are important spawning and feeding grounds for fish and marine mammals and support a thriving but threatened biodiversity. Protected areas include:

Denmark
* Grenen
* The Bay of Aalborg, comprising a shallow sea area.
* Beach meadows on Læsø and the stony reefs south of the island.
* Anholt and the sea north of the island.

Sweden
* The Nordre älv estuary north of Gothenburg. An important spot for migratory birds and fish.
* The Vrångö archipelago (Swedish: &quot;Vrångöskärgården&quot;), part of the Archipelago of Gothenburg. An important reproduction area for seabirds and seals.
* Kungsbacka Fjord. A shallow water fjord between Gothenburg and Varberg, including important salt marshes. 
* Hovs Hallar 
* Kullaberg Nature Reserve

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Øresund Bridge

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131716" start="4" end="12" title="Kattegat" label="Kattegat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="60" end="67" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q816210" start="85" end="99" title="Danish straits" label="Danish straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="111" end="118" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="127" end="137" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="180" end="188" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="190" end="203" title="Västergötland" label="Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q626045" start="205" end="212" title="Halland" label="Halland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="217" end="223" title="Scania" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="227" end="233" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q816210" start="299" end="313" title="Danish straits" label="Danish straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695" start="353" end="362" title="Skagerrak" label="Skagerrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="395" end="404" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="409" end="429" title="North Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="474" end="485" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="710" end="717" title="dredging" label="dredged"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="784" end="799" title="Lighthouse" label="light signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="985" end="995" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="997" end="1003" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="1005" end="1012" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26521" start="1014" end="1022" title="Halmstad" label="Halmstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21168" start="1024" end="1031" title="Varberg" label="Varberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27452" start="1036" end="1049" title="Frederikshavn" label="Frederikshavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1147" end="1153" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1184" end="1201" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158579" start="1202" end="1215" title="Treaty Series" label="Treaty Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q215177" start="1317" end="1323" title="Skagen" label="Skagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="1369" end="1376" title="Øresund" label="Øresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518751" start="1394" end="1400" title="Kullen Lighthouse" label="Kullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="1429" end="1437" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214748" start="1486" end="1494" title="Göta älv" label="Göta älv"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="1498" end="1508" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q426988" start="1528" end="1533" title="Lagan River (Sweden)" label="Lagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958359" start="1535" end="1541" title="Nissan (river)" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258116" start="1543" end="1548" title="Ätran (river)" label="Ätran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537948" start="1553" end="1559" title="Viskan" label="Viskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q626045" start="1579" end="1586" title="Halland" label="Halland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739513" start="1632" end="1638" title="Gudenå" label="Gudenå"/>
<link wikidata="Q216422" start="1689" end="1694" title="Samsø" label="Samsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q683719" start="1696" end="1700" title="Læsø" label="Læsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q216845" start="1705" end="1711" title="Anholt (Denmark)" label="Anholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791521" start="1898" end="1922" title="Kullaberg Nature Reserve" label="Kullaberg Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503448" start="1963" end="1975" title="rare species" label="rare species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119003" start="1989" end="2000" title="rocky shore" label="rocky shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599139" start="2014" end="2019" title="Mölle" label="Mölle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807612" start="2215" end="2230" title="Kattegat Bridge" label="Kattegat Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="2255" end="2262" title="Zealand (Denmark)" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q925736" start="2486" end="2491" title="Odder" label="Odder"/>
<link wikidata="Q204957" start="2527" end="2537" title="Kalundborg" label="Kalundborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="2557" end="2596" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="2685" end="2692" title="Øresund" label="Øresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q204715" start="2694" end="2704" title="Great Belt" label="Great Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211008" start="2710" end="2721" title="Little Belt" label="Little Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186818" start="2769" end="2797" title="Den Store Danske Encyklopædi" label="Den Store Danske Encyklopædi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2837" end="2842" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2944" end="2952" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="2997" end="3006" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q816210" start="3040" end="3054" title="Danish straits" label="Danish straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="3160" end="3164" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3246" end="3256" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10443185" start="3270" end="3281" title="Kattesundet" label="Kattesundet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695" start="3394" end="3403" title="Skagerrak" label="Skagerrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753725" start="3479" end="3493" title="Knýtlinga saga" label="Knýtlinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3550" end="3555" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q895858" start="3737" end="3748" title="Eider Canal" label="Eider Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3855" end="3866" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q707337" start="3954" end="3964" title="Sound dues" label="Sound dues"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="4005" end="4012" title="Øresund" label="Øresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="4020" end="4030" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="4113" end="4119" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="4183" end="4191" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540292" start="4355" end="4364" title="halocline" label="halocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="4656" end="4670" title="brackish water" label="brackish water"/>
<link wikidata="Q204715" start="4931" end="4941" title="Great Belt" label="Great Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="5034" end="5041" title="sealife" label="sealife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107856" start="5056" end="5065" title="Cold seep" label="Cold seep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295340" start="5376" end="5382" title="Eemian" label="Eemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189315" start="5487" end="5498" title="Cementation (geology)" label="cementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="5503" end="5516" title="lithification" label="lithification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="5569" end="5581" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5692" end="5706" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="5717" end="5728" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030030" start="5819" end="5825" title="oceanic anoxic event" label="anoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236263" start="5855" end="5864" title="dead zone (ecology)" label="dead zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="6039" end="6053" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364688" start="6736" end="6765" title="Sulphur Emission Control Area" label="Sulphur Emission Control Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="6994" end="7011" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="7192" end="7204" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537592" start="7242" end="7248" title="Grenen" label="Grenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12337432" start="7304" end="7316" title="Beach meadow" label="Beach meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q683719" start="7321" end="7325" title="Læsø" label="Læsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="7340" end="7344" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q216845" start="7369" end="7375" title="Anholt (Denmark)" label="Anholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214748" start="7423" end="7433" title="Nordre älv" label="Nordre älv"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="7434" end="7441" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784845" start="7517" end="7523" title="Vrångö" label="Vrångö"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746725" start="7589" end="7614" title="Archipelago of Gothenburg" label="Archipelago of Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444540" start="7673" end="7689" title="Kungsbacka Fjord" label="Kungsbacka Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q21168" start="7736" end="7743" title="Varberg" label="Varberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="7765" end="7775" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543904" start="7782" end="7793" title="Hovs Hallar" label="Hovs Hallar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791521" start="7797" end="7821" title="Kullaberg Nature Reserve" label="Kullaberg Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q297871" start="7852" end="7866" title="Øresund Bridge" label="Øresund Bridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16714" wikidata="Q575766" url="?curid=16714" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test">
<text>In statistics, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (also K–S test or KS test) is a nonparametric test of the equality of continuous (or discontinuous, see Section 2.2), one-dimensional probability distributions. It can be used to test whether a sample came from a given reference probability distribution (one-sample K–S test), or to test whether two samples came from the same distribution (two-sample K–S test). Intuitively, it provides a method to qualitatively answer the question &quot;How likely is it that we would see a collection of samples like this if they were drawn from that probability distribution?&quot; or, in the second case, &quot;How likely is it that we would see two sets of samples like this if they were drawn from the same (but unknown) probability distribution?&quot;.
It is named after Andrey Kolmogorov and Nikolai Smirnov.

The Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic quantifies a distance between the empirical distribution function of the sample and the cumulative distribution function of the reference distribution, or between the empirical distribution functions of two samples. The null distribution of this statistic is calculated under the null hypothesis that the sample is drawn from the reference distribution (in the one-sample case) or that the samples are drawn from the same distribution (in the two-sample case). In the one-sample case, the distribution considered under the null hypothesis may be continuous (see Section 2), purely discrete or mixed (see Section 2.2). In the two-sample case (see Section 3), the distribution considered under the null hypothesis is a continuous distribution but is otherwise unrestricted. 

The two-sample K–S test is one of the most useful and general nonparametric methods for comparing two samples, as it is sensitive to differences in both location and shape of the empirical cumulative distribution functions of the two samples.

The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test can be modified to serve as a goodness of fit test. In the special case of testing for normality of the distribution, samples are standardized and compared with a standard normal distribution. This is equivalent to setting the mean and variance of the reference distribution equal to the sample estimates, and it is known that using these to define the specific reference distribution changes the null distribution of the test statistic (see Test with estimated parameters). Various studies have found that, even in this corrected form, the test is less powerful for testing normality than the Shapiro–Wilk test or Anderson–Darling test. However, these other tests have their own disadvantages. For instance the Shapiro–Wilk test is known not to work well in samples with many identical values.

==One-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic==
The empirical distribution function &quot;F&quot;&quot;n&quot; for &quot;n&quot; independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) ordered observations &quot;Xi&quot; is defined as

:formula_1
:where formula_2 is the indicator function, equal to 1 if formula_3 and equal to 0 otherwise.

The Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic for a given cumulative distribution function &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is

:formula_4

where sup&quot;x&quot; is the supremum of the set of distances. Intuitively, the statistic takes the largest absolute difference between the two distribution functions across all &quot;x&quot; values.

By the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem, if the sample comes from distribution &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), then &quot;D&quot;&quot;n&quot; converges to 0 almost surely in the limit when formula_5 goes to infinity. Kolmogorov strengthened this result, by effectively providing the rate of this convergence (see Kolmogorov distribution). Donsker&#x27;s theorem provides a yet stronger result.

In practice, the statistic requires a relatively large number of data points (in comparison to other goodness of fit criteria such as the Anderson–Darling test statistic) to properly reject the null hypothesis.

==Kolmogorov distribution==

The Kolmogorov distribution is the distribution of the random variable

:formula_6

where &quot;B&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) is the Brownian bridge. The cumulative distribution function of &quot;K&quot; is given by

:formula_7

which can also be expressed by the Jacobi theta function formula_8. Both the form of the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test statistic and its asymptotic distribution under the null hypothesis were published by Andrey Kolmogorov, while a table of the distribution was published by Nikolai Smirnov. Recurrence relations for the distribution of the test statistic in finite samples are available.

Under null hypothesis that the sample comes from the hypothesized distribution &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;),

:formula_9

in distribution, where &quot;B&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) is the Brownian bridge. If &quot;F&quot; is continuous then under the null hypothesis formula_10 converges to the Kolmogorov distribution, which does not depend on &quot;F&quot;. This result may also be known as the Kolmogorov theorem. 

The accuracy of this limit as an approximation to the exact cdf of formula_11 when formula_5 is finite is not very impressive: even when formula_13, the corresponding maximum error is about formula_14; this error increases to formula_15 when formula_16 and to a totally unacceptable formula_17 when formula_18. However, a very simple expedient of replacing formula_19 by
:formula_20

in the argument of the Jacobi theta function reduces these errors to 
formula_21, formula_22, and formula_23 respectively; such accuracy would be usually considered more than adequate for all practical applications.

The &quot;goodness-of-fit&quot; test or the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test can be constructed by using the critical values of the Kolmogorov distribution. This test is asymptotically valid when formula_24 It rejects the null hypothesis at level formula_25 if

:formula_26

where &quot;K&quot;&quot;α&quot; is found from

:formula_27

The asymptotic power of this test is 1.

Fast and accurate algorithms to compute the cdf formula_28 or its complement for arbitrary formula_5 and formula_19, are available from:

* and for continuous null distributions with code in C and Java to be found in.

* for purely discrete, mixed or continuous null distribution implemented in the KSgeneral package of the R project for statistical computing, which for a given sample also computes the KS test statistic and its p-value. Alternative C++ implementation is available from.

===Test with estimated parameters===

If either the form or the parameters of &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) are determined from the data &quot;X&quot;&quot;i&quot; the critical values determined in this way are invalid. In such cases, Monte Carlo or other methods may be required, but tables have been prepared for some cases. Details for the required modifications to the test statistic and for the critical values for the normal distribution and the exponential distribution have been published, and later publications also include the Gumbel distribution. The Lilliefors test represents a special case of this for the normal distribution. The logarithm transformation may help to overcome cases where the Kolmogorov test data does not seem to fit the assumption that it came from the normal distribution.

Using estimated parameters, the question arises which estimation method should be used. Usually this would be the maximum likelihood method, but e.g. for the normal distribution MLE has a large bias error on sigma. Using a moment fit or KS minimization instead has a large impact on the critical values, and also some impact on test power. If we need to decide for Student-T data with df = 2 via KS test whether the data could be normal or not, then a ML estimate based on H0 (data is normal, so using the standard deviation for scale) would give much larger KS distance, than a fit with minimum KS. In this case we should reject H0, which is often the case with MLE, because the sample standard deviation might be very large for T-2 data, but with KS minimization we may get still a too low KS to reject H0. In the Student-T case, a modified KS test with KS estimate instead of MLE, makes the KS test indeed slightly worse. However, in other cases, such a modified KS test leads to slightly better test power.

===Discrete and mixed null distribution===

Under the assumption that formula_31 is non-decreasing and right-continuous, with countable (possibly infinite) number of jumps, the KS test statistic can be expressed as:

:formula_32

From the right-continuity of formula_31, it follows that formula_34 and formula_35 and hence, the distribution of formula_36 depends on the null distribution formula_31, i.e., is no longer distribution-free as in the continuous case. Therefore, a fast and accurate method has been developed to compute the exact and asymptotic distribution of formula_36 when formula_31 is purely discrete or mixed, implemented in C++ and in the KSgeneral package of the R language. The functions codice_1, codice_2 and codice_3 compute also the KS test statistic and p-values for purely discrete, mixed or continuous null distributions and arbitrary sample sizes. The KS test and its p-values for discrete null distributions and small sample sizes are also computed in as part of the dgof package of the R language. Major statistical packages among which SAS codice_4, Stata codice_5 implement the KS test under the assumption that formula_31 is continuous, which is more conservative if the null distribution is actually not continuous (see 
).

==Two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test==
The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test may also be used to test whether two underlying one-dimensional probability distributions differ. In this case, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic is

:formula_41

where formula_42 and formula_43 are the empirical distribution functions of the first and the second sample respectively, and formula_44 is the supremum function.

For large samples, the null hypothesis is rejected at level formula_25 if

:formula_46

Where formula_5 and formula_48 are the sizes of first and second sample respectively. The value of formula_49 is given in the table below for the most common levels of formula_25

and in general by

:formula_51

so that the condition reads

:formula_52

Here, again, the larger the sample sizes, the more sensitive the minimal bound: For a given ratio of sample sizes (e.g. formula_53), the minimal bound scales in the size of either of the samples according to its inverse square root. 

Note that the two-sample test checks whether the two data samples come from the same distribution. This does not specify what that common distribution is (e.g. whether it&#x27;s normal or not normal). Again, tables of critical values have been published. A shortcoming of the univariate Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is that it is not very powerful because it is devised to be sensitive against all possible types of differences between two distribution functions. Some argue that the Cucconi test, originally proposed for simultaneously comparing location and scale, can be much more powerful than the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test when comparing two distribution functions.

Two-sample KS tests have been applied in economics to detect asymmetric effects and to study natural experiments.

==Setting confidence limits for the shape of a distribution function==
While the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is usually used to test whether a given &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is the underlying probability distribution of &quot;F&quot;&quot;n&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), the procedure may be inverted to give confidence limits on &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) itself. If one chooses a critical value of the test statistic &quot;D&quot;&quot;α&quot; such that P(&quot;D&quot;&quot;n&quot; &gt; &quot;D&quot;&quot;α&quot;) = &quot;α&quot;, then a band of width ±&quot;D&quot;&quot;α&quot; around &quot;F&quot;&quot;n&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) will entirely contain &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) with probability 1 − &quot;α&quot;.

==The Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic in more than one dimension==
A distribution-free multivariate Kolmogorov–Smirnov goodness of fit test has been proposed by Justel, Peña and Zamar (1997). The test uses a statistic which is built using Rosenblatt&#x27;s transformation, and an algorithm is developed to compute it in the bivariate case. An approximate test that can be easily computed in any dimension is also presented.

The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test statistic needs to be modified if a similar test is to be applied to multivariate data. This is not straightforward because the maximum difference between two joint cumulative distribution functions is not generally the same as the maximum difference of any of the complementary distribution functions. Thus the maximum difference will differ depending on which of formula_54 or formula_55 or any of the other two possible arrangements is used. One might require that the result of the test used should not depend on which choice is made.

One approach to generalizing the Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic to higher dimensions which meets the above concern is to compare the cdfs of the two samples with all possible orderings, and take the largest of the set of resulting KS statistics. In &quot;d&quot; dimensions, there are 2&quot;d&quot; − 1 such orderings. One such variation is due to Peacock 
(see also Gosset 
for a 3D version)
and another to Fasano and Franceschini (see Lopes et al. for a comparison and computational details). Critical values for the test statistic can be obtained by simulations, but depend on the dependence structure in the joint distribution.

==Implementations==
The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is implemented in many software programs. Most of these implement both the one and two sampled test.

* Mathematica has KolmogorovSmirnovTest.
* MATLAB&#x27;s Statistics Toolbox has kstest and kstest2 for one-sample and two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests, respectively.
* The R package &quot;KSgeneral&quot; computes the KS test statistics and its p-values under arbitrary, possibly discrete, mixed or continuous null distribution.
* R&#x27;s statistics base-package implements the test as ks.test {stats} in its &quot;stats&quot; package.
* SAS implements the test in its PROC NPAR1WAY procedure.
* In Python, the SciPy package implements the test in the scipy.stats.kstest function.
* SYSTAT (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL)
* Java has an implementation of this test provided by Apache Commons.
* KNIME has a node implementing this test based on the above Java implementation.
*Julia has the package HypothesisTests.jl with the function ExactOneSampleKSTest(x::AbstractVector{&lt;:Real}, d::UnivariateDistribution).
*StatsDirect (StatsDirect Ltd, Manchester, UK) implements all common variants.
* Stata (Stata Corporation, College Station, TX) implements the test in ksmirnov (Kolmogorov–Smirnov equality-of-distributions test) command.
* PSPP implements the test in its KOLMOGOROV-SMIRNOV (or using KS shortcut function).
* The Real Statistics Resource Pack for Excel runs the test as KSCRIT and KSPROB.
==See also==
*Lepage test
*Cucconi test
*Kuiper&#x27;s test
*Shapiro–Wilk test
*Anderson–Darling test
*Cramér–von Mises test
*Wasserstein metric

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
*
*

==External links==
*Short introduction 
*KS test explanation
*JavaScript implementation of one- and two-sided tests
*Online calculator with the KS test
* Open-source C++ code to compute the Kolmogorov distribution and perform the KS test
*Paper on Evaluating Kolmogorov&#x27;s Distribution; contains C implementation. This is the method used in Matlab.
*Paper on Computing the Two-Sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov Distribution; computing the cdf of the KS statistic in C or Java.
*Paper powerlaw: A Python Package for Analysis of Heavy-Tailed Distributions; Jeff Alstott, Ed Bullmore, Dietmar Plenz. Among others, it also performs the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Source code and installers of powerlaw package are available at PyPi.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="19" end="42" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="49" end="57" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="K–S test"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="61" end="68" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="KS test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097688" start="75" end="93" title="nonparametric statistics" label="nonparametric test"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="147" end="158" title="#Discrete and mixed null distribution" label="Section 2.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="177" end="201" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="237" end="243" title="random sample" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="806" end="823" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4424724" start="828" end="843" title="Nikolai Smirnov (mathematician)" label="Nikolai Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="892" end="900" title="metric (mathematics)" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="913" end="944" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="967" end="999" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068958" start="1099" end="1116" title="null distribution" label="null distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="1159" end="1174" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1441" end="1450" title="#Kolmogorov distribution" label="Section 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1483" end="1494" title="#Discrete and mixed null distribution" label="Section 2.2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1525" end="1534" title="#Two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Section 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097688" start="1715" end="1736" title="Nonparametric statistics" label="nonparametric methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034239" start="1955" end="1970" title="goodness of fit" label="goodness of fit"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="2012" end="2021" title="Normal distribution" label="normality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2367" end="2397" title="#Test with estimated parameters" label="Test with estimated parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199823" start="2479" end="2487" title="Power_of_a_test" label="powerful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396441" start="2519" end="2536" title="Shapiro–Wilk test" label="Shapiro–Wilk test"/>
<link wikidata="Q491401" start="2540" end="2561" title="Anderson–Darling test" label="Anderson–Darling test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="2769" end="2800" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="2846" end="2885" title="Independent and identically distributed random variables" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="2981" end="2999" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949963" start="3075" end="3084" title="statistic" label="statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="3097" end="3129" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3205" end="3213" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q544369" start="3384" end="3409" title="Glivenko–Cantelli theorem" label="Glivenko–Cantelli theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="3526" end="3539" title="almost surely" label="almost surely"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3682" end="3705" title="#Kolmogorov distribution" label="Kolmogorov distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527064" start="3708" end="3730" title="Donsker&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Donsker&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q491401" start="3902" end="3923" title="Anderson–Darling test" label="Anderson–Darling test"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="4060" end="4075" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q628309" start="4131" end="4146" title="Brownian bridge" label="Brownian bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="4152" end="4184" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154787" start="4262" end="4283" title="Jacobi theta function" label="Jacobi theta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="4426" end="4443" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4424724" start="4496" end="4511" title="Nikolai Smirnov (mathematician)" label="Nikolai Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q578985" start="4733" end="4748" title="convergence of random variables" label="in distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199823" start="5966" end="5971" title="statistical power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="6316" end="6351" title="R (programming language)" label="R project for statistical computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q232207" start="6716" end="6727" title="Monte Carlo method" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="6905" end="6924" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="6933" end="6957" title="exponential distribution" label="exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096862" start="7019" end="7038" title="Gumbel distribution" label="Gumbel distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q951027" start="7044" end="7059" title="Lilliefors test" label="Lilliefors test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="7404" end="7429" title="Maximum likelihood estimation" label="maximum likelihood method"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="8986" end="8996" title="R (programming language)" label="R language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003932" start="9371" end="9374" title="SAS (software)" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204300" start="9385" end="9390" title="Stata" label="Stata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="9832" end="9863" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="9936" end="9953" title="Infimum and supremum" label="supremum function"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458422" start="11012" end="11024" title="Cucconi test" label="Cucconi test"/>
<link wikidata="Q55363177" start="12186" end="12192" title="Ana Justel" label="Justel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952580" start="12547" end="12564" title="multivariate statistics" label="multivariate data"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="12643" end="12675" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="13802" end="13813" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="13843" end="13849" title="MATLAB" label="MATLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="13975" end="13976" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="14133" end="14134" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003932" start="14241" end="14244" title="SAS (software)" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="14302" end="14308" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q197492" start="14314" end="14319" title="SciPy" label="SciPy"/>
<link wikidata="Q117882" start="14386" end="14392" title="SYSTAT (statistics)" label="SYSTAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="14420" end="14424" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q616659" start="14472" end="14486" title="Apache Commons" label="Apache Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q639194" start="14490" end="14495" title="KNIME" label="KNIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613697" start="14571" end="14576" title="Julia (programming language)" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048686" start="14710" end="14721" title="StatsDirect" label="StatsDirect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204300" start="14790" end="14795" title="Stata" label="Stata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848165" start="14932" end="14936" title="PSPP" label="PSPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="15056" end="15061" title="Microsoft Excel" label="Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776276" start="15112" end="15123" title="Lepage test" label="Lepage test"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458422" start="15125" end="15137" title="Cucconi test" label="Cucconi test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052704" start="15139" end="15157" title="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test" label="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396441" start="15159" end="15176" title="Shapiro–Wilk test" label="Shapiro–Wilk test"/>
<link wikidata="Q491401" start="15178" end="15199" title="Anderson–Darling test" label="Anderson–Darling test"/>
<link wikidata="Q783996" start="15201" end="15222" title="Cramér–von Mises criterion" label="Cramér–von Mises test"/>
<link wikidata="Q768993" start="15224" end="15242" title="Wasserstein metric" label="Wasserstein metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="15632" end="15638" title="Matlab" label="Matlab"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16716" wikidata="Q1558" url="?curid=16716" title="Kansas">
<text>Kansas ( ) is a landlocked state in the Midwestern region of the United States. It borders Nebraska to the north; Missouri to the east; Oklahoma to the south; and Colorado to the west. Kansas is named after the Kansas River, in turn named after the Kansa people. Its capital is Topeka, and its most populous city is Wichita; however, the largest urban area is the bi-state Kansas City metropolitan area split between Kansas and Missouri.

For thousands of years, what is now Kansas was home to numerous and diverse Indigenous tribes. The first settlement of non-indigenous people in Kansas occurred in 1827 at Fort Leavenworth. The pace of settlement accelerated in the 1850s, in the midst of political wars over the slavery debate. When it was officially opened to settlement by the U.S. government in 1854 with the Kansas–Nebraska Act, conflict between abolitionist Free-Staters from New England and pro-slavery settlers from neighboring Missouri broke out over the question of whether Kansas would become a free state or a slave state, in a period known as Bleeding Kansas. On January 29, 1861, Kansas entered the Union as a free state, hence the unofficial nickname &quot;The Free State&quot;. Passage of the Homestead Acts in 1862 brought a further influx of settlers, and the booming cattle trade of the 1870s attracted some of the Wild West&#x27;s most iconic figures to western Kansas.

As of 2015, Kansas was among the most productive agricultural states, producing high yields of wheat, corn, sorghum, and soybeans. In addition to its traditional strength in agriculture, Kansas possesses an extensive aerospace industry. Kansas, which has an area of is the 15th-largest state by area, the 36th most-populous of the 50 states, with a population of 2,940,865 according to the 2020 census, and the 10th least densely populated. Residents of Kansas are called &quot;Kansans&quot;. Mount Sunflower is Kansas&#x27;s highest point at .

Kansas is generally considered to be the geographic center of the Contiguous United States, with Lebanon being approximately the center.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Kansas&quot; derives from the Algonquian term, &quot;Akansa&quot;, for the Quapaw people. These were a Dhegiha Siouan-speaking people who settled in Arkansas around the 13th century. The stem -&quot;kansa&quot; is named after the Kaw people, also known as the &quot;Kansa&quot;, a federally recognized Native American tribe. The tribe&#x27;s name (natively &quot;&quot;) is often said to mean &quot;people of the (south) wind&quot; although this was probably not the term&#x27;s original meaning.

==History==


Before European colonization, Kansas was occupied by the Caddoan Wichita and later the Siouan Kaw people. Tribes in the eastern part of the state generally lived in villages along the river valleys. Tribes in the western part of the state were semi-nomadic and hunted large herds of bison. The first European to set foot in present-day Kansas was the Spanish conquistador Francisco Vázquez de Coronado, who explored the area in 1541.

Between 1763 and 1803, the territory of Kansas was integrated into Spanish Louisiana. During that period, Governor Luis de Unzaga &#x27;le Conciliateur&#x27; promoted expeditions and good relations with the Amerindians. Explorer Antoine de Marigny and others continued trading across the Kansas River, especially at its confluence with the Missouri River, tributaries of the Mississippi River.

In 1803, most of modern Kansas was acquired by the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase. Southwest Kansas, however, was still a part of Spain, Mexico, and the Republic of Texas until the conclusion of the Mexican–American War in 1848, when these lands were ceded to the United States. From 1812 to 1821, Kansas was part of the Missouri Territory. The Santa Fe Trail traversed Kansas from 1821 to 1880, transporting manufactured goods from Missouri and silver and furs from Santa Fe, New Mexico. Wagon ruts from the trail are still visible in the prairie today.

In 1827, Fort Leavenworth became the first permanent settlement of white Americans in the future state. The Kansas–Nebraska Act became law on May 30, 1854, establishing Nebraska Territory and Kansas Territory, and opening the area to broader settlement by whites. Kansas Territory stretched all the way to the Continental Divide and included the sites of present-day Denver, Colorado Springs, and Pueblo.
=== Bleeding Kansas and the Civil War ===
The first non-military settlement of Euro-Americans in Kansas Territory consisted of abolitionists from Massachusetts and other Free-Staters who founded the town of Lawrence and attempted to stop the spread of slavery from neighboring Missouri.

Missouri and Arkansas continually sent settlers into Kansas Territory along its eastern border to sway votes in favor of slavery prior to Kansas statehood elections. Directly presaging the American Civil War these forces collided, entering into skirmishes and guerrilla conflicts that earned the territory the nickname Bleeding Kansas. These included John Brown&#x27;s Pottawatomie massacre of 1856.

Kansas was admitted to the Union as a free state on January 29, 1861, making it the 34th state to join the United States. By that time, the violence in Kansas had largely subsided, but during the Civil War, on August 21, 1863, William Quantrill led several hundred of his supporters on a raid into Lawrence, destroying much of the city and killing nearly 200 people. He was roundly condemned by both the conventional Confederate military and the partisan rangers commissioned by the Missouri legislature. His application to that body for a commission was flatly rejected due to his pre-war criminal record.

=== Settlement and the Wild West ===
Passage of the Homestead Acts in 1862 accelerated settlement and agricultural development in the state. After the Civil War, many veterans constructed homesteads in Kansas. Many African Americans also looked to Kansas as the land of &quot;John Brown&quot; and, led by freedmen like Benjamin &quot;Pap&quot; Singleton, began establishing black colonies in the state. Leaving southern states in the late 1870s because of increasing discrimination, they became known as Exodusters.

At the same time, the Chisholm Trail was opened and the Wild West era commenced in Kansas. Storied lawman Wild Bill Hickok was a deputy marshal at Fort Riley and a marshal at Hays and Abilene. Dodge City was home to both Bat Masterson and Wyatt Earp, who worked as lawmen in the town. The Dalton Gang robbed trains and banks throughout Kansas and the Southwest and maintained a hideout in Meade. In one year alone, eight million head of cattle from Texas boarded trains in Dodge City bound for the East, earning Dodge the nickname &quot;Queen of the Cowtowns&quot;.

=== 20th century ===
In response to demands of Methodists and other evangelical Protestants, in 1881 Kansas became the first U.S. state to adopt a constitutional amendment prohibiting all alcoholic beverages, which was repealed in 1948. Anti-saloon activist Carrie Nation vandalized her first saloon in Kiowa in 1900. In 1922, suffragist Ella Uphay Mowry became the first female gubernatorial candidate in the state when she ran as &quot;Mrs. W.D. Mowry&quot;. She later stated: &quot;Someone had to be the pioneer. I firmly believe that some day a woman will sit in the governor&#x27;s chair in Kansas.&quot;

Kansas suffered severe environmental damage in the 1930s due to the combined effects of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl, and large numbers of people left southwestern Kansas in particular for better opportunities elsewhere. The outbreak of World War II spurred rapid growth in aircraft manufacturing near Wichita in the so-called Battle of Kansas, and the aerospace sector remains a significant portion of the Kansan economy to this day.

==Geography==


Kansas is bordered by Nebraska to the north; Missouri to the east; Oklahoma to the south; and Colorado to the west. The state is divided into 105 counties with 628 cities, with its largest county by area being Butler County. Kansas is located equidistant from the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. The geographic center of the 48 contiguous states is in Smith County near Lebanon. Until 1989, the Meades Ranch Triangulation Station in Osborne County was the geodetic center of North America: the central reference point for all maps of North America. The geographic center of Kansas is in Barton County.

===Geology===

Kansas is underlain by a sequence of horizontal to gently westward dipping sedimentary rocks. A sequence of Mississippian, Pennsylvanian and Permian rocks outcrop in the eastern and southern part of the state. The state&#x27;s western half has exposures of Cretaceous through Tertiary sediments, the latter derived from the erosion of the uplifted Rocky Mountains to the west. These are underlain by older Paleozoic and Mesozoic sediments which correlate well with the outcrops to the east. The state&#x27;s northeastern corner was subjected to glaciation in the Pleistocene and is covered by glacial drift and loess.

===Topography===

The western two-thirds of the state, lying in the great central plain of the United States, has a generally flat or undulating surface, while the eastern third has many hills and forests. The land gradually rises from east to west; its altitude ranges from along the Verdigris River at Coffeyville in Montgomery County, to at Mount Sunflower, from the Colorado border, in Wallace County. It is a common misconception that Kansas is the flattest state in the nation—in 2003, a tongue-in-cheek study famously declared the state &quot;flatter than a pancake&quot;. In fact, Kansas has a maximum topographic relief of , making it the 23rd flattest U.S. state measured by maximum relief.

===Rivers===

Around of the state&#x27;s northeastern boundary is defined by the Missouri River. The Kansas River (locally known as the Kaw), formed by the junction of the Smoky Hill and Republican rivers at appropriately-named Junction City, joins the Missouri River at Kansas City, after a course of across the northeastern part of the state.

The Arkansas River (pronunciation varies), rising in Colorado, flows with a bending course for nearly across the western and southern parts of the state. With its tributaries, (the Little Arkansas, Ninnescah, Walnut, Cow Creek, Cimarron, Verdigris, and the Neosho), it forms the southern drainage system of the state.

Kansas&#x27;s other rivers are the Saline and Solomon Rivers, tributaries of the Smoky Hill River; the Big Blue, Delaware, and Wakarusa, which flow into the Kansas River; and the Marais des Cygnes, a tributary of the Missouri River. Spring River is located between Riverton and Baxter Springs.

===National parks and historic sites===

Areas under the protection of the National Park Service include:
* Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site in Topeka
* Fort Larned National Historic Site in Larned
* Fort Scott National Historic Site in Bourbon County
* Nicodemus National Historic Site at Nicodemus
* Pony Express National Historic Trail
* Tallgrass Prairie National Preserve near Strong City

===Flora and fauna===
In Kansas, there are currently 238 species of rare animals and 400 rare plants. Among those include: Smooth rockress, Virginia rail, Western Grotto Salamander, Royal Fern, Turkey-tangle, Bobolink, Cave salamander, Snowy Plover, Strecker&#x27;s Chorus Frog, Peregrine falcon, and Black-footed ferret. Common animal species and grasses include: Crows, Deer, Lesser prairie chicken, Mice, Moles, Virginia Opossum, Prairie dogs, Raccoon, Eastern Gama Grass, Prairie Dropseed, Indian Grass, Little Bluestem, Switch grass, Northern Sea Oats, Tussock Sedge, Sideoats grama, and Big Bluestem.

===Climate===


In the Köppen climate classification, Kansas has three climates: humid continental, semi-arid steppe, and humid subtropical. The eastern two-thirds of the state (especially the northeastern portion) has a humid continental climate, with cool to cold winters and hot, often humid summers. Most of the precipitation falls during both the summer and the spring. The USDA hardiness zones for Kansas range from Zone 5b (−15 °F to −10 °F) in the North to Zone 7a (0 °F to 5 °F) in the South.

The western third of the state—from roughly the U.S. Route 83 corridor westward—has a semi-arid steppe climate. Summers are hot, often very hot, and generally less humid. Winters are highly changeable between warm and very cold. The western region receives an average of about of precipitation per year. Chinook winds in the winter can warm western Kansas all the way into the range.

The south-central and southeastern portions of the state, including the Wichita area, have a humid subtropical climate with hot and humid summers, milder winters, and more precipitation than elsewhere in Kansas. Some features of all three climates can be found in most of the state, with droughts and changeable weather between dry and humid not uncommon, and both warm and cold spells in the winter.

Temperatures in areas between U.S. Routes 83 and 81, as well as the southwestern portion of the state along and south of U.S. 50, reach or above on most days of June, July, and August. High humidity added to the high temperatures sends the heat index into life-threatening territory, especially in Wichita, Hutchinson, Salina, Russell, Hays, and Great Bend. Temperatures are often higher in Dodge City, Garden City, and Liberal, but the heat index in those three cities is usually lower than the actual air temperature.

Although temperatures of or higher are not as common in areas east of U.S. 81, higher humidity and the urban heat island effect lead most summer days to heat indices between in Topeka, Lawrence, and the Kansas City metropolitan area. Also, combined with humidity between 85 and 95 percent, dangerous heat indices can be experienced at every hour of the day.

Precipitation ranges from about annually in the state&#x27;s southeast corner to about in the southwest. Snowfall ranges from around in the fringes of the south, to in the far northwest. Frost-free days range from more than 200 days in the south, to 130 days in the northwest. Thus, Kansas is the country&#x27;s ninth or tenth sunniest state, depending on the source. Western Kansas is as sunny as parts of California and Arizona.

Kansas is prone to severe weather, especially in the spring and the early-summer. Despite the frequent sunshine throughout much of the state, due to its location at a climatic boundary prone to intrusions of multiple air masses, the state is vulnerable to strong and severe thunderstorms. Some of these storms become supercell thunderstorms; these can produce some tornadoes, occasionally those of EF3 strength or higher. Kansas averages more than 50 tornadoes annually. Severe thunderstorms sometimes drop some very large hail over Kansas as well. Furthermore, these storms can even bring in flash flooding and damaging straight line winds.

According to NOAA, the all-time highest temperature recorded in Kansas is () on July 24, 1936, near Alton in Osborne County, and the all-time low is on February 13, 1905, near Lebanon in Smith County. Alton and Lebanon are approximately apart.

Kansas&#x27;s record high of ties with North Dakota for the fifth-highest record high in an American state, behind California (), Arizona (), Nevada (), and New Mexico ().

==Settlement==


Known as rural flight, the last few decades have been marked by a migratory pattern out of the countryside into cities. Out of all the cities in these Midwestern states, 89% have fewer than 3,000 people, and hundreds of those have fewer than 1,000. In Kansas alone, there are more than 6,000 ghost towns and dwindling communities, according to one Kansas historian, Daniel C. Fitzgerald. At the same time, some of the communities in Johnson County (metropolitan Kansas City) are among the fastest-growing in the country.

Kansas has 627 incorporated cities. By state statute, cities are divided into three classes as determined by the population obtained &quot;by any census of enumeration&quot;. A city of the third class has a population of less than 5,000, but cities reaching a population of more than 2,000 may be certified as a city of the second class. The second class is limited to cities with a population of less than 25,000, and upon reaching a population of more than 15,000, they may be certified as a city of the first class. First and second class cities are independent of any township and are not included within the township&#x27;s territory.

===Birth data===
&quot;Note: Births in table do not add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.&quot;
* Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one &quot;Hispanic&quot; group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.

===Life expectancy===
The residents of Kansas have a life expectancy near the U.S. national average. In 2013, males in Kansas lived an average of 76.6 years compared to a male national average of 76.7 years and females lived an average of 81.0 years compared to a female national average of 81.5 years. Increases in life expectancy between 1980 and 2013 were below the national average for males and near the national average for females. Male life expectancy in Kansas between 1980 and 2014 increased by an average of 5.2 years, compared to a male national average of a 6.7-year increase. Life expectancy for females in Kansas between 1980 and 2014 increased by 4.3 years, compared to a female national average of a 4.0 year increase.

Using 2017–2019 data, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation calculated that life expectancy for Kansas counties ranged from 75.8 years for Wyandotte County to 81.7 years for Johnson County. Life expectancy for the state as a whole was 78.5 years. Life expectancy for the United States as a whole in 2019 was 78.8 years.

===Regions===

====Northeast Kansas====

The northeastern portion of the state, extending from the eastern border to Junction City and from the Nebraska border to south of Johnson County is home to more than 1.5 million people in the Kansas City (Kansas portion), Manhattan, Lawrence, and Topeka metropolitan areas. Overland Park, a young city incorporated in 1960, has the largest population and the largest land area in the county. It is home to Johnson County Community College.

Olathe is the county seat and home to Johnson County Executive Airport. The cities of Olathe, Shawnee, De Soto and Gardner have some of the state&#x27;s fastest growing populations. The cities of Overland Park, Lenexa, Olathe, De Soto, and Gardner are also notable because they lie along the former route of the Santa Fe Trail. Among cities with at least one thousand residents, Mission Hills has the highest median income in the state.

Several institutions of higher education are located in Northeast Kansas including Baker University (the oldest university in the state, founded in 1858 and affiliated with the United Methodist Church) in Baldwin City, Benedictine College (sponsored by St. Benedict&#x27;s Abbey and Mount St. Scholastica Monastery and formed from the merger of St. Benedict&#x27;s College (1858) and Mount St. Scholastica College (1923)) in Atchison, MidAmerica Nazarene University in Olathe, Ottawa University in Ottawa and Overland Park, Kansas City Kansas Community College and KU Medical Center in Kansas City, and KU Edwards Campus in Overland Park. Less than an hour&#x27;s drive to the west, Lawrence is home to the University of Kansas, the largest public university in the state, and Haskell Indian Nations University.

To the north, Kansas City, with the second largest land area in the state, contains a number of diverse ethnic neighborhoods. Its attractions include the Kansas Speedway, Sporting Kansas City, Kansas City Monarchs, and The Legends at Village West retail and entertainment center. Nearby, Kansas&#x27;s first settlement Bonner Springs is home to several national and regional attractions including the Providence Medical Center Amphitheater, the National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame, and the annual Kansas City Renaissance Festival. Further up the Missouri River, the city of Lansing is the home of the state&#x27;s first maximum-security prison. Historic Leavenworth, founded in 1854, was the first incorporated city in Kansas. North of the city, Fort Leavenworth is the oldest active Army post west of the Mississippi River. The city of Atchison was an early commercial center in the state and is well known as the birthplace of Amelia Earhart.

To the west, nearly a quarter million people reside in the Topeka metropolitan area. Topeka is the state capital and home to Washburn University and Washburn Institute of Technology. Built at a Kansas River crossing along the old Oregon Trail, this historic city has several nationally registered historic places. Further westward along Interstate 70 and the Kansas River is Junction City with its historic limestone and brick buildings and nearby Fort Riley, well known as the home to the U.S. Army&#x27;s 1st Infantry Division (nicknamed &quot;the Big Red One&quot;). A short distance away, the city of Manhattan is home to Kansas State University, the second-largest public university in the state and the nation&#x27;s oldest land-grant university, dating back to 1863. South of the campus, Aggieville dates back to 1889 and is the state&#x27;s oldest shopping district of its kind.

====South Central Kansas====

In south-central Kansas, the Wichita metropolitan area is home to more than 600,000 people. Wichita is the largest city in the state in terms of both land area and population. &#x27;The Air Capital&#x27; is a major manufacturing center for the aircraft industry and the home of Wichita State University. Before Wichita was &#x27;The Air Capital&#x27; it was a Cowtown. With a number of nationally registered historic places, museums, and other entertainment destinations, it has a desire to become a cultural mecca in the Midwest. Wichita&#x27;s population growth has grown by double digits and the surrounding suburbs are among the fastest growing cities in the state. The population of Goddard has grown by more than 11% per year since 2000. Other fast-growing cities include Andover, Maize, Park City, Derby, and Haysville.

Wichita was one of the first cities to add the city commissioner and city manager in their form of government. Wichita is also home of the nationally recognized Sedgwick County Zoo.

Up river (the Arkansas River) from Wichita is the city of Hutchinson. The city was built on one of the world&#x27;s largest salt deposits (of what would form Strataca), and it has the world&#x27;s largest and longest wheat elevator. It is also the home of Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center, Prairie Dunes Country Club and the Kansas State Fair. North of Wichita along Interstate 135 is the city of Newton, the former western terminal of the Santa Fe Railroad and trailhead for the famed Chisholm Trail. To the southeast of Wichita are the cities of Winfield and Arkansas City with historic architecture and the Cherokee Strip Museum (in Ark City). The city of Udall was the site of the deadliest tornado in Kansas on May 25, 1955; it killed 80 people in and near the city.

====Southeast Kansas====

Southeast Kansas has a unique history with a number of nationally registered historic places in this coal-mining region. Located in Crawford County (dubbed the Fried Chicken Capital of Kansas), Pittsburg is the largest city in the region and the home of Pittsburg State University. The neighboring city of Frontenac in 1888 was the site of the worst mine disaster in the state in which an underground explosion killed 47 miners. &quot;Big Brutus&quot; is located outside the city of West Mineral. Along with the restored fort, historic Fort Scott has a national cemetery designated by President Lincoln in 1862. The region also shares a Media market with Joplin, Missouri, a city in Southwest Missouri.

====Central and North-Central Kansas====

Salina is the largest city in central and north-central Kansas. South of Salina is the small city of Lindsborg with its numerous Dala horses. Much of the architecture and decor of this town has a distinctly Swedish style. To the east along Interstate 70, the historic city of Abilene was formerly a trailhead for the Chisholm Trail and was the boyhood home of President Dwight D. Eisenhower, and is the site of his Presidential Library and the tombs of the former president, First Lady and son who died in infancy. To the west is Lucas, the Grassroots Art Capital of Kansas.

====Northwest Kansas====

Westward along the Interstate, the city of Russell, traditionally the beginning of sparsely-populated northwest Kansas, was the base of former U.S. Senator Bob Dole and the boyhood home of U.S. Senator Arlen Specter. The city of Hays is home to Fort Hays State University and the Sternberg Museum of Natural History, and is the largest city in the northwest with a population of around 20,001.

Two other landmarks are located in smaller towns in Ellis County: the &quot;Cathedral of the Plains&quot; is located east of Hays in Victoria, and the boyhood home of Walter Chrysler is west of Hays in Ellis. West of Hays, population drops dramatically, even in areas along I-70, and only two towns containing populations of more than 4,000: Colby and Goodland, which are located apart along I-70.

====Southwest Kansas====

Dodge City, famously known for the cattle drive days of the late 19th century, was built along the old Santa Fe Trail route. The city of Liberal is located along the southern Santa Fe Trail route. The first wind farm in the state was built east of Montezuma. Garden City has the Lee Richardson Zoo. In 1992, a short-lived secessionist movement advocated the secession of several counties in southwest Kansas.

====Around the state====

Located midway between Kansas City, Topeka, and Wichita in the heart of the Bluestem Region of the Flint Hills, the city of Emporia has several nationally registered historic places and is the home of Emporia State University, well known for its Teachers College. It was also the home of newspaper man William Allen White.

==Demographics==

=== Population ===
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Kansas was 2,913,314 on July 1, 2019, a 2.11% increase since the 2010 United States census and an increase of 58,387, or 2.05%, since 2010. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 93,899 (246,484 births minus 152,585 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 20,742 people out of the state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 44,847 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 65,589 people. At the 2020 census, its population was 2,937,880.

In 2018, The top countries of origin for Kansas&#x27;s immigrants were Mexico, India, Vietnam, Guatemala and China.

The population density of Kansas is 52.9 people per square mile. The center of population of Kansas is located in Chase County, at , approximately north of the community of Strong City.

The focus on labor-efficient grain-based agriculture—such as a large wheat farm that requires only one or a few people with large machinery to operate, rather than a vegetable farm that requires many people—is causing the de-population of rural areas across Kansas.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,397 homeless people in Kansas.

===Race and ethnicity===

According to the 2021 United States census estimates, the racial makeup of the population was: White American, non-Hispanic (74.7%), Hispanic or Latino (12.7%), Black or African American (6.2%), Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander (0.1%), two or more races (3.3%), Asian (3.2%), and American Indian and Alaska Native (1.2%). At the 2020 census, its racial and ethnic makeup was 75.6% White, 5.7% African American, 2.9% Asian American, 1.1% Native American, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 4.9% some other race, and 9.5% two or more races.
As of 2004, the population included 149,800 foreign-born (5.5% of the state population). The ten largest reported ancestry groups, which account for nearly 90% of the population, in the state are: German (33.75%), Irish (14.4%), English (14.1%), American (7.5%), French (4.4%), Scottish (4.2%), Dutch (2.5%), Swedish (2.4%), Italian (1.8%), and Polish (1.5%). German descendants are especially present in the northwest and northeast with German immigrants settling and founding towns such as Nortonville, Holton, Sabetha and Horton. Descendants of English and of white Americans from other states are especially present in the southeast. Kansas is also home to a large Czech community.

Mexicans are present in the southwest and make up nearly half the population in certain counties. Many African Americans in Kansas are descended from the Exodusters, newly freed blacks who fled the South for land in Kansas following the Civil War.

There is a growing Asian community in Kansas. Since 1965, more and more Asian families have moved to Kansas from countries such as the Philippines, China, Korea, India, and Vietnam.

;Birth data
As of 2011, 35.0% of Kansas&#x27;s population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups (i.e., did not have two parents of non-Hispanic white ancestry).

===Language===

English is the most-spoken language in Kansas, with 91.3% of the population speaking only English at home as of the year 2000. 5.5% speak Spanish, 0.7% speak German, and 0.4% speak Vietnamese.

===Religion===

The 2014 Pew Religious Landscape Survey showed the religious makeup of adults in Kansas was as follows: 57% Protestant, 18% Catholic, 1% Mormon, 1% Jehovah&#x27;s Witness, 20% unaffiliated, 1% Buddhist, and 2% other religions. In 2010, the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) reported that the Catholic Church had the highest number of adherents in Kansas (at 426,611), followed by the United Methodist Church with 202,989 members, and the Southern Baptist Convention, reporting 99,329 adherents.
In 2020, ARDA reported 414,939 Catholics, 165,658 United Methodists, and 164,486 Southern Baptists. In 2022, the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI)&#x27;s study revealed 74% of the total population were Christian; among them, 59% were Protestant, 13% Catholic, and 2% Mormon. The religiously unaffiliated were 23% of the population, Unitarian Universalists 1%, and New Agers 1%.

Kansas&#x27;s capital Topeka is sometimes cited as the home of Pentecostalism as it was the site of Charles Fox Parham&#x27;s Bethel Bible College, where glossolalia was first claimed as the evidence of a spiritual experience referred to as the baptism of the Holy Spirit in 1901. It is also the home of Reverend Charles Sheldon, author of &quot;In His Steps&quot;, and was the site where the question &quot;What would Jesus do?&quot; originated in a sermon of Sheldon&#x27;s at Central Congregational Church.

Kansas is the location of the second Baháʼí Faith community west of Egypt, when the Baháʼí community of Enterprise, KS was started in 1897. From that beginning the Baháʼí Faith spread across Kansas.

Topeka is also home of the Westboro Baptist Church, a hate group according to the Southern Poverty Law Center. The church has garnered worldwide media attention for picketing the funerals of U.S. servicemen and women for what church members claim as &quot;necessary to combat the fight for equality for gays and lesbians&quot;. They have sometimes successfully raised lawsuits against the city of Topeka.

=== Largest immigrant groups ===
==Economy==

Kansas&#x27;s total gross domestic product was $226 billion in 2023. The state&#x27;s 2023 per capita income was $63,732, which ranked 29th among U.S. states, and median household income was measured at $68,925.

Total Employment of the metropolitan areas in the State of Kansas by total Non-farm Employment in 2016

*Kansas Portion of the Kansas City MO-KS MSA: 468,400 non-farm, accounting for 40.9% of state GDP in 2015
*Wichita, KS MSA: 297,300 non-farm
*Topeka, KS MSA: 112,600 non-farm
*Lawrence KS, MSA: 54,000 non-farm
*Manhattan, KS MSA: 44,200 non-farm
*Total employment: 1,184,710
Total Number of employer establishments in 2016: 74,884

In 2015, the job growth rate was 0.8%, among the lowest rates in America with only &quot;10,900 total nonfarm jobs&quot; added that year. As of April 2016, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 4.2%.

The State of Kansas had a $350 million budget shortfall in February 2017. In February 2017, S&amp;P downgraded Kansas&#x27;s credit rating to AA−.

Nearly 90% of Kansas&#x27;s land is devoted to agriculture. The state&#x27;s agricultural outputs are cattle, sheep, wheat, sorghum, soybeans, cotton, hogs, corn, and salt. As of 2018, there were 59,600 farms in Kansas, 86 (0.14%) of which are certified organic farms. The average farm in the state is about 770 acres (more than a square mile), and in 2016, the average cost of running the farm was $300,000.

By far, the most significant agricultural crop in the state is wheat. Eastern Kansas is part of the Grain Belt, an area of major grain production in the central United States. Approximately 40% of all winter wheat grown in the U.S. is grown in Kansas. Roughly 95% of the wheat grown in the state is hard red winter wheat. During 2016, farmers of conventionally grown wheat farmed 8.2 million acres and harvested an average of 57 bushels of wheat per acre.

The industrial outputs are transportation equipment, commercial and private aircraft, food processing, publishing, chemical products, machinery, apparel, petroleum, and mining.

The state&#x27;s economy is also heavily influenced by the aerospace industry. Several large aircraft corporations have manufacturing facilities in Wichita and Kansas City, including Spirit AeroSystems, Bombardier Aerospace (LearJet), and Textron Aviation (a merger of the former Cessna, Hawker, and Beechcraft brands). Boeing ended a decades-long history of manufacturing in Kansas between 2012 and 2013.

Major companies headquartered in Kansas include the Garmin (Olathe), YRC Worldwide (Overland Park), and Koch Industries (with national headquarters in Wichita).

Kansas is also home to three major military installations: Fort Leavenworth (Army), Fort Riley (Army), and McConnell Air Force Base (Air Force). Approximately 25,000 active duty soldiers and airmen are stationed at these bases which also employ approximately 8,000 civilian DoD employees. The U.S. Army Reserve also has the 451st Expeditionary Sustainment Command headquartered in Wichita that serves reservists and their units from around the region. The Kansas Air National Guard has units at Forbes Field in Topeka and the 184th Intelligence Wing in Wichita. The Smoky Hill Weapons Range, a detachment of the Intelligence Wing, is one of the largest and busiest bombing ranges in the nation. During World War II, Kansas was home to numerous Army Air Corps training fields for training new pilots and aircrew. Many of those airfields live on today as municipal airports.

===Energy===

Kansas has vast renewable resources and is a top producer of wind energy in the US, with an installed capacity of about 6,100 Megawatts (MW) from nearly 3,200 wind turbines in 2019. Wind generated the largest share of electricity from the state at 41%. An additional 700 MW of capacity was scheduled to come online during 2020. Kansas is also a leading national producer of renewable ethanol and biodiesel fuels at nearly 600 million gallons per year.

Kansas is ranked eighth in U.S. petroleum extraction. Production has experienced a steady decline as the state&#x27;s limited economical reserves especially from the Anadarko Basin are depleted. Since oil prices bottomed in 1999, oil production in Kansas has remained fairly constant, with an average monthly rate of about in 2004. The recent higher prices have made carbon dioxide sequestration and other oil recovery techniques more economical.

Kansas is also ranked eighth in U.S. natural gas production. Production has steadily declined since the mid-1990s with the gradual depletion of the Hugoton Natural Gas Field—the state&#x27;s largest field which extends into Oklahoma and Texas. In 2004, slower declines in the Hugoton gas fields and increased coalbed methane production contributed to a smaller overall decline. Average monthly production was over .

===Taxes===
Tax is collected by the Kansas Department of Revenue.

Revenue shortfalls resulting from lower than expected tax collections and slower growth in personal income following a 1998 permanent tax reduction have contributed to the substantial growth in the state&#x27;s debt level as bonded debt increased from $1.16 billion in 1998 to $3.83 billion in 2006. Some increase in debt was expected as the state continues with its 10-year Comprehensive Transportation Program enacted in 1999.

In 2003, Kansas had three income brackets for income tax calculation, ranging from 3.5% to 6.45%.

The state sales tax in Kansas is 6.15%. Various cities and counties in Kansas have an additional local sales tax. Except during the 2001 recession (March–November 2001), when monthly sales tax collections were flat, collections have trended higher as the economy has grown and two rate increases have been enacted. If there had been no change in sales tax rates or in the economy, the total sales tax collections for 2003 would have been $1,797 million, compared to $805.3 million in 1990. However, they instead amounted to $1,630 million an inflation-adjusted reduction of 10%. The state sales tax is a combined destination-based tax, meaning a single tax is applied that includes state, county, and local taxes, and the rate is based on where the consumer takes possession of the goods or services. Thanks to the destination structure and the numerous local special taxing districts, Kansas has 920 separate sales tax rates ranging from 6.5% to 11.5%. This taxing scheme, known as &quot;Streamlined Sales Tax&quot; was adopted on October 1, 2005, under the governorship of Kathleen Sebelius. Groceries are subject to sales tax in the state. All sales tax collected is remitted to the state department of revenue, and local taxes are then distributed to the various taxing agencies.

As of June 2004, Moody&#x27;s Investors Service ranked the state 14th for net tax-supported debt per capita. As a percentage of personal income, it was at 3.8%—above the median value of 2.5% for all rated states and having risen from a value of less than 1% in 1992. The state has a statutory requirement to maintain cash reserves of at least 7.5% of expenses at the end of each fiscal year; however, lawmakers can vote to override the rule, and did so during the most recent budget agreement.

During his campaign for the 2010 election, Governor Sam Brownback called for a complete &quot;phase out of Kansas&#x27;s income tax&quot;. In May 2012, Governor Brownback signed into law the Kansas Senate Bill Substitute HB 2117. Starting in 2013, the &quot;ambitious tax overhaul&quot; trimmed income tax, eliminated some corporate taxes, and created pass-through income tax exemptions, he raised the sales tax by one percent to offset the loss to state revenues but that was inadequate. He made cuts to education and some state services to offset lost revenue. The tax cut led to years of budget shortfalls, culminating in a $350 million budget shortfall in February 2017. From 2013 to 2017, 300,000 businesses were considered to be pass-through income entities and benefited from the tax exemption. The tax reform &quot;encouraged tens of thousands of Kansans to claim their wages and salaries as income from a business rather than from employment.&quot;

The economic growth that Brownback anticipated never materialized. He argued that it was because of &quot;low wheat and oil prices and a downturn in aircraft sales&quot;. The state general fund debt load was $83 million in fiscal year 2010 and by fiscal year 2017 the debt load sat at $179 million. In 2016, Governor Brownback earned the title of &quot;most unpopular governor in America&quot;. Only 26 percent of Kansas voters approved of his job performance, compared to 65 percent who said they did not. In the summer of 2016 S&amp;P Global Ratings downgraded Kansas&#x27;s credit rating. In February 2017, S&amp;P lowered it to AA−.

In February 2017, a bi-partisan coalition presented a bill that would repeal the pass-through income exemption, the &quot;most important provisions of Brownback&#x27;s overhaul&quot;, and raise taxes to make up for the budget shortfall. Brownback vetoed the bill but &quot;45 GOP legislators had voted in favor of the increase, while 40 voted to uphold the governor&#x27;s veto.&quot; On June 6, 2017, a coalition of Democrats and newly elected Republicans overrode [Brownback&#x27;s] veto and implemented tax increases to a level close to what it was before 2013. Brownback&#x27;s tax overhaul was described in a June 2017 article in &quot;The Atlantic&quot; as the United States&#x27; &quot;most aggressive experiment in conservative economic policy&quot;. The drastic tax cuts had &quot;threatened the viability of schools and infrastructure&quot; in Kansas.

==Transportation==

===Highways===

Kansas is served by two Interstate highways with one beltway, two spur routes, and three bypasses, with over in all. The first section of Interstate in the nation was opened on Interstate 70 (I-70) just west of Topeka on November 14, 1956.

I-70 is a major east–west route connecting to Denver, Colorado and Kansas City, Missouri. Cities along this route (from west to east) include Colby, Hays, Salina, Junction City, Topeka, Lawrence, Bonner Springs, and Kansas City.

I-35 is a major north–south route connecting to Oklahoma City, Oklahoma and Des Moines, Iowa. Cities along this route (from south to north) include Wichita, El Dorado, Emporia, Ottawa, and Kansas City (and suburbs).

Spur routes serve as connections between the two major routes. I-135, a north–south route, connects I-35 at Wichita to I-70 at Salina. I-335, a southwest–northeast route, connects I-35 at Emporia to I-70 at Topeka. I-335 and portions of I-35 and I-70 make up the Kansas Turnpike. Bypasses include I-470 around Topeka, I-235 around Wichita, and I-670 in downtown Kansas City. I-435 is a beltway around the Kansas City metropolitan area while I-635 bypasses through Kansas City.

U.S. Route 69 (US-69) travels south to north, from Oklahoma to Missouri. The highway passes through the eastern section of Kansas, traveling through Baxter Springs, Pittsburg, Frontenac, Fort Scott, Louisburg, and the Kansas City area.

Kansas also has the country&#x27;s third largest state highway system after Texas and California. This is because of the high number of counties and county seats (105) and their intertwining.

In January 2004, the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT) announced the new Kansas 511 traveler information service. By dialing 511, callers will get access to information about road conditions, construction, closures, detours and weather conditions for the state highway system. Weather and road condition information is updated every 15 minutes.

====Interstate Highways====
** (formerly known as I-35W)
** 
** 
** 


====U.S. Routes====
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 


===Aviation===

The state&#x27;s only major commercial (Class C) airport is Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport, located along US-54 on the western edge of the city. Manhattan Regional Airport in Manhattan offers daily flights to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport and Chicago&#x27;s O&#x27;Hare International Airport, making it the second-largest commercial airport in the state. Most air travelers in northeastern Kansas fly out of Kansas City International Airport, located in Platte County, Missouri, as well as Topeka Regional Airport in the state&#x27;s capital.

In the state&#x27;s southeastern part, people often use Tulsa International Airport in Tulsa, Oklahoma or Joplin Regional Airport in Joplin, Missouri. For those in the far western part of the state, Denver International Airport is a popular option. Connecting flights are also available from smaller Kansas airports in Dodge City, Garden City, Hays, Hutchinson, Liberal, or Salina.

Dotted across the state are smaller regional and municipal airports, including the Lawrence Municipal Airport, which houses many aircraft for the city of Lawrence and the University of Kansas, Miami County Airport, Wamego Airport, Osage City Municipal Airport, which is the headquarters of &quot;Skydive Kansas&quot;, Garden City Regional Airport, Manhattan Regional Airport, and Dodge City Regional Airport.

===Rail===

Up through the mid 20th century, railroads connected most cities in Kansas. During World War II, less profitable links were abandoned for scrap metal drives, then additional mileage was reduced as passenger service was halted caused by the wide spread use of automobiles and trucking on the expanding highway system.

For passenger service, currently the &quot;Southwest Chief&quot; Amtrak route runs through the state on its route from Chicago, Illinois to Los Angeles, California on the BNSF railway. Stops in Kansas include Lawrence, Topeka, Newton, Hutchinson, Dodge City, and Garden City. An Amtrak Thruway connects Newton to the &quot;Heartland Flyer&quot; in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. There has been proposals to modify the Amtrak routing through Kansas, such as: removing rail service from the &quot;Southwest Chief&quot; between Albuquerque, New Mexico and Dodge City, and extending rail service for the &quot;Heartland Flyer&quot; from Oklahoma City to Newton with new stops at Arkansas City and Wichita.

For freight service, there are three Class I railroads in Kansas: BNSF, Union Pacific, and CPKC; as well as many shortline railroads.

===Transit===
==Law and government==
===State and local politics===

Executive branch: The executive branch consists of one officer and five elected officers. The governor and lieutenant governor are elected on the same ticket. The attorney general, secretary of state, state treasurer, and state insurance commissioner are each elected separately.

Legislative branch: The bicameral Kansas Legislature consists of the Kansas House of Representatives, with 125 members serving two-year terms, and the Kansas Senate, with 40 members serving four-year terms.

Judicial branch: The judicial branch of the state government is headed by the Kansas Supreme Court. The court has seven judges. A vacancy is filled by the Governor picking one of three nominees selected by the nine-member Kansas Supreme Court Nominating Commission. The board consists of five Kansas lawyers elected by other Kansas lawyers and four members selected by the governor.

==Political culture==
Since the 1930s, Kansas has remained one of the most socially conservative states in the nation. The 1990s brought the defeat of prominent Democrats, including Dan Glickman, and the Kansas State Board of Education&#x27;s 1999 decision to eliminate evolution from the state teaching standards, a decision that was later reversed. In 2005, voters accepted a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage. The next year, the state passed a law setting a minimum age for marriage at 15 years. Kansas&#x27;s path to a solid Republican state has been examined by journalist and historian Thomas Frank in his 2004 book &quot;What&#x27;s the Matter with Kansas?&quot;.

=== 19th-century state politics ===
Starting in 1887 Kansas women could vote in city elections and hold certain offices.

=== 20th-century state politics ===
Kansas was the first state to institute a system of workers&#x27; compensation (1910) and to regulate the securities industry (1911). Kansas also permitted women&#x27;s suffrage in 1912, almost a decade before the federal constitution was amended to require it. Suffrage in all states would not be guaranteed until ratification of the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1920.

The council–manager government model was adopted by many larger Kansas cities in the years following World War I while many American cities were being run by political machines or organized crime, notably the Pendergast Machine in neighboring Kansas City, Missouri. Kansas was also at the center of &quot;Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka&quot;, a 1954 Supreme Court decision that banned racially segregated schools throughout the U.S., though, infamously, many Kansas residents opposed the decision, and it led to protests in Topeka after the verdict.

The state backed Republican Presidential Candidates Wendell Willkie and Thomas E. Dewey in 1940 and 1944, respectively, breaking ranks with the majority of the country in the election of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Kansas also supported Dewey in 1948 despite the presence of incumbent president Harry S. Truman, who hailed from Independence, Missouri, approximately east of the Kansas–Missouri state line. After Roosevelt carried Kansas in 1936, only one Democrat has won the state since, Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964.

=== 21st-century state politics ===
In 2008, Democrat Governor Kathleen Sebelius vetoed permits for the construction of new coal-fired energy plants in Kansas, saying: &quot;We know that greenhouse gases contribute to climate change. As an agricultural state, Kansas is particularly vulnerable. Therefore, reducing pollutants benefits our state not only in the short term—but also for generations of Kansans to come.&quot; However, shortly after Mark Parkinson became governor in 2009 upon Sebelius&#x27;s resignation to become Secretary of U.S. Department of Health &amp; Human Services, Parkinson announced a compromise plan to allow construction of a coal-fired plant.

In 2010, Republican Sam Brownback was elected governor with 63 percent of the state vote. He was sworn in as governor in 2011, Kansas&#x27;s first Republican governor in eight years. Brownback had established himself as a conservative member of the U.S. Senate in years prior, but made several controversial decisions after becoming governor, leading to a 23% approval rating among registered voters – the lowest of any governor in the United States. In May 2011, much to the opposition of art leaders and enthusiasts in the state, Brownback eliminated the Kansas Arts Commission, making Kansas the first state without an arts agency. In July 2011, Brownback announced plans to close the Lawrence branch of the Kansas Department of Social and Rehabilitation Services as a cost-saving measure. Hundreds rallied against the decision. Lawrence City Commission later voted to provide the funding needed to keep the branch open.

Democrat Laura Kelly defeated former Secretary of State of Kansas Kris Kobach in the 2018 election for Governor with 48.0% of the vote.

In August 2022, Kansas voters rejected the controversial Value Them Both Amendment, which would have eliminated the right to an abortion in the state constitution. The vote was the first referendum on abortion since Roe v. Wade was overturned earlier that summer, and the result was hailed as a landmark victory for pro-choice advocates in the traditionally socially conservative state.

In a 2020 study, Kansas was ranked as the 13th hardest state for citizens to vote in.

===National politics===


The state&#x27;s current delegation to the Congress of the United States includes Republican Senators Jerry Moran of Manhattan, and Roger Marshall of Great Bend. In the House of Representatives, Kansas is represented by Republican Representatives Tracey Mann of Quinter (District 1), Jake LaTurner of Pittsburg (District 2), Ron Estes of Wichita (District 4), and Democratic Representative Sharice Davids of Kansas City (District 3) Davids is the second Native American to represent Kansas in Congress, after Republican Charles Curtis (Kaw).

Historically, Kansas has been strongly Republican, dating from the Antebellum age when the Republican Party was created out of the movement opposing the extension of slavery into Kansas Territory. Kansas has not elected a Democrat to the U.S. Senate since the 1932 election, when Franklin D. Roosevelt won his first term as president in the wake of the Great Depression. This is the longest Senate losing streak for either party in a single state. Senator Sam Brownback was a candidate for the Republican party nomination for president in 2008. Brownback was not a candidate for re-election to a third full term in 2010, but he was elected Governor in that year&#x27;s general election. Moran defeated Tiahrt for the Republican nomination for Brownback&#x27;s seat in the August 2010 primary, then won a landslide general election victory over Democrat Lisa Johnston.

The only non-Republican presidential candidates Kansas has given its electoral vote to are Populist James Weaver and Democrats William Jennings Bryan (once), Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt (twice), and Lyndon Johnson. In 2004, George W. Bush won the state&#x27;s six electoral votes by an overwhelming margin of 25 percentage points with 62% of the vote. The only two counties to support Democrat John Kerry in that election were Wyandotte, which contains Kansas City, and Douglas, home to the University of Kansas, located in Lawrence. The 2008 election brought similar results as John McCain won the state with 57% of the votes. Douglas, Wyandotte, and Crawford County were the only counties in support of President Barack Obama.

Abilene was the boyhood home to Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower, and he maintained lifelong ties to family and friends there. Kansas was the adult home of two losing Republican candidates (Governor Alf Landon in 1936 and Senator Bob Dole in 1996).

The &quot;New York Times&quot; reported in September 2014 that as the Democratic candidate for Senator has tried to drop out of the race, independent Greg Orman has attracted enough bipartisan support to seriously challenge the reelection bid of Republican Pat Roberts:
:Kansas politics have been roiled in recent years. The rise of the Tea Party and the election of President Obama have prompted Republicans to embrace a purer brand of conservatism and purge what had long been a robust moderate wing from its ranks. Mr. Roberts has sought to adapt to this new era, voting against spending bills that included projects for the state that he had sought.

===State laws===
The legal drinking age in Kansas is 21. In lieu of the state retail sales tax, a 10% Liquor Drink Tax is collected for liquor consumed on the licensed premises and an 8% Liquor Enforcement Tax is collected on retail purchases. Although the sale of cereal malt beverage (also known as 3.2 beer) was legalized in 1937, the first post-Prohibition legalization of alcoholic liquor did not occur until the state&#x27;s constitution was amended in 1948. The following year the Legislature enacted the Liquor Control Act which created a system of regulating, licensing, and taxing, and the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) was created to enforce the act. The power to regulate cereal malt beverage remains with the cities and counties. Liquor-by-the-drink did not become legal until passage of an amendment to the state&#x27;s constitution in 1986 and additional legislation the following year. As of November 2006, Kansas still has 29 dry counties and only 17 counties have passed liquor-by-the-drink with no food sales requirement. Today there are more than 2,600 liquor and 4,000 cereal malt beverage licensees in the state.

On May 12, 2022, Gov. Laura Kelly signed legislation (Senate Bill 84) that legalizes sports betting in the state, making Kansas the 35th state to approve sports wagering in the US. This would give the four state-owned casinos the right to partner with online bookmakers and up to 50 retailers, including gas stations and restaurants, to engage in sports betting.

==Education==

Education in Kansas is governed at the primary and secondary school level by the Kansas State Board of Education. The state&#x27;s public colleges and universities are supervised by the Kansas Board of Regents.

Twice since 1999 the Board of Education has approved changes in the state science curriculum standards that encouraged the teaching of intelligent design. Both times, the standards were reversed after changes in the composition of the board in the next election.

==Culture==

===Music===

The rock band Kansas was formed in the state capital of Topeka, the hometown of several of the band&#x27;s members.

Joe Walsh, guitarist for the famous rock band the Eagles, was born in Wichita. Danny Carey, drummer for the band Tool, was raised in Paola.

Singers from Kansas include Leavenworth native Melissa Etheridge, Sharon native Martina McBride, Chanute native Jennifer Knapp (whose first album was titled &quot;Kansas&quot;), Kansas City native Janelle Monáe, Prairie Village native Joyce DiDonato, and Liberal native Jerrod Niemann.

The state anthem is the American classic Home on the Range, written by Kansan Brewster Higley. Another song, the official state march adopted by the Kansas Legislature in 1935 is called &quot;The Kansas March&quot;, which features the lyrics, &quot;Blue sky above us, silken strands of heat, Rim of the far horizon, where earth and heaven meet, Kansas as a temple, stands in velvet sod, Shrine which the sunshine, sanctifies to God.&quot;

===Literature===

The state&#x27;s most famous appearance in literature was as the home of Dorothy Gale, the main character in the novel &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; (1900). Laura Ingalls Wilder&#x27;s &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot;, published in 1935, is another well-known tale about Kansas.

Kansas was also the setting of the 1965 best-seller &quot;In Cold Blood&quot;, described by its author Truman Capote as a &quot;nonfiction novel&quot;. Mixing fact and fiction, the book chronicles the events and aftermath of the 1959 murder of a wealthy farmer and his family who lived in the small West Kansas town of Holcomb in Finney County.

The fictional town of Smallville, Kansas is the childhood home of Clark Kent/Superman in American comic books published by DC Comics. Also Keystone City is a Kansas city where The Flash works and lives.

The science fiction novella &quot;A Boy and His Dog&quot;, as well as the film based on it, take place in post-apocalyptic Topeka.

The winner of the 2011 Newbery Medal for excellence in children&#x27;s literature, &quot;Moon Over Manifest&quot;, tells the story of a young and adventurous girl named Abilene who is sent to the fictional town of Manifest, Kansas, by her father in the summer of 1936. It was written by Kansan Clare Vanderpool.

Lawrence is the setting for a number of science fiction writer James Gunn&#x27;s novels.

===Art===

Kansas is home to a number of art museums. The Wichita Art Museum collection focuses on American art. The Nerman Museum of Contemporary Art in Overland Park exhibits artists of national and international recognition. The Spencer Museum of Art, at University of Kansas in Lawrence, has a diverse permanent collection and Ingrid &amp; J.K. Lee Study Center as an education space.

===Film===

The first film theater in Kansas was the Patee Theater in Lawrence. Most theaters at the time showed films only as part of vaudeville acts but not as an exclusive and stand alone form of entertainment. Though the Patee family had been involved in vaudeville, they believed films could carry the evening without other variety acts, but to show the films it was necessary for the Patee&#x27;s to establish a generating plant (back in 1903 Lawrence was not yet fully electrified). The Patee Theater was one of the first of its kind west of the Mississippi River. The specialized equipment like the projector came from New York City.

Kansas has been the setting of many award-winning and popular American films, as well as being the home of some of the oldest operating cinemas in the world. The Plaza Cinema in Ottawa, Kansas, located in the northeastern portion of the state, was built on May 22, 1907, and it is listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the oldest operating cinema in the world. In 1926, The Jayhawk Theatre, an art-deco movie house in Topeka opened its doors for the first time to movie going audiences, and today, in addition to screenings of independent films, the theatre acts as a venue for plays and concerts. The Fox Theater in Hutchinson was built in 1930, and was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1989. Like the other theaters listed here, The Fox still plays first run movies to this day.
* As was the case with the novel, Dorothy Gale (portrayed by Judy Garland) in the 1939 fantasy film &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; was a young girl who lived in Kansas with her aunt and uncle. The line, &quot;We&#x27;re not in Kansas anymore&quot;, has entered into the English lexicon as a phrase describing a wholly new or unexpected situation.
* The 1967 feature film &quot;In Cold Blood&quot;, like the book on which it was based, was set in various locations across Kansas. Many of the scenes in the film were filmed at the exact locations where the events profiled in the book took place. A 1996 TV miniseries was also based on the book.
* The 1988 film &quot;Kansas&quot; starred Andrew McCarthy as a traveler who met up with a dangerous wanted drifter played by Matt Dillon.
* The 2005 film &quot;Capote&quot;, for which Philip Seymour Hoffman was awarded the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of the title character, profiled the author as he traveled across Kansas while writing &quot;In Cold Blood&quot; (although most of the film itself was shot in the Canadian province of Manitoba).
* The setting of &quot;The Day After&quot;, a 1983 made-for-television movie about a fictional nuclear attack, was the city of Lawrence.
* Due to the super hero Superman growing up in the fictional Smallville, Kansas, multiple films featuring the super hero have been entirely or at least partially set in Kansas including &quot;Superman&quot; (1978), &quot;Superman III&quot; (1983), &quot;Man of Steel&quot; (2013), &quot;Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice&quot; (2016), and &quot;Justice League&quot; (2017).
* The 2012 film &quot;Looper&quot; is set in Kansas.
* The 1973 film &quot;Paper Moon&quot; in which Tatum O&#x27;Neal won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress (The youngest to win an Academy Award) was based in and filmed in Kansas. The film was shot in the small towns of Hays; McCracken; Wilson; and St. Joseph, Missouri. Various shooting locations include the Midland Hotel at Wilson; the railway depot at Gorham; storefronts and buildings on Main Street in White Cloud; Hays; sites on both sides of the Missouri River; Rulo Bridge; and Saint Joseph, Missouri.
* Scenes of the 1996 film Mars Attacks! took place in the fictional town of Perkinsville. Scenes taking place in Kansas were filmed in Burns, Lawrence, and Wichita.
* The 2007 film &quot;The Lookout&quot; is set mostly in Kansas (although filmed in Canada). Specifically two locations; Kansas City and the fictional town of Noel, Kansas.
* The 2012 documentary &quot;The Gridiron&quot; was filmed at The University of Kansas
* The 2014 ESPN documentary &quot;No Place Like Home&quot; was filmed in Lawrence and the countryside of Douglas County, Kansas
* The 2017 film &quot;Thank You for Your Service&quot; is primarily set in Kansas, including the cities of Topeka and Junction City.
* The 2017 documentary &quot;When Kings Reigned&quot; was filmed in Lawrence.
* The 2019 film &quot;Brightburn&quot; took place in the fictional town of Brightburn. As is evident with scenes in the film depicting mountains (Kansas has no mountain ranges), it was filmed in Georgia instead of in Kansas.

===Television===

* The protagonist brothers of the 2005 TV show &quot;Supernatural&quot; hail from Lawrence, with the city referenced numerous times on the show.
* Most of the second season of the TV Series &quot;Prison Break&quot; had scenes that took place in Kansas. Specifically the towns of Ness City and Tribune as the character T–Bag searches for his ex-girlfriend who turned him in to the police. A season 1 episode also briefly took place in Topeka.
* 2006 TV series &quot;Jericho&quot; was based in the fictitious town of Jericho, Kansas, surviving post-nuclear America.
* Early seasons of &quot;Smallville&quot;, about Superman as a teenager, were based in a fictional town of Smallville, Kansas. Unlike most other adaptations of the Superman story, the series also places the fictional city of Metropolis in western Kansas, a few hours from Smallville.
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot;, a radio series western, ran from 1952 to 1961, took place in Dodge City, Kansas.
* &quot;Gunsmoke&quot;, television series, the longest running prime time show of the 20th century, ran from September 10, 1955, to March 31, 1975, for a total of 635 episodes.
* The 2009 Showtime series &quot;United States of Tara&quot; is set in Overland Park, a suburb of Kansas City.

===Sports===
====Professional====


Sporting Kansas City, who have played their home games at Village West in Kansas City, since 2008, are the first top-tier professional sports league and first Major League Soccer team to be located within Kansas. In 2011 the team moved to their new home, a $165 million soccer specific stadium now known as Children&#x27;s Mercy Park.

Historically, Kansans have supported the major league sports teams of Kansas City, Missouri, including the Kansas City Royals (MLB), and the Kansas City Chiefs (NFL), in part because the home stadiums for these teams are a few miles from the Kansas border. The Chiefs and the Royals play at the Truman Sports Complex, located about from the Kansas–Missouri state line. FC Kansas City, a charter member of the National Women&#x27;s Soccer League, played the 2013 season, the first for both the team and the league, on the Kansas side of the metropolitan area, but played on the Missouri side until folding after the 2017 season. From 1973 to 1997 the flagship radio station for the Royals was WIBW in Topeka.

Some Kansans, mostly from the westernmost parts of the state, support the professional sports teams of Denver, particularly the Denver Broncos of the NFL.

Two major auto racing facilities are located in Kansas. The Kansas Speedway located in Kansas City hosts races of the NASCAR, IndyCar, and ARCA circuits. Also, the National Hot Rod Association (NHRA) holds drag racing events at Heartland Park Topeka. The Sports Car Club of America has its national headquarters in Topeka.

=====History=====

The history of professional sports in Kansas probably dates from the establishment of the minor league baseball Topeka Capitals and Leavenworth Soldiers in 1886 in the Western League. The African-American Bud Fowler played on the Topeka team that season, one year before the &quot;color line&quot; descended on professional baseball.

In 1887, the Western League was dominated by a reorganized Topeka team called the Golden Giants: a high-priced collection of major leaguer players, including Bug Holliday, Jim Conway, Dan Stearns, Perry Werden and Jimmy Macullar, which won the league by 15.5 games. On April 10, 1887, the Golden Giants also won an exhibition game from the defending World Series champions, the St. Louis Browns (the present-day Cardinals), by a score of 12–9. However, Topeka was unable to support the team, and it disbanded after one year.

The first night game in the history of professional baseball was played in Independence on April 28, 1930, when the Muscogee (Oklahoma) Indians beat the Independence Producers 13–3 in a minor league game sanctioned by the Western League of the Western Baseball Association with 1,500 fans attending the game. The permanent lighting system was first used for an exhibition game on April 17, 1930, between the Independence Producers and House of David semi-professional baseball team of Benton Harbor, Michigan with the Independence team winning 9–1 before a crowd of 1,700 spectators.

====College====


The governing body for intercollegiate sports in the United States, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), was headquartered in Johnson County, Kansas from 1952 until moving to Indianapolis in 1999.

=====NCAA Division I schools=====

While there are no franchises of the four major professional sports within the state, many Kansans are fans of the state&#x27;s major college sports teams, especially the Jayhawks of the University of Kansas (KU), and the Wildcats of Kansas State University (KSU or &quot;K-State&quot;). The teams are rivals in the Big 12 Conference.

Both KU and K-State have tradition-rich programs in men&#x27;s basketball. The Jayhawks are a perennial national power, ranking first in all-time victories among NCAA programs. The Jayhawks have won six national titles, including NCAA tournament championships in 1952, 1988, 2008, and 2022. They also were retroactively awarded national championships by the Helms Foundation for 1922 and 1923. K-State also had a long stretch of success on the hardwood, lasting from the 1940s to the 1980s, making four Final Fours during that stretch. In 1988, KU and K-State met in the Elite Eight, KU taking the game 71–58. After a 12-year absence, the Wildcats returned to the NCAA tournament in 2008, and advanced to the Elite Eight in 2010 and 2018. KU is fifth all-time with 15 Final Four appearances, while K-State&#x27;s four appearances are tied for 17th.

Conversely, success on the gridiron has been less frequent for both KSU and KU. However, there have been recent breakthroughs for both schools&#x27; football teams. The Jayhawks won the Orange Bowl for the first time in three tries in 2008, capping a 12–1 season, the best in school history. And when Bill Snyder arrived to coach at K-State in 1989, he turned the Wildcats from one of the worst college football programs in America, into a national force for most of the 1990s and early 2000s. The team won the Fiesta Bowl in 1997, achieved an undefeated (11–0) regular season and No.1 ranking in 1998, and took the Big 12 Conference championship in 2003. After three seasons in which K-State football languished, Snyder came out of retirement in 2009 and guided them to the top of the college football ranks again, finishing second in the Big 12 in 2011 and earning a berth in the Cotton Bowl, and winning the Big 12 again in 2012.

Wichita State University, which also fields teams (called the Shockers) in Division I of the NCAA, is best known for its baseball and basketball programs. In baseball, the Shockers won the College World Series in 1989. In men&#x27;s basketball, they appeared in the Final Four in 1965 and 2013, and entered the 2014 NCAA tournament unbeaten. The school also fielded a football team from 1897 to 1986. The Shocker football team is tragically known for a plane crash in 1970 that killed 31 people, including 14 players.

=====NCAA Division II schools=====

Notable success has also been achieved by the state&#x27;s smaller schools in football. Pittsburg State University, an NCAA Division II participant, has claimed four national titles in football, two in the NAIA and most recently the 2011 NCAA Division II national title. Pittsburg State became the winningest NCAA Division II football program in 1995. PSU passed Hillsdale College at the top of the all-time victories list in the 1995 season on its march to the national runner-up finish. The Gorillas, in 96 seasons of intercollegiate competition, have accumulated 579 victories, posting a 579–301–48 overall mark.

Washburn University, in Topeka, won the NAIA Men&#x27;s Basketball Championship in 1987. The Fort Hays State University men won the 1996 NCAA Division II title with a 34–0 record, and the Washburn women won the 2005 NCAA Division II crown. St. Benedict&#x27;s College (now Benedictine College), in Atchison, won the 1954 and 1967 Men&#x27;s NAIA Basketball Championships.

The Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference has its roots as one of the oldest college sport conferences in existence and participates in the NAIA and all ten member schools are in the state of Kansas. Other smaller school conferences that have some members in Kansas are the Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association the Midlands Collegiate Athletic Conference, the Midwest Christian College Conference, and the Heart of America Athletic Conference. Many junior colleges also have active athletic programs.

Emporia State&#x27;s women&#x27;s basketball team, under head coach Brandon Schneider, who is now serving as the women&#x27;s basketball coach at the University of Kansas, has seen success as well. In 2010 the team won the NCAA Division II National Championship. Emporia State and Washburn in Topeka share a heated rivalry in all sports, mostly due to the close proximity of both cities.

=====Junior colleges=====

The Kansas Jayhawk Community College Conference has been heralded as one of the best conferences in all of NJCAA football, with Garden City Community College, Independence Community College, and Butler County Community College all consistently in contention for national championships.

====High school====

The Kansas State High School Activities Association (KSHSAA) is the organization which oversees interscholastic competition in the state of Kansas at the high school level. It oversees both athletic and non-athletic competition, and sponsors championships in several sports and activities.

===Rivalry with Missouri===

Kansas and Missouri are two bordering U.S. states with a long and tumultuous history. The relationship between these two states has its roots in Bleeding Kansas, but mutual distrust has continued off and on since then, even in sporting contexts. These states also share the Kansas City metropolitan area, where both states each have a city named Kansas City on either side of the Missouri River. The bitterness sown during Bleeding Kansas lingers in the Border War between the University of Kansas and the University of Missouri. The two states compete economically, mainly at the border which is also called a Border War. In 2019, the governors of the two states signed an agreement to stop offering financial incentives to pull business across the border. In 2022, the governor of Kansas said that agreement did not include enticement of the Chiefs football team moving its arena from Missouri to Kansas.

==See also==

* Index of Kansas-related articles
* Outline of Kansas
* List of Kansas landmarks
* List of people from Kansas
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Kansas
* USS &quot;Kansas&quot;, 2 ships
==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* ; 559 pages.
* ; 535 pages.
* ; 1204 pages.
* ; 5 volumes; 2731 pages; (Vol1), (Vol2), (Vol3), (Vol4), (Vol5); the 1919 edition contains additional biographies.
* ; 369 pages.
* ; 3 volumes; 2723 pages; (Vol1), (Vol2), (Vol3)
* ; 610 pages.
* ; 3 volumes; 1616 pages; (Hathi Trust ) (Internet Archive)

==External links==

* State of Kansas
* Kansas Travel and Tourism Division 
* Kansas Historical Society 
* Kansas Memory —documents, photographs, and other primary sources provided by the Kansas Historical Society
* Kansas State Agency Databases —Annotated list of searchable databases produced by Kansas state agencies
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Kansas 
* Kansas State Facts from USDA 

Maps
* Kansas Department of Transportation maps 
:* .
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="0" end="6" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="27" end="32" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="40" end="50" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="65" end="78" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="91" end="99" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="114" end="122" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="136" end="144" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="163" end="171" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="211" end="223" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="249" end="254" title="Kaw people" label="Kansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="267" end="274" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="278" end="284" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q260627" start="294" end="312" title="List of cities in Kansas" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="316" end="323" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="373" end="402" title="Kansas City metropolitan area" label="Kansas City metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="515" end="532" title="Plains Indians" label="Indigenous tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="610" end="626" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="717" end="724" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="817" end="836" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499603" start="868" end="880" title="Free-Stater (Kansas)" label="Free-Staters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="886" end="897" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="1010" end="1037" title="Slave states and free states" label="free state or a slave state"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="1060" end="1075" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="1117" end="1122" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="1213" end="1227" title="Homestead Acts" label="Homestead Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="1503" end="1510" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="1516" end="1523" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="1668" end="1694" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="15th-largest state by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="1700" end="1718" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="36th most-populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="1806" end="1834" title="List of states and territories of the United States by population density" label="10th least densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587215" start="1888" end="1903" title="Mount Sunflower" label="Mount Sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="2007" end="2031" title="Contiguous United States" label="Contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="2140" end="2150" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268882" start="2185" end="2191" title="Quapaw" label="Quapaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217420" start="2213" end="2227" title="Dhegiha Siouan" label="Dhegiha Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="2259" end="2267" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="2340" end="2350" title="Kaw people" label="Kaw people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="2439" end="2444" title="List of federally recognized tribes" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="2629" end="2650" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025090" start="2679" end="2686" title="Caddoan" label="Caddoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425238" start="2687" end="2694" title="Wichita people" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="2709" end="2715" title="Siouan" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="2716" end="2726" title="Kaw people" label="Kaw people"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="2905" end="2910" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="2981" end="2993" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="2994" end="3023" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="3124" end="3141" title="Spanish Louisiana" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266890" start="3172" end="3186" title="Luis de Unzaga" label="Luis de Unzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="3264" end="3275" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3286" end="3304" title="Antoine de Marigny" label="Antoine de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="3345" end="3357" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="3397" end="3411" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3432" end="3449" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="3487" end="3516" title="United States territorial acquisitions" label="acquired by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="3532" end="3550" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="3622" end="3639" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="3668" end="3688" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="3720" end="3746" title="Mexican Cession" label="ceded to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="3790" end="3808" title="Missouri Territory" label="Missouri Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="3814" end="3828" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="3902" end="3910" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="3936" end="3956" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419569" start="3958" end="3983" title="Santa Fe Trail Remains" label="Wagon ruts from the trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="4034" end="4050" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="4133" end="4152" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q751536" start="4194" end="4212" title="Nebraska Territory" label="Nebraska Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="4217" end="4233" title="Kansas Territory" label="Kansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="4289" end="4305" title="Kansas Territory" label="Kansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="4392" end="4398" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="4400" end="4416" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="4422" end="4428" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="4557" end="4570" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4576" end="4589" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499603" start="4600" end="4612" title="Free-Stater (Kansas)" label="Free-Staters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="4731" end="4739" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4907" end="4925" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="5037" end="5052" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="5069" end="5079" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489516" start="5087" end="5108" title="Pottawatomie massacre" label="Pottawatomie massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="5130" end="5151" title="Admission to the Union" label="admitted to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q714490" start="5346" end="5363" title="William Quantrill" label="William Quantrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="5417" end="5425" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="5536" end="5556" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate military"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="5602" end="5622" title="Missouri legislature" label="Missouri legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="5779" end="5793" title="Homestead Acts" label="Homestead Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="6003" end="6013" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="6032" end="6040" title="freedmen" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888152" start="6046" end="6080" title="Benjamin &amp;quot;Pap&amp;quot; Singleton" label="Benjamin &amp;quot;Pap&amp;quot; Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420574" start="6231" end="6241" title="Exodusters" label="Exodusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="6266" end="6280" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="6300" end="6309" title="American Old West" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q44677" start="6350" end="6366" title="Wild Bill Hickok" label="Wild Bill Hickok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438701" start="6391" end="6401" title="Fort Riley" label="Fort Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057071" start="6419" end="6423" title="Hays, Kansas" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q321292" start="6428" end="6435" title="Abilene, Kansas" label="Abilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="6437" end="6447" title="Dodge City, Kansas" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q704265" start="6465" end="6478" title="Bat Masterson" label="Bat Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44616" start="6483" end="6493" title="Wyatt Earp" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q934918" start="6533" end="6544" title="Dalton Gang" label="Dalton Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901559" start="6633" end="6638" title="Meade, Kansas" label="Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="6858" end="6868" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="6879" end="6902" title="evangelical Protestants" label="evangelical Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="6983" end="6994" title="Prohibition" label="prohibiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980230" start="6999" end="7018" title="Alcohol laws of Kansas" label="alcoholic beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583364" start="7069" end="7082" title="Carrie Nation" label="Carrie Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023014" start="7114" end="7119" title="Kiowa, Kansas" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q96269745" start="7149" end="7165" title="Ella Uphay Mowry" label="Ella Uphay Mowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7514" end="7530" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="7539" end="7548" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7669" end="7681" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871382" start="7759" end="7775" title="Battle of Kansas" label="Battle of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="7906" end="7914" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="7929" end="7937" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="7951" end="7959" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="7978" end="7986" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q312105" start="8026" end="8038" title="List of counties in Kansas" label="105 counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q260627" start="8044" end="8054" title="List of cities in Kansas" label="628 cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q376505" start="8094" end="8107" title="Butler County, Kansas" label="Butler County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386982" start="8127" end="8138" title="equidistant" label="equidistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535053" start="8181" end="8226" title="Geographic center of the contiguous United States" label="geographic center of the 48 contiguous states"/>
<link wikidata="Q376024" start="8233" end="8245" title="Smith County, Kansas" label="Smith County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012298" start="8251" end="8258" title="Lebanon, Kansas" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533990" start="8276" end="8310" title="Meades Ranch Triangulation Station" label="Meades Ranch Triangulation Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q374334" start="8314" end="8328" title="Osborne County, Kansas" label="Osborne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q376096" start="8468" end="8481" title="Barton County, Kansas" label="Barton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="8566" end="8573" title="Strike and dip" label="dipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="8574" end="8590" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="8607" end="8620" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="8622" end="8635" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="8640" end="8647" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="8756" end="8766" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="8823" end="8830" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="8838" end="8846" title="Tectonic uplift" label="uplifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="8847" end="8862" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="9044" end="9054" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="9062" end="9073" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279297" start="9092" end="9105" title="glacial drift" label="glacial drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="9110" end="9115" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="9186" end="9205" title="Great Plains" label="great central plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q943521" start="9403" end="9418" title="Verdigris River" label="Verdigris River"/>
<link wikidata="Q996804" start="9422" end="9433" title="Coffeyville, Kansas" label="Coffeyville"/>
<link wikidata="Q374547" start="9437" end="9454" title="Montgomery County, Kansas" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587215" start="9462" end="9477" title="Mount Sunflower" label="Mount Sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q374471" start="9508" end="9522" title="Wallace County, Kansas" label="Wallace County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="9901" end="9915" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="9921" end="9933" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q177627" start="9992" end="10002" title="Smoky Hill River" label="Smoky Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q673908" start="10007" end="10017" title="Republican River" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781699" start="10048" end="10061" title="Junction City, Kansas" label="Junction City"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="10091" end="10102" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="10170" end="10184" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10186" end="10206" title="Arkansas River#Pronunciations" label="pronunciation varies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="10219" end="10227" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648931" start="10347" end="10362" title="Little Arkansas River" label="Little Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038999" start="10364" end="10373" title="Ninnescah River" label="Ninnescah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179400" start="10383" end="10392" title="Cow Creek (Kansas)" label="Cow Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092055" start="10394" end="10402" title="Cimarron River (Arkansas River)" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q516393" start="10423" end="10429" title="Neosho River" label="Neosho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618310" start="10520" end="10526" title="Saline River (Kansas)" label="Saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905162" start="10588" end="10596" title="Big Blue River (Kansas)" label="Big Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253337" start="10598" end="10606" title="Delaware River (Kansas)" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960826" start="10612" end="10620" title="Wakarusa River" label="Wakarusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892251" start="10664" end="10681" title="Marais des Cygnes River" label="Marais des Cygnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109287" start="10750" end="10758" title="Riverton, Kansas" label="Riverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901396" start="10763" end="10777" title="Baxter Springs, Kansas" label="Baxter Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="10855" end="10876" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q991084" start="10888" end="10938" title="Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site" label="Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471470" start="10951" end="10985" title="Fort Larned National Historic Site" label="Fort Larned National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404770" start="10989" end="10995" title="Larned, Kansas" label="Larned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472003" start="10998" end="11031" title="Fort Scott National Historic Site" label="Fort Scott National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028918" start="11052" end="11084" title="Nicodemus National Historic Site" label="Nicodemus National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028911" start="11088" end="11097" title="Nicodemus, Kansas" label="Nicodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="11100" end="11136" title="Pony Express National Historic Trail" label="Pony Express National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680127" start="11139" end="11174" title="Tallgrass Prairie National Preserve" label="Tallgrass Prairie National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088997" start="11180" end="11191" title="Strong City, Kansas" label="Strong City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15536350" start="11316" end="11331" title="Boechera laevigata" label="Smooth rockress"/>
<link wikidata="Q747837" start="11333" end="11346" title="Virginia rail" label="Virginia rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212627" start="11348" end="11373" title="Eurycea spelaea" label="Western Grotto Salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q733398" start="11375" end="11385" title="Osmunda regalis" label="Royal Fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273836" start="11387" end="11400" title="Turkey-tangle" label="Turkey-tangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q591831" start="11402" end="11410" title="Bobolink" label="Bobolink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276281" start="11412" end="11427" title="Eurycea lucifuga" label="Cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263624" start="11429" end="11441" title="Snowy Plover" label="Snowy Plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274954" start="11443" end="11470" title="Strecker&amp;#x27;s Chorus Frog" label="Strecker&amp;#x27;s Chorus Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="11472" end="11488" title="Peregrine falcon" label="Peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="11494" end="11513" title="Black-footed ferret" label="Black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="11558" end="11562" title="Crow" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="11565" end="11569" title="Deer" label="Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19551" start="11571" end="11593" title="Lesser prairie chicken" label="Lesser prairie chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="11595" end="11599" title="Mouse" label="Mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353759" start="11601" end="11606" title="Eastern Mole" label="Moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q147267" start="11608" end="11624" title="Virginia Opossum" label="Virginia Opossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q247142" start="11626" end="11637" title="Black-tailed Prairie Dog" label="Prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="11640" end="11647" title="Raccoon" label="Raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421782" start="11649" end="11667" title="Tripsacum dactyloides" label="Eastern Gama Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579245" start="11669" end="11685" title="Sporobolus heterolepis" label="Prairie Dropseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046578" start="11687" end="11699" title="Sorghastrum nutans" label="Indian Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013856" start="11701" end="11716" title="Schizachyrium scoparium" label="Little Bluestem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466543" start="11718" end="11730" title="Switch grass" label="Switch grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087377" start="11732" end="11749" title="Chasmanthium latifolium" label="Northern Sea Oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615554" start="11751" end="11764" title="Carex stricta" label="Tussock Sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950436" start="11766" end="11780" title="Sideoats grama" label="Sideoats grama"/>
<link wikidata="Q663311" start="11786" end="11798" title="Big Bluestem" label="Big Bluestem"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11824" end="11853" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="12022" end="12047" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="12180" end="12184" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="12185" end="12199" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q410689" start="12352" end="12365" title="U.S. Route 83" label="U.S. Route 83"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="12390" end="12399" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="12400" end="12406" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q898845" start="12608" end="12620" title="Chinook wind" label="Chinook wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="12761" end="12768" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="12782" end="12807" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410661" start="13140" end="13142" title="U.S. Route 81" label="81"/>
<link wikidata="Q409726" start="13212" end="13219" title="U.S. Route 50" label="U.S. 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141844" start="13331" end="13341" title="heat index" label="heat index"/>
<link wikidata="Q958555" start="13398" end="13408" title="Hutchinson, Kansas" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650620" start="13410" end="13416" title="Salina, Kansas" label="Salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931592" start="13418" end="13425" title="Russell, Kansas" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057071" start="13427" end="13431" title="Hays, Kansas" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065459" start="13437" end="13447" title="Great Bend, Kansas" label="Great Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="13482" end="13492" title="Dodge City, Kansas" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q983784" start="13494" end="13505" title="Garden City, Kansas" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003630" start="13511" end="13518" title="Liberal, Kansas" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="13715" end="13732" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="13789" end="13795" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="13797" end="13805" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="13815" end="13844" title="Kansas City metropolitan area" label="Kansas City metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="14393" end="14400" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="14720" end="14729" title="supercell" label="supercell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="14768" end="14775" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q429050" start="14801" end="14804" title="Enhanced Fujita scale" label="EF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="14926" end="14930" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233551" start="15146" end="15151" title="Alton, Kansas" label="Alton"/>
<link wikidata="Q374334" start="15155" end="15169" title="Osborne County, Kansas" label="Osborne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012298" start="15222" end="15229" title="Lebanon, Kansas" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q376024" start="15233" end="15245" title="Smith County, Kansas" label="Smith County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="15330" end="15342" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="15421" end="15428" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="15433" end="15439" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="15448" end="15458" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608153" start="15490" end="15502" title="rural flight" label="rural flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621672" start="15773" end="15784" title="List of ghost towns in Kansas" label="ghost towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="16018" end="16037" title="Municipal corporation" label="incorporated cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394476" start="16575" end="16583" title="Civil township" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="16848" end="16862" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075569" start="17748" end="17778" title="Robert Wood Johnson Foundation" label="Robert Wood Johnson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q375652" start="17858" end="17874" title="Wyandotte County, Kansas" label="Wyandotte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q374979" start="17893" end="17907" title="Johnson County, Kansas" label="Johnson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781699" start="18157" end="18170" title="Junction City, Kansas" label="Junction City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="18336" end="18353" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q500481" start="18356" end="18369" title="Overland Park, Kansas" label="Overland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268244" start="18488" end="18520" title="Johnson County Community College" label="Johnson County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="18537" end="18548" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901636" start="18561" end="18593" title="Johnson County Executive Airport" label="Johnson County Executive Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q986627" start="18617" end="18624" title="Shawnee, Kansas" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232393" start="18626" end="18633" title="De Soto, Kansas" label="De Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232927" start="18638" end="18645" title="Gardner, Kansas" label="Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q992536" start="18734" end="18740" title="Lenexa, Kansas" label="Lenexa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="18835" end="18849" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028321" start="18902" end="18915" title="Mission Hills, Kansas" label="Mission Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849228" start="19044" end="19060" title="Baker University" label="Baker University"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="19138" end="19161" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887341" start="19180" end="19199" title="Benedictine College" label="Benedictine College"/>
<link wikidata="Q25242939" start="19214" end="19239" title="St. Benedict&amp;#x27;s Abbey" label="St. Benedict&amp;#x27;s Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362414" start="19244" end="19275" title="Benedictine Sisters of Mount St. Scholastica" label="Mount St. Scholastica Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840874" start="19396" end="19426" title="MidAmerica Nazarene University" label="MidAmerica Nazarene University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109265" start="19438" end="19455" title="Ottawa University" label="Ottawa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="19644" end="19652" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="19668" end="19688" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q845332" start="19738" end="19771" title="Haskell Indian Nations University" label="Haskell Indian Nations University"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="19788" end="19799" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723946" start="19928" end="19943" title="Kansas Speedway" label="Kansas Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q329812" start="19945" end="19965" title="Sporting Kansas City" label="Sporting Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364900" start="19967" end="19987" title="Kansas City Monarchs (American Association)" label="Kansas City Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746877" start="19993" end="20020" title="The Legends at Village West" label="The Legends at Village West"/>
<link wikidata="Q892775" start="20093" end="20107" title="Bonner Springs, Kansas" label="Bonner Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416948" start="20175" end="20213" title="Cricket Wireless Amphitheater (Bonner Springs, Kansas)" label="Providence Medical Center Amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970220" start="20219" end="20264" title="National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame" label="National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q14689715" start="20281" end="20313" title="Kansas City Renaissance Festival" label="Kansas City Renaissance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="20330" end="20344" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q996441" start="20358" end="20365" title="Lansing, Kansas" label="Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762867" start="20438" end="20449" title="Leavenworth, Kansas" label="Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="20530" end="20546" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="20590" end="20607" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q753949" start="20621" end="20629" title="Atchison, Kansas" label="Atchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355" start="20713" end="20727" title="Amelia Earhart" label="Amelia Earhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="20815" end="20821" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q941551" start="20855" end="20874" title="Washburn University" label="Washburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971450" start="20879" end="20911" title="Washburn Institute of Technology" label="Washburn Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="20924" end="20936" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="20960" end="20972" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q965968" start="21067" end="21080" title="Interstate 70 (Kansas)" label="Interstate 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781699" start="21105" end="21118" title="Junction City, Kansas" label="Junction City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438701" start="21178" end="21188" title="Fort Riley" label="Fort Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="21220" end="21229" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="21237" end="21258" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q856841" start="21335" end="21344" title="Manhattan, Kansas" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="21356" end="21379" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692221" start="21525" end="21535" title="Aggieville" label="Aggieville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221427" start="21677" end="21702" title="Wichita metropolitan area, Kansas" label="Wichita metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="21740" end="21747" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="21926" end="21950" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535140" start="22336" end="22343" title="Goddard, Kansas" label="Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q492811" start="22426" end="22433" title="Andover, Kansas" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q770579" start="22435" end="22440" title="Maize, Kansas" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736707" start="22442" end="22451" title="Park City, Kansas" label="Park City"/>
<link wikidata="Q137775" start="22453" end="22458" title="Derby, Kansas" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q613842" start="22464" end="22473" title="Haysville, Kansas" label="Haysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="22673" end="22687" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q958555" start="22717" end="22727" title="Hutchinson, Kansas" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365140" start="22817" end="22825" title="Strataca" label="Strataca"/>
<link wikidata="Q847637" start="22915" end="22950" title="Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center" label="Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375633" start="22987" end="23004" title="Kansas State Fair" label="Kansas State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q966021" start="23029" end="23043" title="Interstate 135 (Kansas)" label="Interstate 135"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003636" start="23059" end="23065" title="Newton, Kansas" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="23102" end="23119" title="Santa Fe Railroad" label="Santa Fe Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="23148" end="23162" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q628263" start="23210" end="23218" title="Winfield, Kansas" label="Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065312" start="23223" end="23236" title="Arkansas City, Kansas" label="Arkansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092209" start="23272" end="23286" title="Cherokee Strip (Kansas)" label="Cherokee Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615619" start="23321" end="23326" title="Udall, Kansas" label="Udall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="23357" end="23364" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569352" start="23461" end="23477" title="Southeast Kansas" label="Southeast Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q376616" start="23593" end="23608" title="Crawford County, Kansas" label="Crawford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913953" start="23655" end="23664" title="Pittsburg, Kansas" label="Pittsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097334" start="23715" end="23741" title="Pittsburg State University" label="Pittsburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687658" start="23767" end="23776" title="Frontenac, Kansas" label="Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q858606" start="23896" end="23906" title="Big Brutus" label="Big Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144713" start="23944" end="23956" title="West Mineral, Kansas" label="West Mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232317" start="23997" end="24007" title="Fort Scott, Kansas" label="Fort Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q317865" start="24116" end="24132" title="Joplin, Missouri" label="Joplin, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650620" start="24207" end="24213" title="Salina, Kansas" label="Salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012266" start="24308" end="24317" title="Lindsborg, Kansas" label="Lindsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q615892" start="24336" end="24347" title="Dalecarlian horse" label="Dala horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q965968" start="24447" end="24460" title="Interstate 70 (Kansas)" label="Interstate 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q321292" start="24483" end="24490" title="Abilene, Kansas" label="Abilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="24524" end="24538" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="24577" end="24597" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270206" start="24622" end="24642" title="Eisenhower Presidential Center" label="Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482296" start="24737" end="24742" title="Lucas, Kansas" label="Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931592" start="24852" end="24859" title="Russell, Kansas" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="24965" end="24973" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q363055" start="25011" end="25024" title="Arlen Specter" label="Arlen Specter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057071" start="25038" end="25042" title="Hays, Kansas" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q591426" start="25054" end="25080" title="Fort Hays State University" label="Fort Hays State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q376069" start="25256" end="25268" title="Ellis County, Kansas" label="Ellis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188698" start="25337" end="25345" title="Victoria, Kansas" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q318044" start="25371" end="25386" title="Walter Chrysler" label="Walter Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901463" start="25406" end="25411" title="Ellis, Kansas" label="Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931279" start="25546" end="25551" title="Colby, Kansas" label="Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931362" start="25556" end="25564" title="Goodland, Kansas" label="Goodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="25629" end="25639" title="Dodge City, Kansas" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="25732" end="25746" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003630" start="25766" end="25773" title="Liberal, Kansas" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739080" start="25877" end="25886" title="Montezuma, Kansas" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q983784" start="25888" end="25899" title="Garden City, Kansas" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514798" start="25908" end="25926" title="Lee Richardson Zoo" label="Lee Richardson Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189119" start="25939" end="25972" title="West Kansas" label="short-lived secessionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q379070" start="26164" end="26175" title="Flint Hills" label="Flint Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583523" start="26189" end="26196" title="Emporia, Kansas" label="Emporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="26266" end="26290" title="Emporia State University" label="Emporia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577838" start="26367" end="26386" title="William Allen White" label="William Allen White"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="26430" end="26457" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="26556" end="26581" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="26805" end="26816" title="Immigration to the United States" label="Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="26971" end="26982" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="27086" end="27092" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="27094" end="27099" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="27101" end="27108" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="27110" end="27119" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="27124" end="27129" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="27201" end="27221" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q376129" start="27246" end="27258" title="Chase County, Kansas" label="Chase County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088997" start="27305" end="27316" title="Strong City, Kansas" label="Strong City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="27449" end="27458" title="farm machinery" label="machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266462" start="27485" end="27499" title="Vegetable farming" label="vegetable farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212396" start="27541" end="27569" title="Depopulation of the Great Plains" label="de-population of rural areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="27599" end="27602" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="27615" end="27648" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="27680" end="27688" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="27829" end="27857" title="White American" label="White American, non-Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="27867" end="27875" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="27879" end="27885" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="28005" end="28010" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="28467" end="28473" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="28484" end="28489" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="28499" end="28506" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="28516" end="28524" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369944" start="28533" end="28539" title="French American" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="28548" end="28556" title="Scottish American" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="28565" end="28570" title="Dutch American" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q115026" start="28579" end="28586" title="Swedish American" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="28595" end="28602" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="28615" end="28621" title="Polish American" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353960" start="28762" end="28773" title="Nortonville, Kansas" label="Nortonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901483" start="28775" end="28781" title="Holton, Kansas" label="Holton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514856" start="28783" end="28790" title="Sabetha, Kansas" label="Sabetha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901580" start="28795" end="28801" title="Horton, Kansas" label="Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420574" start="29111" end="29121" title="Exodusters" label="Exodusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="30036" end="30073" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="30191" end="30214" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="30245" end="30272" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="30415" end="30449" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="30752" end="30766" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064415" start="30789" end="30807" title="Charles Fox Parham" label="Charles Fox Parham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897872" start="30815" end="30835" title="Bethel Bible College" label="Bethel Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="30843" end="30854" title="glossolalia" label="glossolalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q976547" start="30934" end="30960" title="baptism of the Holy Spirit" label="baptism of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082480" start="31002" end="31017" title="Charles Sheldon" label="Charles Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017321" start="31035" end="31047" title="In His Steps" label="In His Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933884" start="31097" end="31117" title="What would Jesus do?" label="What would Jesus do?"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="31237" end="31249" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386661" start="31304" end="31318" title="Enterprise, KS" label="Enterprise, KS"/>
<link wikidata="Q692942" start="31427" end="31450" title="Westboro Baptist Church" label="Westboro Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233801" start="31454" end="31464" title="hate group" label="hate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="31482" end="31509" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="31943" end="31960" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="32015" end="32038" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="32192" end="32213" title="Kansas City metropolitan area" label="Kansas City MO-KS MSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221427" start="32276" end="32291" title="Wichita, KS Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Wichita, KS MSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824821" start="32311" end="32325" title="Topeka metropolitan area, Kansas" label="Topeka, KS MSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q112220" start="32345" end="32361" title="Douglas County, Kansas" label="Lawrence KS, MSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306356" start="32380" end="32397" title="Manhattan, Kansas, metropolitan area" label="Manhattan, KS MSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="32975" end="32982" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="32984" end="32992" title="soybeans" label="soybeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="33002" end="33006" title="pig" label="hogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="33008" end="33012" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680670" start="33095" end="33118" title="Organic certification" label="certified organic farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="33361" end="33371" title="Grain Belt" label="Grain Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977574" start="33560" end="33581" title="hard red winter wheat" label="hard red winter wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493556" start="34079" end="34097" title="Spirit AeroSystems" label="Spirit AeroSystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q891779" start="34099" end="34119" title="Bombardier Aerospace" label="Bombardier Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336983" start="34121" end="34128" title="LearJet" label="LearJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985472" start="34135" end="34151" title="Textron Aviation" label="Textron Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308889" start="34176" end="34182" title="Cessna" label="Cessna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992531" start="34184" end="34190" title="Hawker Aircraft" label="Hawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q634227" start="34196" end="34206" title="Beechcraft" label="Beechcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="34216" end="34222" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q658789" start="34355" end="34361" title="Garmin" label="Garmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593022" start="34363" end="34369" title="Olathe, Kansas" label="Olathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046013" start="34372" end="34385" title="YRC Worldwide" label="YRC Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496384" start="34407" end="34422" title="Koch Industries" label="Koch Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="34454" end="34461" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="34524" end="34540" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438701" start="34549" end="34559" title="Fort Riley" label="Fort Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q652649" start="34572" end="34596" title="McConnell Air Force Base" label="McConnell Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963954" start="34960" end="34972" title="Forbes Field" label="Forbes Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024007" start="35414" end="35425" title="Wind power in Kansas" label="wind energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="35479" end="35488" title="Megawatts" label="Megawatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q106180382" start="35554" end="35582" title="List of power stations in Kansas" label="largest share of electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="35737" end="35744" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="35749" end="35758" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178964" start="35833" end="35858" title="Petroleum in the United States" label="U.S. petroleum extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750736" start="35972" end="35986" title="Anadarko Basin" label="Anadarko Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="36007" end="36017" title="Price of oil" label="oil prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000852" start="36142" end="36162" title="Oil price increases since 2003" label="recent higher prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="36173" end="36201" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon dioxide sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142477" start="36402" end="36427" title="Hugoton Natural Gas Area" label="Hugoton Natural Gas Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q955546" start="36563" end="36578" title="coalbed methane" label="coalbed methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364967" start="36707" end="36735" title="Kansas Department of Revenue" label="Kansas Department of Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="37404" end="37413" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622705" start="38256" end="38277" title="Streamlined Sales Tax" label="Streamlined Sales Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q27677" start="38342" end="38359" title="Kathleen Sebelius" label="Kathleen Sebelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="38569" end="38599" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q317618" start="39099" end="39112" title="Sam Brownback" label="Sam Brownback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462051" start="39399" end="39418" title="Flow-through entity" label="pass-through income"/>
<link wikidata="Q868587" start="40535" end="40549" title="S&amp;amp;P Global" label="S&amp;amp;P Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="41285" end="41297" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="41567" end="41586" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="41596" end="41603" title="Ring road" label="beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q786061" start="41609" end="41619" title="spur route" label="spur route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779930" start="41632" end="41640" title="bypass (road)" label="bypasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q965968" start="41720" end="41733" title="Interstate 70 in Kansas" label="Interstate 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="41754" end="41760" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="41830" end="41836" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="41851" end="41872" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931279" start="41926" end="41931" title="Colby, Kansas" label="Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057071" start="41933" end="41937" title="Hays, Kansas" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650620" start="41939" end="41945" title="Salina, Kansas" label="Salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781699" start="41947" end="41960" title="Junction City, Kansas" label="Junction City"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="41962" end="41968" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="41970" end="41978" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q892775" start="41980" end="41994" title="Bonner Springs, Kansas" label="Bonner Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="42000" end="42011" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415280" start="42014" end="42018" title="Interstate 35 in Kansas" label="I-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="42062" end="42075" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="42090" end="42106" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="42162" end="42169" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q630677" start="42171" end="42180" title="El Dorado, Kansas" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583523" start="42182" end="42189" title="Emporia, Kansas" label="Emporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913965" start="42191" end="42197" title="Ottawa, Kansas" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q966021" start="42294" end="42299" title="Interstate 135 (Kansas)" label="I-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q450005" start="42366" end="42371" title="Interstate 335 (Kansas)" label="I-335"/>
<link wikidata="Q450005" start="42494" end="42509" title="Kansas Turnpike" label="Kansas Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q966240" start="42528" end="42533" title="Interstate 470 (Kansas)" label="I-470"/>
<link wikidata="Q966057" start="42549" end="42554" title="Interstate 235 (Kansas)" label="I-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453708" start="42575" end="42580" title="Interstate 670 (Kansas)" label="I-670"/>
<link wikidata="Q966084" start="42606" end="42611" title="Interstate 435 (Kansas)" label="I-435"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="42636" end="42665" title="Kansas City metropolitan area" label="Kansas City metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453609" start="42672" end="42677" title="Interstate 635 (Kansas–Missouri)" label="I-635"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217552" start="42709" end="42722" title="U.S. Route 69 in Kansas" label="U.S. Route 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901396" start="42858" end="42872" title="Baxter Springs, Kansas" label="Baxter Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913953" start="42874" end="42883" title="Pittsburg, Kansas" label="Pittsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687658" start="42885" end="42894" title="Frontenac, Kansas" label="Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232317" start="42896" end="42906" title="Fort Scott, Kansas" label="Fort Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587004" start="42908" end="42917" title="Louisburg, Kansas" label="Louisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="43095" end="43106" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925916" start="43160" end="43195" title="Kansas Department of Transportation" label="Kansas Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639561" start="43228" end="43231" title="5-1-1" label="511"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699012" start="43679" end="43686" title="Airspace class (United States)" label="Class C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433234" start="43699" end="43744" title="Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport" label="Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q409870" start="43760" end="43765" title="U.S. Route 54 (Kansas)" label="US-54"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272488" start="43799" end="43825" title="Manhattan Regional Airport" label="Manhattan Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q856841" start="43829" end="43838" title="Manhattan, Kansas" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="43863" end="43902" title="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q213717" start="43922" end="43955" title="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport" label="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431674" start="44072" end="44105" title="Kansas City International Airport" label="Kansas City International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q489897" start="44118" end="44141" title="Platte County, Missouri" label="Platte County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467244" start="44154" end="44177" title="Topeka Regional Airport" label="Topeka Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q515522" start="44264" end="44291" title="Tulsa International Airport" label="Tulsa International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="44295" end="44310" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900701" start="44314" end="44337" title="Joplin Regional Airport" label="Joplin Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q317865" start="44341" end="44357" title="Joplin, Missouri" label="Joplin, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q330015" start="44407" end="44435" title="Denver International Airport" label="Denver International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247541" start="44527" end="44537" title="Dodge City Regional Airport" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275259" start="44539" end="44550" title="Garden City Regional Airport" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885964" start="44552" end="44556" title="Hays Regional Airport" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950696" start="44558" end="44568" title="Hutchinson Municipal Airport (Kansas)" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540690" start="44570" end="44577" title="Liberal Mid-America Regional Airport" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404634" start="44582" end="44588" title="Salina Municipal Airport" label="Salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504407" start="44674" end="44700" title="Lawrence Municipal Airport (Kansas)" label="Lawrence Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="44762" end="44782" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264428" start="44822" end="44850" title="Osage City Municipal Airport" label="Osage City Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275259" start="44909" end="44937" title="Garden City Regional Airport" label="Garden City Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272488" start="44939" end="44965" title="Manhattan Regional Airport" label="Manhattan Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247541" start="44971" end="44998" title="Dodge City Regional Airport" label="Dodge City Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="45096" end="45108" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4464386" start="45151" end="45169" title="United States home front during World War II" label="scrap metal drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="45374" end="45389" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="45396" end="45402" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="45502" end="45506" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="45540" end="45548" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="45550" end="45556" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003636" start="45558" end="45564" title="Newton, Kansas" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q958555" start="45566" end="45576" title="Hutchinson, Kansas" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="45578" end="45588" title="Dodge City, Kansas" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q983784" start="45594" end="45605" title="Garden City, Kansas" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="45610" end="45624" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q734900" start="45654" end="45669" title="Heartland Flyer" label="Heartland Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="45679" end="45692" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="45820" end="45835" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="45850" end="45873" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q734900" start="45931" end="45946" title="Heartland Flyer" label="Heartland Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065312" start="46000" end="46013" title="Arkansas City, Kansas" label="Arkansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="46018" end="46025" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="46065" end="46082" title="Class I rail carrier" label="Class I railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="46094" end="46098" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="46100" end="46113" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706368" start="46119" end="46123" title="Canadian Pacific Kansas City" label="CPKC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038271" start="46141" end="46159" title="shortline railroad" label="shortline railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853527" start="46339" end="46358" title="Lieutenant Governor of Kansas" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="46383" end="46389" title="Ticket (election)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="46513" end="46531" title="Legislative branch" label="Legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="46537" end="46546" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270271" start="46547" end="46565" title="Kansas Legislature" label="Kansas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525545" start="46582" end="46613" title="Kansas House of Representatives" label="Kansas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525955" start="46664" end="46677" title="Kansas Senate" label="Kansas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="46721" end="46736" title="Judicial branch" label="Judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603882" start="46785" end="46791" title="state supreme court" label="headed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365113" start="46799" end="46819" title="Kansas Supreme Court" label="Kansas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365116" start="46943" end="46985" title="Kansas Supreme Court Nominating Commission" label="Kansas Supreme Court Nominating Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q370213" start="47287" end="47299" title="Dan Glickman" label="Dan Glickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059645" start="47309" end="47340" title="Kansas State Board of Education" label="Kansas State Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="47375" end="47384" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="47515" end="47532" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744752" start="47713" end="47725" title="Thomas Frank" label="Thomas Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990900" start="47749" end="47784" title="What&amp;#x27;s the Matter with Kansas? (book)" label="What&amp;#x27;s the Matter with Kansas?"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47892" end="47912" title="List of first women mayors in the United States#Kansas" label="hold certain offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="48003" end="48029" title="workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workers&amp;#x27; compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="48057" end="48067" title="Security (finance)" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="48107" end="48128" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="48286" end="48325" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="48340" end="48366" title="council–manager government" label="council–manager government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="48494" end="48511" title="political machine" label="political machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="48516" end="48531" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338080" start="48545" end="48563" title="Tom Pendergast" label="Pendergast Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="48579" end="48600" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="48641" end="48668" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="48672" end="48678" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q698714" start="48946" end="48961" title="Wendell Willkie" label="Wendell Willkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="48966" end="48981" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279380" start="48985" end="48989" title="1940 United States presidential election in Kansas" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q48845692" start="48994" end="48998" title="1944 United States presidential election in Kansas" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="49081" end="49102" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48845328" start="49135" end="49139" title="1948 United States presidential election in Kansas" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="49184" end="49199" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="49217" end="49239" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977539" start="49329" end="49333" title="1936 United States presidential election in Kansas" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="49378" end="49395" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643307" start="49399" end="49403" title="1964 United States presidential election in Kansas" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q27677" start="49469" end="49486" title="Kathleen Sebelius" label="Kathleen Sebelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q317618" start="50099" end="50112" title="Sam Brownback" label="Sam Brownback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499080" start="51013" end="51024" title="Laura Kelly" label="Laura Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437211" start="51070" end="51081" title="Kris Kobach" label="Kris Kobach"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220853" start="51089" end="51115" title="2018 Kansas gubernatorial election" label="2018 election for Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q113334565" start="51198" end="51223" title="2022 Kansas Value Them Both Amendment" label="Value Them Both Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="51357" end="51368" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="51685" end="51714" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="51724" end="51734" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365787" start="51744" end="51755" title="Jerry Moran" label="Jerry Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q856841" start="51759" end="51768" title="Manhattan, Kansas" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27923290" start="51774" end="51788" title="Roger Marshall" label="Roger Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065459" start="51792" end="51802" title="Great Bend, Kansas" label="Great Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="51811" end="51835" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767554" start="51889" end="51900" title="Tracey Mann" label="Tracey Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023043" start="51904" end="51911" title="Quinter, Kansas" label="Quinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364518" start="51913" end="51923" title="1st Congressional District of Kansas" label="District 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731273" start="51926" end="51939" title="Jake LaTurner" label="Jake LaTurner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913953" start="51943" end="51952" title="Pittsburg, Kansas" label="Pittsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364521" start="51954" end="51964" title="2nd Congressional District of Kansas" label="District 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363747" start="51967" end="51976" title="Ron Estes" label="Ron Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="51980" end="51987" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364525" start="51989" end="51999" title="4th Congressional District of Kansas" label="District 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q58322868" start="52032" end="52046" title="Sharice Davids" label="Sharice Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="52050" end="52061" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13858936" start="52063" end="52073" title="3rd Congressional District of Kansas" label="District 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q271023" start="52162" end="52176" title="Charles Curtis" label="Charles Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="52178" end="52181" title="Kaw people" label="Kaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="52252" end="52262" title="Antebellum era" label="Antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="52407" end="52415" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="52465" end="52486" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="52538" end="52554" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q317618" start="52641" end="52654" title="Sam Brownback" label="Sam Brownback"/>
<link wikidata="Q462305" start="53154" end="53166" title="James Baird Weaver" label="James Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="53181" end="53203" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="53212" end="53226" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="53260" end="53274" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="53285" end="53299" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="53455" end="53465" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q375652" start="53488" end="53497" title="Wyandotte County, Kansas" label="Wyandotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="53514" end="53525" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q112220" start="53531" end="53538" title="Douglas County, Kansas" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="53552" end="53572" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="53585" end="53593" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="53640" end="53651" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q376616" start="53713" end="53728" title="Crawford County, Kansas" label="Crawford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="53776" end="53788" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="53844" end="53864" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q665416" start="53999" end="54009" title="Alf Landon" label="Alf Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="54013" end="54017" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="54042" end="54046" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q17580354" start="54200" end="54210" title="Greg Orman" label="Greg Orman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915195" start="54726" end="54744" title="legal drinking age" label="legal drinking age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744639" start="54977" end="54990" title="malt beverage" label="malt beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q524679" start="55006" end="55014" title="3.2 beer" label="3.2 beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="55054" end="55065" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039461" start="55123" end="55148" title="Kansas Constitution" label="state&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270271" start="55193" end="55204" title="Kansas Legislature" label="Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261535" start="55663" end="55675" title="dry county" label="dry counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059645" start="56316" end="56347" title="Kansas State Board of Education" label="Kansas State Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364589" start="56421" end="56444" title="Kansas Board of Regents" label="Kansas Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q172618" start="56582" end="56600" title="intelligent design" label="intelligent design"/>
<link wikidata="Q204328" start="56751" end="56757" title="Kansas (band)" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="56793" end="56799" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="56854" end="56863" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="56904" end="56910" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q447698" start="56933" end="56944" title="Danny Carey" label="Danny Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="56967" end="56971" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762867" start="57023" end="57034" title="Leavenworth, Kansas" label="Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q270669" start="57042" end="57059" title="Melissa Etheridge" label="Melissa Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q967492" start="57061" end="57067" title="Sharon, Kansas" label="Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q256732" start="57075" end="57090" title="Martina McBride" label="Martina McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907695" start="57092" end="57099" title="Chanute, Kansas" label="Chanute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178501" start="57107" end="57121" title="Jennifer Knapp" label="Jennifer Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364550" start="57158" end="57164" title="Kansas (Jennifer Knapp album)" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="57173" end="57184" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q234356" start="57192" end="57205" title="Janelle Monáe" label="Janelle Monáe"/>
<link wikidata="Q989487" start="57207" end="57222" title="Prairie Village, Kansas" label="Prairie Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q465761" start="57230" end="57244" title="Joyce DiDonato" label="Joyce DiDonato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003630" start="57250" end="57257" title="Liberal, Kansas" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478249" start="57265" end="57279" title="Jerrod Niemann" label="Jerrod Niemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625958" start="57323" end="57340" title="Home on the Range" label="Home on the Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="57865" end="57891" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q237514" start="57906" end="57926" title="Laura Ingalls Wilder" label="Laura Ingalls Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q687432" start="57940" end="57967" title="Little House on the Prairie (novel)" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142887" start="58094" end="58107" title="In Cold Blood" label="In Cold Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="58139" end="58152" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q951266" start="58355" end="58362" title="Holcomb, Kansas" label="Holcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q375608" start="58366" end="58379" title="Finney County" label="Finney County"/>
<link wikidata="Q180228" start="58404" end="58414" title="Smallville" label="Smallville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="58459" end="58467" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="58505" end="58514" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180784" start="58558" end="58567" title="The Flash" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049896" start="58620" end="58637" title="A Boy and His Dog" label="A Boy and His Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194657" start="58660" end="58664" title="A Boy and His Dog (1975 film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="58709" end="58715" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q622813" start="58741" end="58754" title="Newbery Medal" label="Newbery Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907531" start="58807" end="58825" title="Moon Over Manifest" label="Moon Over Manifest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126270" start="59012" end="59028" title="Clare Vanderpool" label="Clare Vanderpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="59031" end="59039" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q715505" start="59094" end="59104" title="James Gunn (author)" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998113" start="59179" end="59197" title="Wichita Art Museum" label="Wichita Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996474" start="59238" end="59271" title="Nerman Museum of Contemporary Art" label="Nerman Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601838" start="59353" end="59374" title="Spencer Museum of Art" label="Spencer Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59564" end="59577" title="Patee Theater" label="Patee Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="59581" end="59589" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="59646" end="59656" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59736" end="59748" title="Patee family" label="Patee family"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="59770" end="59780" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="60064" end="60081" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q311666" start="60118" end="60127" title="projector" label="projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="60449" end="60479" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="60558" end="60566" title="art-deco" label="art-deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="60833" end="60869" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583524" start="61000" end="61012" title="Dorothy Gale" label="Dorothy Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="61027" end="61039" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="61066" end="61094" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722631" start="61335" end="61360" title="In Cold Blood (film)" label="&amp;quot;In Cold Blood&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151024" start="61561" end="61579" title="In Cold Blood (miniseries)" label="1996 TV miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696889" start="61630" end="61636" title="Kansas (film)" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q457836" start="61651" end="61666" title="Andrew McCarthy" label="Andrew McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193070" start="61734" end="61745" title="Matt Dillon" label="Matt Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q463615" start="61763" end="61781" title="Capote (film)" label="&amp;quot;Capote&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q180560" start="61793" end="61815" title="Philip Seymour Hoffman" label="Philip Seymour Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="61832" end="61860" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="62063" end="62071" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q738462" start="62097" end="62110" title="The Day After" label="The Day After"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="62201" end="62209" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="62235" end="62243" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213053" start="62403" end="62411" title="Superman (1978 film)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q528095" start="62432" end="62444" title="Superman III" label="Superman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q622769" start="62465" end="62477" title="Man of Steel (film)" label="Man of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62498" end="62532" title="Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice" label="Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q20501835" start="62557" end="62571" title="Justice League (film)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q53719" start="62602" end="62620" title="Looper (film)" label="&amp;quot;Looper&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q603162" start="62655" end="62677" title="Paper Moon (film)" label="&amp;quot;Paper Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q230138" start="62687" end="62704" title="Tatum O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Tatum O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057071" start="62868" end="62872" title="Hays, Kansas" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104661" start="62874" end="62883" title="McCracken, Kansas" label="McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144465" start="62885" end="62891" title="Wilson, Kansas" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="62897" end="62917" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q269292" start="63004" end="63010" title="Gorham, Kansas" label="Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597098" start="63056" end="63067" title="White Cloud, Kansas" label="White Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="63102" end="63116" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379076" start="63118" end="63129" title="Rulo Bridge" label="Rulo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="63135" end="63157" title="Saint Joseph, Missouri" label="Saint Joseph, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q271690" start="63185" end="63198" title="Mars Attacks!" label="Mars Attacks!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666594" start="63294" end="63299" title="Burns, Kansas" label="Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="63301" end="63309" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="63315" end="63322" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="63559" end="63583" title="The University of Kansas" label="The University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63618" end="63636" title="No Place Like Home (2014 film)" label="No Place Like Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q112220" start="63689" end="63711" title="Douglas County, Kansas" label="Douglas County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23755714" start="63734" end="63760" title="Thank You for Your Service (2017 film)" label="Thank You for Your Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="63819" end="63825" title="Topeka" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781699" start="63830" end="63843" title="Junction City, Kansas" label="Junction City"/>
<link wikidata="Q59600666" start="63945" end="63955" title="Brightburn" label="Brightburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q130585" start="64220" end="64232" title="Supernatural (U.S. TV series)" label="Supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q80044" start="64363" end="64375" title="Prison Break" label="Prison Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233463" start="64446" end="64455" title="Ness City, Kansas" label="Ness City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917357" start="64460" end="64467" title="Tribune, Kansas" label="Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="64601" end="64607" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q221237" start="64632" end="64639" title="Jericho (2006 TV series)" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q180228" start="64756" end="64766" title="Smallville" label="Smallville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366408" start="64838" end="64848" title="Smallville (comics)" label="Smallville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474926" start="64956" end="64966" title="Metropolis (comics)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="65023" end="65031" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="65308" end="65316" title="Showtime (TV channel)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247235" start="65330" end="65351" title="United States of Tara" label="United States of Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q500481" start="65368" end="65381" title="Overland Park" label="Overland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930701" start="65503" end="65515" title="Village West" label="Village West"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="65519" end="65530" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="65567" end="65593" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="professional sports league"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="65604" end="65623" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154710" start="65715" end="65738" title="soccer specific stadium" label="soccer specific stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787141" start="65752" end="65778" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Mercy Park" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Mercy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="65822" end="65834" title="Major professional sports leagues of Canada and the United States" label="major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="65851" end="65872" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="65888" end="65906" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="65908" end="65911" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="65922" end="65940" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="65942" end="65945" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541138" start="66076" end="66097" title="Truman Sports Complex" label="Truman Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276051" start="66150" end="66164" title="FC Kansas City" label="FC Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101443" start="66190" end="66225" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629660" start="66238" end="66249" title="2013 National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League season" label="2013 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28439928" start="66396" end="66407" title="2017 National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League season" label="2017 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456998" start="66431" end="66453" title="Flagship station" label="flagship radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537278" start="66473" end="66477" title="WIBW (AM)" label="WIBW"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="66593" end="66599" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="66618" end="66632" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="66656" end="66667" title="auto racing" label="auto racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723946" start="66706" end="66721" title="Kansas Speedway" label="Kansas Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="66764" end="66770" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="66772" end="66779" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q787511" start="66785" end="66789" title="Auto Racing Club of America" label="ARCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="66810" end="66838" title="National Hot Rod Association" label="National Hot Rod Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q46241" start="66852" end="66863" title="drag racing" label="drag racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129050" start="66874" end="66895" title="Heartland Park Topeka" label="Heartland Park Topeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="66901" end="66927" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="67079" end="67100" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510670" start="67121" end="67141" title="Leavenworth Soldiers" label="Leavenworth Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019183" start="67157" end="67171" title="Western League (1885–1899)" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983845" start="67194" end="67204" title="Bud Fowler" label="Bud Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="67270" end="67280" title="Baseball color line" label="color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824807" start="67406" end="67419" title="Topeka Golden Giants (1887)" label="Golden Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986072" start="67482" end="67494" title="Bug Holliday" label="Bug Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194318" start="67496" end="67506" title="Jim Conway (baseball)" label="Jim Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214436" start="67508" end="67519" title="Dan Stearns" label="Dan Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169969" start="67521" end="67533" title="Perry Werden" label="Perry Werden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031240" start="67538" end="67552" title="Jimmy Macullar" label="Jimmy Macullar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556156" start="67674" end="67686" title="1886 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980314" start="67702" end="67718" title="St. Louis Browns (NL)" label="St. Louis Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="68525" end="68565" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q374979" start="68595" end="68617" title="Johnson County, Kansas" label="Johnson County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163297" start="68873" end="68881" title="Kansas Jayhawks" label="Jayhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="68889" end="68909" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568142" start="68924" end="68932" title="Kansas State Wildcats" label="Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="68936" end="68959" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="69018" end="69035" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709484" start="69396" end="69412" title="Helms Foundation" label="Helms Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416059" start="69541" end="69551" title="Final Four" label="Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361908" start="69609" end="69620" title="Elite Eight" label="Elite Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="69915" end="69923" title="American football" label="gridiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="70074" end="70085" title="Orange Bowl (game)" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910936" start="70189" end="70200" title="Bill Snyder" label="Bill Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411753" start="70399" end="70410" title="Fiesta Bowl" label="Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="70504" end="70521" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688256" start="70770" end="70781" title="Cotton Bowl Classic" label="Cotton Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="70822" end="70846" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167295" start="70884" end="70892" title="Wichita State Shockers" label="Shockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="70897" end="70907" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="70915" end="70919" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q787505" start="71011" end="71031" title="College World Series" label="College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="71190" end="71198" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998164" start="71275" end="71286" title="Wichita State University football team plane crash" label="plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097334" start="71465" end="71491" title="Pittsburg State University" label="Pittsburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q941551" start="71994" end="72013" title="Washburn University" label="Washburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="72034" end="72038" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q591426" start="72087" end="72113" title="Fort Hays State University" label="Fort Hays State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364939" start="72371" end="72408" title="Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference" label="Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840590" start="72641" end="72690" title="Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association" label="Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842529" start="72695" end="72734" title="Midlands Collegiate Athletic Conference" label="Midlands Collegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843348" start="72740" end="72776" title="Midwest Christian College Conference" label="Midwest Christian College Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692211" start="72786" end="72822" title="Heart of America Athletic Conference" label="Heart of America Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q370258" start="72829" end="72843" title="junior college" label="junior college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="72882" end="72895" title="Emporia State" label="Emporia State"/>
<link wikidata="Q20195168" start="72950" end="72967" title="Brandon Schneider" label="Brandon Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998117" start="73302" end="73345" title="Kansas Jayhawk Community College Conference" label="Kansas Jayhawk Community College Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973896" start="73405" end="73410" title="NJCAA" label="NJCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522202" start="73426" end="73455" title="Garden City Community College" label="Garden City Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171840" start="73457" end="73487" title="Independence Community College" label="Independence Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002600" start="73493" end="73524" title="Butler County Community College" label="Butler County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365070" start="73610" end="73657" title="Kansas State High School Activities Association" label="Kansas State High School Activities Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="73937" end="73945" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="73969" end="73975" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="74071" end="74086" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944627" start="74145" end="74170" title="Border War (Kansas–Missouri rivalry)" label="even in sporting contexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="74200" end="74229" title="Kansas City metropolitan area" label="Kansas City metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74380" end="74390" title="Border War (Kansas–Missouri rivalry)#Background" label="Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="74403" end="74423" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="74432" end="74454" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="74770" end="74776" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018260" start="74850" end="74882" title="Index of Kansas-related articles" label="Index of Kansas-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112317" start="74885" end="74902" title="Outline of Kansas" label="Outline of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575746" start="74905" end="74929" title="List of Kansas landmarks" label="List of Kansas landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632514" start="74932" end="74958" title="List of people from Kansas" label="List of people from Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976479" start="74961" end="75016" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Kansas" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870681" start="75019" end="75041" title="USS Kansas" label="USS &amp;quot;Kansas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364992" start="75589" end="75614" title="Kansas Historical Society" label="Kansas Historical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16717" wikidata="Q9922" url="?curid=16717" title="K">
<text>K, or k, is the eleventh letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is &quot;kay&quot; (pronounced ), plural &quot;kays&quot;.

The letter K usually represents the voiceless velar plosive.

== History ==
The letter K comes from the Greek letter Κ (kappa), which was taken from the Semitic kaph, the symbol for an open hand. This, in turn, was likely adapted by Semitic tribes who had lived in Egypt from the hieroglyph for &quot;hand&quot; representing /ḏ/ in the Egyptian word for hand, ⟨⟩ (likely pronounced in Old Egyptian). The Semites evidently assigned it the sound value instead, because their word for hand started with that sound.

K was brought into the Latin alphabet with the name &quot;ka&quot; /kaː/ to differentiate it from C, named &quot;ce&quot; (pronounced /keː/) and Q, named &quot;qu&quot; and pronounced /kuː/. In the earliest Latin inscriptions, the letters C, K and Q were all used to represent the sounds and (which were not differentiated in writing). Of these, Q was used before a rounded vowel (e.g. &#x27;ego&#x27;), K before /a/ (e.g. &#x27;calendis&#x27;), and C elsewhere. Later, the use of C and its variant G replaced most usages of K and Q. K survived only in a few fossilized forms, such as &quot;Kalendae&quot;, &quot;the calends&quot;.

After Greek words were taken into Latin, the kappa was transliterated as a C. Loanwords from other alphabets with the sound were also transliterated with C. Hence, the Romance languages generally use C, in imitating Classical Latin&#x27;s practice, and have K only in later loanwords from other language groups. The Celtic languages also tended to use C instead of K, and this influence carried over into Old English.

== Use in writing systems ==
=== English ===
The letter usually represents in English. It is silent when it comes before at the start of a stem, e.g.:
* At the start of a word (&quot;knight&quot;, &quot;knife&quot;, &quot;knot&quot;, &quot;know&quot;, and &quot;knee&quot;)
* After a prefix (&quot;unknowable&quot;)
* In compounds (&quot;penknife&quot;)

English is now the only Germanic language to productively use &quot;hard&quot; (outside the digraph ) rather than (although Dutch uses it in loan words of Latin origin, and the pronunciation of these words follows the same hard/soft distinction as in English).

Like J, X, Q, and Z, the letter K is not used very frequently in English. It is the fifth least frequently used letter in the English language, with a frequency in words of about 0.8%.

=== Other languages ===
In most languages where it is employed, this letter represents the sound (with or without aspiration) or some similar sound.

The Latinization of Modern Greek also uses this letter for . However, before the front vowels (), this is rendered as , which can be considered a separate phoneme.

=== Other systems ===
The International Phonetic Alphabet uses for the voiceless velar plosive.

== Other uses ==

* In the International System of Units (SI), the SI prefix for one thousand is kilo-, officially abbreviated as k: for example, prefixed to &quot;metre&quot;/&quot;meter&quot; or its abbreviation &quot;m&quot;, &quot;kilometre&quot; or &quot;km&quot; signifies a thousand metres. As such, people occasionally represent numbers in a non-standard notation by replacing the last three zeros of the general numeral with K, as in 30K for 30,000.
* &quot;K&quot; replacing &quot;C&quot; in satiric misspelling.
* K is the unit symbol for the kelvin, used to measure thermodynamic temperature (the degree sign is not used with this symbol).
* K is the chemical symbol for element potassium (from its Latin name ).
* Triangle K.
* In chess notation, the letter K represents the King (WK for White King, BK for Black King).
* In baseball scoring, the letter K is used to represent a strikeout. A forwards oriented K represents a &quot;strikeout swinging&quot;; a backwards oriented K () represents a &quot;strikeout looking&quot;.
* As an abbreviation for OK, often used in emails and short text messages.
* K is used as a slang term for Ketamine among recreational drug users.
* In the CMYK color model, K represents black ink.
* In International Morse code, it is used to mean &quot;over&quot;.
* In fracture mechanics, &quot;K&quot; is used to represent the stress intensity factor.
* In physics, &quot;k&quot; usually stands for the Boltzmann constant.
* In Argentinian politics, K is used as a symbol for Kirchnerism.
* K (logic).
* In the United Kingdom under the old system (before 2001), a licence plate that begins with &quot;K&quot; for example &quot;K123 XYZ&quot; would correspond to a vehicle registered between August 1, 1992, and July 31, 1993. Again under the old system, a licence plate that ends with &quot;K&quot; for example &quot;ABC 123K&quot; would correspond to a vehicle that was registered between August 1, 1971, and July 31, 1972.
* On Idaho license plates, an initial K in the plate number indicates it was issued in Kootenai County.

== Related characters ==
=== Ancestors, descendants and siblings ===
* 𐤊: Semitic letter Kaph, from which the following symbols originally derive:
* : Greek letter kappa, from which K derives
* К к: Cyrillic letter Ka, also derived from Kappa
* K with diacritics: Ƙ ƙ, Ꝁ ꝁ, Ḱ ḱ, Ǩ ǩ, Ḳ ḳ, Ķ ķ, ᶄ, Ⱪ ⱪ, Ḵ ḵ
** Ꞣ and ꞣ were used in Latvian orthography before 1921
*The Uralic Phonetic Alphabet uses various forms of the letter K:
**
*: Subscript small k was used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet prior to its formal standardization in 1902.
*Ʞ ʞ: Turned capital and small k were used in transcriptions of the Dakota language in publications of the American Board of Ethnology in the late 19th century. Turned small k was also used for a velar click in the International Phonetic Alphabet but its use was withdrawn in 1970.
*𝼐: Small capital turned k is used as a click letter
*𝼃: Small letter reversed k is used as a Voice Quality Symbol (VoQS)

=== Ligatures and abbreviations ===
* ₭ : Lao kip
* Ꝃ ꝃ, Ꝅ ꝅ : Various forms of K were used for medieval scribal abbreviations

== Other representations ==
=== Computing ===
=== Other ===


==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9922" start="0" end="1" title="K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q9922" start="6" end="7" title="K" label="k"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="25" end="31" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="39" end="53" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="67" end="90" title="English alphabet" label="modern English alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="187" end="202" title="English alphabet#Letter names" label="&amp;quot;kay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q463543" start="280" end="303" title="voiceless velar plosive" label="voiceless velar plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="348" end="360" title="Greek letter" label="Greek letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14401" start="364" end="369" title="kappa" label="kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q911270" start="397" end="404" title="Semitic alphabets" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525365" start="405" end="409" title="kaph" label="kaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="477" end="491" title="Semitic people" label="Semitic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q613996" start="539" end="572" title="hand (hieroglyph)" label="&amp;quot;hand&amp;quot; representing /ḏ/"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="629" end="641" title="Egyptian language" label="Old Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="964" end="969" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q282162" start="1374" end="1381" title="calends" label="calends"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1396" end="1401" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="1558" end="1575" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="1706" end="1722" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1795" end="1806" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514746" start="1902" end="1908" title="Silent k and g" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="1948" end="1952" title="Word stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2188" end="2205" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="2256" end="2263" title="Digraph (orthography)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2288" end="2293" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q427910" start="2310" end="2331" title="words of Latin origin" label="words of Latin origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9773" start="2431" end="2432" title="J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q9968" start="2434" end="2435" title="X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q9950" start="2437" end="2438" title="Q" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751" start="2444" end="2445" title="Z" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q520562" start="2510" end="2544" title="Letter frequency" label="fifth least frequently used letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="2726" end="2736" title="Aspiration (linguistics)" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="2782" end="2794" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="2953" end="2984" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q463543" start="2998" end="3021" title="voiceless velar plosive" label="voiceless velar plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="3051" end="3085" title="International System of Units (SI)" label="International System of Units (SI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="3091" end="3100" title="SI prefix" label="SI prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426249" start="3526" end="3545" title="satiric misspelling" label="satiric misspelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="3578" end="3584" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="3602" end="3627" title="thermodynamic temperature" label="thermodynamic temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="3687" end="3702" title="chemical symbol" label="chemical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="3707" end="3714" title="Chemical element" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="3715" end="3724" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840070" start="3751" end="3761" title="Triangle K" label="Triangle K"/>
<link wikidata="Q625114" start="3768" end="3782" title="chess notation" label="chess notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260583" start="3862" end="3878" title="baseball scorekeeping" label="baseball scoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="3916" end="3925" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q217844" start="4089" end="4091" title="OK" label="OK"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="4171" end="4179" title="Ketamine" label="Ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="4220" end="4236" title="CMYK color model" label="CMYK color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="4267" end="4291" title="International Morse code" label="International Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157420" start="4318" end="4322" title="Voice procedure" label="over"/>
<link wikidata="Q957852" start="4335" end="4353" title="fracture mechanics" label="fracture mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754376" start="4394" end="4417" title="stress intensity factor" label="stress intensity factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="4424" end="4431" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="4470" end="4488" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154647" start="4495" end="4515" title="Politics of Argentina" label="Argentinian politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q166807" start="4543" end="4554" title="Kirchnerism" label="Kirchnerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q840226" start="4558" end="4567" title="K (logic)" label="K (logic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4578" end="4592" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4603" end="4613" title="Vehicle registration plates of the United Kingdom#1963 to 1982" label="old system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918495" start="4997" end="5017" title="Idaho license plate county codes" label="Idaho license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q494460" start="5079" end="5094" title="Kootenai County" label="Kootenai County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="5171" end="5178" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525365" start="5186" end="5190" title="Kaph" label="Kaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="5248" end="5253" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14401" start="5261" end="5266" title="kappa" label="kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="5296" end="5304" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82320" start="5312" end="5314" title="Ka (Cyrillic)" label="Ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="5349" end="5358" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q394668" start="5361" end="5364" title="Ƙ" label="Ƙ ƙ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595037" start="5366" end="5369" title="K with stroke" label="Ꝁ ꝁ"/>
<link wikidata="Q425435" start="5371" end="5374" title="Ḱ" label="Ḱ ḱ"/>
<link wikidata="Q396787" start="5376" end="5379" title="Ǩ" label="Ǩ ǩ"/>
<link wikidata="Q669057" start="5381" end="5384" title="Dot (diacritic)" label="Ḳ ḳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q344607" start="5386" end="5389" title="Ķ" label="Ķ ķ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047429" start="5391" end="5392" title="ᶄ" label="ᶄ"/>
<link wikidata="Q426550" start="5394" end="5397" title="Ⱪ" label="Ⱪ ⱪ"/>
<link wikidata="Q460147" start="5399" end="5402" title="Macron below" label="Ḵ ḵ"/>
<link wikidata="Q67693351" start="5427" end="5446" title="Latvian orthography" label="Latvian orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287368" start="5464" end="5488" title="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet" label="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q530384" start="5703" end="5718" title="Dakota language" label="Dakota language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345847" start="5831" end="5842" title="Back-released velar click" label="velar click"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862127" start="5898" end="5915" title="Obsolete and nonstandard symbols in the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="withdrawn in 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132434" start="5957" end="5969" title="click letter" label="click letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312997" start="6011" end="6031" title="Voice Quality Symbols" label="Voice Quality Symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q200055" start="6082" end="6089" title="Lao kip" label="Lao kip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4537333" start="6145" end="6165" title="scribal abbreviation" label="scribal abbreviation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16718" wikidata="Q224486" url="?curid=16718" title="Kappa (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Kappa]] (Κ or κ) is the tenth letter of the Greek alphabet.

Kappa may also refer to:

==Measurement==
* Cohen&#x27;s kappa, also known as Kappa statistic
* Fleiss&#x27; kappa, another measure of inter-annotator agreement
* Kappa number, a measure of lignin content in wood pulp

==Companies==
* Kappa (brand), an Italian sportswear brand
* Kappa Publishing Group, publishing company

==Automotive==
* GM Kappa platform, subcompact rear-wheel drive automobile platform
* Lancia Kappa, an executive car
* Hyundai Kappa engine, automobile engine series

== Places ==
* Kappa, Illinois, a village
* Kappa Island, Antarctic island

== Other uses ==
* Kappa (folklore), a Japanese turtle-like humanoid
* &quot;Kappa&quot; (novella), by Ryūnosuke Akutagawa
* Kappa (&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;), a game creature
*&quot;Death Kappa&quot;, a Japanese kaiju film
* Kappa (rocket), a family of Japanese sounding rockets
* Kappa TV, a TV channel based in Kerala
* Knowledge and Power Preparatory Academy IV or KAPPA IV, a middle school in the Bronx, New York City
* &quot;Kappa&quot;, a 1999 song by Mogwai from the album &quot;Come On Die Young&quot;
* Kappa chain, a type of immunoglobulin light chain, part of the human immune system
* Kappa, one of the most popular emotes on live streaming platform Twitch
* Kappa effect, a sensory illusion relating to the human perception of time
* SARS-CoV-2 Kappa variant, one of the variants of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19

==See also==
* Honda Capa, a car sold in Japan
* Kalpa (aeon)
* Kapa (disambiguation)
* κ-opioid receptor
* &quot;Kappaphycus alvarezii&quot;, a type of seaweed</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224486" start="0" end="9" title="Kappa (disambiguation)" label="[[Kappa]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q224486" start="63" end="68" title="Kappa (disambiguation)" label="Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107106" start="107" end="125" title="Cohen&amp;#x27;s kappa" label="Cohen&amp;#x27;s kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750591" start="159" end="177" title="Fleiss&amp;#x27; kappa" label="Fleiss&amp;#x27; kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320409" start="226" end="238" title="Kappa number" label="Kappa number"/>
<link wikidata="Q735873" start="298" end="311" title="Kappa (brand)" label="Kappa (brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367078" start="343" end="365" title="Kappa Publishing Group" label="Kappa Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513871" start="404" end="421" title="GM Kappa platform" label="GM Kappa platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q337873" start="473" end="485" title="Lancia Kappa" label="Lancia Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641666" start="506" end="526" title="Hyundai Kappa engine" label="Hyundai Kappa engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252031" start="569" end="584" title="Kappa, Illinois" label="Kappa, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716013" start="598" end="610" title="Kappa Island" label="Kappa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q335140" start="649" end="665" title="Kappa (folklore)" label="Kappa (folklore)"/>
<link wikidata="Q866812" start="701" end="728" title="Kappa (novella)" label="&amp;quot;Kappa&amp;quot; (novella)"/>
<link wikidata="Q335140" start="755" end="797" title="Kappa (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Kappa (&amp;quot;Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11320563" start="822" end="833" title="Death Kappa" label="Death Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="852" end="862" title="Kaiju" label="kaiju film"/>
<link wikidata="Q60410" start="865" end="879" title="Kappa (rocket)" label="Kappa (rocket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110964" start="921" end="929" title="Kappa TV" label="Kappa TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q408230" start="962" end="1004" title="Knowledge and Power Preparatory Academy IV" label="Knowledge and Power Preparatory Academy IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684139" start="1126" end="1143" title="Come On Die Young" label="Come On Die Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q949267" start="1175" end="1201" title="immunoglobulin light chain" label="immunoglobulin light chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="1302" end="1308" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367098" start="1311" end="1323" title="Kappa effect" label="Kappa effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q107055239" start="1387" end="1411" title="SARS-CoV-2 Kappa variant" label="SARS-CoV-2 Kappa variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550350" start="1495" end="1505" title="Honda Capa" label="Honda Capa"/>
<link wikidata="Q864326" start="1529" end="1541" title="Kalpa (aeon)" label="Kalpa (aeon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222264" start="1544" end="1565" title="Kapa (disambiguation)" label="Kapa (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897645" start="1568" end="1585" title="κ-opioid receptor" label="κ-opioid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367130" start="1594" end="1615" title="Kappaphycus alvarezii" label="Kappaphycus alvarezii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="16720" wikidata="Q1052704" url="?curid=16720" title="Kuiper's test">
<text>Kuiper&#x27;s test is used in statistics to test that whether a data sample come from a given distribution (one-sample Kuiper test), or whether two data samples came from the same unknown distribution (two-sample Kuiper test). It is named after Dutch mathematician Nicolaas Kuiper.

Kuiper&#x27;s test is closely related to the better-known Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (or K-S test as it is often called). As with the K-S test, the discrepancy statistics &quot;D&quot;+ and &quot;D&quot;− represent the absolute sizes of the most positive and most negative differences between the two cumulative distribution functions that are being compared. The trick with Kuiper&#x27;s test is to use the quantity &quot;D&quot;+ + &quot;D&quot;− as the test statistic. This small change makes Kuiper&#x27;s test as sensitive in the tails as at the median and also makes it invariant under cyclic transformations of the independent variable. The Anderson–Darling test is another test that provides equal sensitivity at the tails as the median, but it does not provide the cyclic invariance.

This invariance under cyclic transformations makes Kuiper&#x27;s test invaluable when testing for cyclic variations by time of year or day of the week or time of day, and more generally for testing the fit of, and differences between, circular probability distributions.

==One-sample Kuiper test==
The one-sample test statistic, formula_1, for Kuiper&#x27;s test is defined as follows. Let &quot;F&quot; be the continuous cumulative distribution function which is to be the null hypothesis. Denote by &quot;F&quot;&quot;n&quot; the empirical distribution function for &quot;n&quot; independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations &quot;Xi&quot;, which is defined as 

:formula_2
:where formula_3 is the indicator function, equal to 1 if formula_4 and equal to 0 otherwise.
Then the one-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic for the given cumulative distribution function &quot;F&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is
:formula_5
:formula_6
where formula_7 is the supremum function. And finally the one-sample Kuiper test is defined as,
:formula_8
or equivalently
:formula_9
where formula_10 is the infimum function.

Tables for the critical points of the test statistic formula_1 are available, and these include certain cases where the distribution being tested is not fully known, so that parameters of the family of distributions are estimated.

The asymptotic distribution of the statistic formula_12 is given by,

:formula_13

For formula_14, a reasonable approximation is obtained from the first term of the series as follows 

:formula_15

==Two-sample Kuiper test==
The Kuiper test may also be used to test whether a pair of random samples, either on the real line or the circle coming from a common but unknown distribution. In this case, the Kuiper statistic is

:formula_16

where formula_17 and formula_18 are the empirical distribution functions of the first and the second sample respectively, formula_7 is the supremum function, and formula_10 is the infimum function.

==Example==

We could test the hypothesis that computers fail more during some times of the year than others. To test this, we would collect the dates on which the test set of computers had failed and build an empirical distribution function. The null hypothesis is that the failures are uniformly distributed. Kuiper&#x27;s statistic does not change if we change the beginning of the year and does not require that we bin failures into months or the like. Another test statistic having this property is the Watson statistic, which is related to the Cramér–von Mises test.

However, if failures occur mostly on weekends, many uniform-distribution tests such as K-S and Kuiper would miss this, since weekends are spread throughout the year. This inability to distinguish distributions with a comb-like shape from continuous uniform distributions is a key problem with all statistics based on a variant of the K-S test. Kuiper&#x27;s test, applied to the event times modulo one week, is able to detect such a pattern. Using event times that have been modulated with the K-S test can result in different results depending on how the data is phased. In this example, the K-S test may detect the non-uniformity if the data is set to start the week on Saturday, but fail to detect the non-uniformity if the week starts on Wednesday.

==See also==
* Kolmogorov–Smirnov test

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1052704" start="0" end="18" title="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test" label="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="30" end="40" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="44" end="48" title="statistical hypothesis test" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="94" end="106" title="cumulative distribution function" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q464173" start="265" end="280" title="Nicolaas Kuiper" label="Nicolaas Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="341" end="364" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="581" end="613" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="831" end="837" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q491401" start="928" end="949" title="Anderson–Darling test" label="Anderson–Darling test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111082" start="1172" end="1189" title="seasonality" label="cyclic variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121661" start="1309" end="1343" title="circular distribution" label="circular probability distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="1497" end="1529" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="1549" end="1564" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="1607" end="1638" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="1657" end="1696" title="Independent and identically distributed random variables" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="1792" end="1810" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="1881" end="1899" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Kolmogorov–Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949963" start="1900" end="1909" title="statistic" label="statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="1924" end="1956" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2034" end="2051" title="Infimum and supremum" label="supremum function"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2169" end="2185" title="Infimum and supremum" label="infimum function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376021" start="2408" end="2417" title="estimation theory" label="estimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345341" start="2424" end="2447" title="asymptotic distribution" label="asymptotic distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="2897" end="2928" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2996" end="3013" title="Infimum and supremum" label="supremum function"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3037" end="3053" title="Infimum and supremum" label="infimum function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="3266" end="3297" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="3303" end="3318" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="3344" end="3365" title="Uniform distribution (continuous)" label="uniformly distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q783996" start="3606" end="3627" title="Cramér–von Mises criterion" label="Cramér–von Mises test"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="3868" end="3899" title="continuous uniform distribution" label="continuous uniform distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="4399" end="4422" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test"/>
</links>
</doc>
